Nutrition for Nurses

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

EMERALD CHARITY BILBREW, FAYETTEVILLE TECHNICAL
COMMUNITY COLLEGE
JODY VOGELZANG, GRAND VALLEY STATE UNIVERSITY
KELLI WHITTINGTON, SOUTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2024 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/nutrition in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13       978-1-711472-77-5
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13   978-1-711472-76-8
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13      978-1-961584-38-9
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR    2024
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CDE 24
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                                      Get started at openstax.org/details/books/nutrition

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
Contents

Preface        1

UNIT 1 NUTRITION BASICS FOR NURSES

CHAPTER 1                                                           7
                                                               10
Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

Introduction       7

1.1 What Is Nutrition?        7

1.2 Interdisciplinary Teams and Nutrition in Nursing Practice

1.3 Nutrition and Population Health        12

1.4 Vulnerable Populations       17

1.5 Evidence-Based Practice and Nutrition      19

Chapter Summary           22

Key Terms         22

Review Questions          22

Suggested Reading         24

CHAPTER 2

A Holistic View of Macronutrients 25

Introduction       25

2.1 Carbohydrates         25

2.2 Fats       29

2.3 Protein        32

2.4 Hydration         36

Chapter Summary           38

Key Terms         38

Review Questions          38

Suggested Reading         40

CHAPTER 3

A Holistic View of Micronutrients 41

Introduction       41

3.1 Vitamins       42

3.2 Minerals       50

3.3 Supplements           53

Chapter Summary           57

Key Terms         57

Review Questions          57

Suggested Reading         59

CHAPTER 4

The Digestive Process 61

Introduction       61

4.1 Digestion         61
4.2 Physical Assessment of Digestive Organs          64

4.3 The Function of Digestive Organs  68

4.4 The Nurse's Role in the Promotion of Gut Health      71

Chapter Summary         74

Key Terms     74

Review Questions        74

Suggested Reading       76

UNIT 2 NUTRITION AND NEUROLOGICAL
WELLNESS

CHAPTER 5

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Neurological Wellness 77

Introduction       77

5.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System        78

5.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness       96

5.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness        99

5.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness       101

Chapter Summary         104

Key Terms     104

Review Questions        105

Suggested Reading       106

CHAPTER 6

Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

107

Introduction       107

6.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan       108

6.2 Nutrition and Chronic Neurological Illnesses         117

6.3 Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition         119

Chapter Summary         124

Key Terms     124

Review Questions        124

Suggested Reading       126

UNIT 3 NUTRITION AND ENDOCRINE WELLNESS

CHAPTER 7

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine
Wellness 127

Introduction       127

7.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System         128

7.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness       134

7.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness         138

7.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness        139

Chapter Summary         142

Key Terms     142

Access for free at openstax.org
Review Questions        142
Suggested Reading        144

CHAPTER 8

Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health 145

Introduction       145

8.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan       146

8.2 Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses   157

8.3 Treatments and Nutrition   163

Chapter Summary         166

Key Terms     166

Review Questions        167

Suggested Reading       168

UNIT 4 NUTRITION AND HEMATOLOGICAL
WELLNESS

CHAPTER 9

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Hematologic Wellness 169

Introduction       169

9.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System       170

9.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness       177

9.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness       179

9.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness        181

Chapter Summary         185

Key Terms     185

Review Questions        185

Suggested Reading       186

CHAPTER 10

Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

187

Introduction       187

10.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan         188

10.2 Nutrition and Chronic Hematologic Illness  198

10.3 Treatments and Nutrition  201

Chapter Summary         203

Key Terms     203

Review Questions        203

Suggested Reading       205

UNIT 5 NUTRITION AND CARDIOVASCULAR
WELLNESS

CHAPTER 11

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Cardiovascular Wellness 207

Introduction       207

11.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System       208

11.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness       216

11.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness       221

11.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness        223

Chapter Summary         225

Key Terms     225

Review Questions        225

Suggested Reading       227

CHAPTER 12

Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

229

Introduction       229

12.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan        230

12.2 Nutrition and Long-Term Cardiovascular Illnesses       239

12.3 Treatments and Nutrition    243

Chapter Summary         245

Key Terms     245

Review Questions        245

Suggested Reading       246

UNIT 6 NUTRITION AND PULMONARY WELLNESS

CHAPTER 13

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary
Wellness 249

Introduction       249

13.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System           250

13.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness       261

13.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness           266

13.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness        268

Chapter Summary         270

Key Terms     270

Review Questions        270

Suggested Reading       271

CHAPTER 14

Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health 273

Introduction       273

14.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan        274

14.2 Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses         280

14.3 Treatments and Nutrition    289

Chapter Summary         291

Key Terms     291

Review Questions        291

Suggested Reading       293

Access for free at openstax.org
UNIT 7 NUTRITION AND RENAL WELLNESS

CHAPTER 15

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal
Wellness 295

Introduction       295

15.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System        296

15.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness       303

15.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness        306

15.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness         308

Chapter Summary         311

Key Terms     311

Review Questions        311

Suggested Reading       313

CHAPTER 16

Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health 315

Introduction       315

16.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan         316

16.2 Nutrition and Chronic Renal Illness  324

Chapter Summary         329

Key Terms     329

Review Questions        329

Suggested Reading       330

UNIT 8 NUTRITION AND GASTROINTESTINAL
WELLNESS

CHAPTER 17

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Gastrointestinal Wellness 333

Introduction       333

17.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal System       334

17.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness       341

17.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness       343

17.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness        344

Chapter Summary         346

Key Terms     346

Review Questions        346

Suggested Reading       347

CHAPTER 18

Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

349

Introduction       349

18.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan        350

18.2 Nutrition and Chronic Gastrointestinal Illnesses      359

18.3 Treatments and Nutrition  360
Chapter Summary         363

Key Terms          363  363
                         364
Review Questions

Suggested Reading

UNIT 9 NUTRITION AND MUSCULOSKELETAL
AND INTEGUMENTARY WELLNESS

CHAPTER 19

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness 367

Introduction       367

19.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems       368

19.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness       379

19.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness        381

19.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness        385

Chapter Summary         387

Key Terms          387

Review Questions        387

Suggested Reading       389

CHAPTER 20

Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Health 391

Introduction       391

20.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan        392

20.2 Nutrition and Chronic Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Illness       401

20.3 Treatments and Nutrition    403

Chapter Summary         405

Key Terms          405

Review Questions        405

Suggested Reading       406

Appendix A Apps Frequently Used to Support Nutrition Wellness         409

Answer Key         411

References         425

Index         481

Access for free at openstax.org
         Preface                                                                                                             1

PREFACE

About OpenStax
OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to improve educational access and learning for everyone. Through our partnerships with
philanthropic organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we're breaking down the
most common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources
Customization
Nutrition for Nurses is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and
its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the
sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. Visit the Instructor
Resources section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution
In Nutrition for Nurses, art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license within
the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same
attribution to its original source.

Errata
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. In addition, the wide range of evidence, standards, practices, data, and legal circumstances in
nursing change frequently, and portions of the textbook may become out of date. Since our books are web-based,
we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest,
submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions.
OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past and pending
errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print. The web
view is the recommended format because it is the most accessible--including being WCAG 2.1 AA compliant--and
most current. Print versions are available for individual purchase, or they may be ordered through your campus
bookstore.

About Nutrition for Nurses
Summary
Nurses play a pivotal role in educating clients about the importance of nutrition in wellness promotion and illness
prevention. Nutrition for Nurses emphasizes evidence-based practice and holistic assessment to facilitate the
integration of nutritional awareness for pre-licensure nursing students in the provision of client-centered care. This
text prepares students to serve as professionals who are part of an interdisciplinary team, which includes registered
dieticians and nutritionists, and to emphasize nutrition as a key component of wellness, disease prevention, and
disease management.

Nutrition for Nurses is written by nurses and dietitians, and is tailored specifically to nursing students to help them
develop sound clinical judgment. The text promotes evidence-based practice and adheres to the nursing process
2  Preface

   steps of assessment, diagnosis, planning, implementation, and evaluation. Nutrition for Nurses helps students
   develop nutritional competency that includes explaining the role of macronutrients, micronutrients, and hydration in
   nutrition; describing the structure and function of the digestive organs; applying the nursing process to assess the
   impact of nutrition on body systems and disease processes; and evaluating the impact of nutrition on body systems
   across the lifespan.

   Pedagogical Foundation
   Nutrition for Nurses is structured to support the flexible integration of nutrition content across both system-based
   and nursing competency-based curricula and can be used whether nutrition is taught as a stand-alone course or as
   part of another nursing course. The text tailors the presentation of fundamental nutrition concepts to nursing
   students, helping to prepare them for nutrition concepts not only throughout the curriculum but also as a
   prerequisite to pathophysiology and awareness of disease processes. Throughout, the focus is on assessment of the
   client, including normal and abnormal findings, and the role nutrition plays in the body and its systems as a critical
   component of wellness. This presentation utilizes concepts promoting the development of clinical judgment by
   building upon the systematic model developed by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).

   Although the chapters in Nutrition for Nurses are written to be mostly independent, they do generally build on the
   understanding gained in the four fundamentals chapters in Unit 1. (Please bear this in mind when considering
   alternate sequence coverage.) Instructors may pair the chapters from this nutrition textbook with similar body
   system topics in a disease course.

   Organizational Framework
   The table of contents for Nutrition for Nurses presents content in 20 chapters, organized into 9 thematic units:

     · Unit 1 features four introductory chapters that include foundational nutritional knowledge, the role of
         interdisciplinary teams, and agency oversight. The functions of macronutrients, micronutrients, hydration, and
         the physiology of digestion are presented. The discussion of these nutritional components explains how
         nutrition impacts wellness.

     · Units 2-9 cover the impact of nutrition on the body's organ systems, including the following systems:
         Neurological
         Endocrine
         Hematological
         Cardiovascular
         Pulmonary
         Renal
         Gastrointestinal
         Musculoskeletal and integumentary

         Each unit covers one body system and includes two chapters; the first chapter helps students apply clinical
         judgment to promote health and wellness in the identified body system, and the second chapter covers lifespan
         considerations and body system illness.

     · The appendix identifies common nutritional apps with hyperlinks for easy access to these resources.

   Nursing Features
   To further enhance learning, Nutrition for Nurses includes the following features:

     · Clinical Tips offer practical suggestions that help nurses deliver quality care to the client--for example, asking
         clients open-ended questions or helping clients to communicate better with health care professionals.

     · Media boxes provide an opportunity to explore related content that reinforces or extends learning. Examples
         include a fracture risk assessment tool (FRAX) and a video highlighting changes to the Nutrition Facts label.

     · Safety Alerts address provision of care to clients across the wellness continuum and emphasize the
         importance of quality and safety in client care. Examples include consuming salt substitutes that contain
         potassium chloride and contraindications for deep palpation.

     · Special Considerations highlight nutritional considerations related to various client categories, including age/
         life stage, race/ethnicity/culture, or sex/gender. Examples include insulin sensitivity in diverse populations and
         populations who are at risk for vitamin B12 deficiency.

   Access for free at openstax.org
Preface                                                                                                                 3

  · Trending Today boxes present nutritional and nursing trends via the lens of evidence-based practice. This
      feature contains a variety of social media resources and videos as well as questions for reflective thinking.
      Examples include promoting wellness with herbs and examining the link between nutrition and aging skin.
     Some chapters in this book discuss social media with the intended purpose of preparing nurses to handle
     questions clients will ask about nutritional information they have read online and via social media. References
     to social media or specific social media sites are not an endorsement of their use as source for nutritional
     information or self-diagnosis. The authors advise readers to evaluate nutritional resources for their use of
     evidence-based practice (EBP), which uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal evidence, and to seek the
     care of a trained, certified, and experienced health care provider for nutrition-related care.

  · Unfolding Case Studies present a hypothetical client scenario that unfolds in two or more parts throughout the
      chapter, with each subsequent part presenting new information on the same client, to help foster clinical
      judgment. In each part of an unfolding case feature, the scenario is followed by two multiple-choice questions
      that require students to apply their knowledge of evidence-based client care. The answers to these questions,
      with explanations, are included in the Answer Key for students at the end of the book.

Pedagogical Features
To support student learning, Nutrition for Nurses includes the following standard elements:

  · Learning Outcomes: Every chapter section begins with a set of clear and concise student learning outcomes.
      These outcomes are designed to help the instructor decide what content to include or assign and can guide
      students on what they can expect to learn and be assessed on.

  · Review Questions: This end-of-chapter feature presents multiple-choice questions for students to apply their
      learned knowledge and integrate the chapter (and unit) concepts. The questions focus on client scenarios and
      body system and nutritional concepts review as relevant to the chapter material. The question answers, with
      explanations, are included in the Answer Key for students at the end of the book.

  · Chapter Summary: Chapter summaries assist both students and instructors by outlining the primary subtopics
      addressed within the chapter.

  · Key Terms: Key terms are presented in bold text and are followed by an explanation in context. Definitions of
      key terms are also listed in the end-of-chapter glossary.

  · Suggested Reading: All chapters include a recommended list of readings that either go into more depth about
      topics already covered in the chapter or provide content closely related to those topics in order to form a more
      comprehensive view.

  · References: References are listed at the end of the book, organized by chapter.

About the Authors
Senior Contributing Authors

                                                      Senior contributing authors: Emerald Charity Bilbrew (left),
                                                      Jody Vogelzang (middle), Kelli Whittington (right)

Dr. Emerald Charity Bilbrew, Fayetteville Technical Community College. Dr. Bilbrew holds an ASN from Southern
Union State Community College, a BSN in Nursing from Jacksonville University, an MSN in Nursing Leadership and
4  Preface

   Management from Jacksonville University, a Post Master's in Nursing Education from Walden University, and a
   Doctor in Nursing Practice in Nursing Leadership in Healthcare Systems from Regis University. Dr. Bilbrew has been
   a nurse for more than 20 years and is certified in the specialty of medical-surgical nursing. She is a Lead Instructor
   of Nursing at Fayetteville Technical Community College where she teaches courses in the Associate Degree Nursing
   Program that include clinical, lab, online, classroom, and preceptorship components. Dr. Bilbrew is a member of the
   Academy of Medical-Surgical Nurses (AMSN) and has served on multiple volunteer committees, including the
   Legislative Committee, where she advocates for changes in laws for the advancement of nursing and betterment of
   the care and safety of clients. She is a member of the National League for Nursing (NLN), a charter member of the
   Omega Upsilon Chapter of the Sigma Theta Tau International Honor Society of Nursing, and a peer reviewer for the
   Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing (ACEN).

   Dr. Jody Vogelzang, Grand Valley State University. Dr. Vogelzang holds a BS in dietetics from Michigan State
   University, an MS in Health Science from Grand Valley State University, an MA in Biology from Miami University of
   Ohio, and a PhD in Health Services specializing in community health from Walden University. Dr. Vogelzang is a
   registered dietitian and health education specialist and an expert in community health who has spent the last two
   decades teaching in higher education. As a practitioner, Dr. Vogelzang is especially well-rounded, working in the
   community setting with infants, children, pregnant women, and chronically ill adults and older adults and in
   palliative and hospice care. In 2016, Dr. Vogelzang was the founding director of a coordinated graduate program in
   clinical dietetics. She is a nationally recognized speaker and researcher. Her peers have formally recognized her for
   excellence in professional practice--Excellence in Public Health Nutrition (AND) and Achievements in Public Health
   Nutrition (APA). Dr. Vogelzang has also been recognized for her dedication to the high standards of the nutrition and
   dietetics profession through active participation, leadership, and devotion to serving others in nutrition and dietetics
   as well as allied health fields (AND Medallion Award). She regularly volunteers in professional and community
   organizations locally, nationally, and internationally.

   Dr. Kelli Whittington, Southern Illinois University. Dr. Whittington holds a BS in Nursing from Middle Tennessee
   University, an MS in Nursing from Southern Illinois University, and a PhD in Workforce Education from Southern
   Illinois University. She is Program Director of Nursing, School of Health Science, at Southern Illinois University. Dr.
   Whittington's nursing career spans more than 30 years, with practice in the acute care setting. Her nursing
   experience includes ICU, oncology, management, and administration. Her nursing education career began in 1993
   with an adjunct clinical position at the community college level. Throughout her nursing education experience, she
   has taught nurses across all academic levels, from certified nurse assistants through bachelor's-prepared registered
   nurses, culminating with doctorally prepared registered nurses. She currently teaches nutrition courses to
   accelerated, traditional, and RN-to-BSN students. Dr. Whittington is a member of the Illinois Nurses Association,
   Illinois Organization of Nurse Leaders, Registered Nurse Education League, and Sigma Theta Tau International
   Honor Society of Nursing. She is the recipient of the Emerson Excellence in Teaching Award (2019), the visiting
   scholar award from Michigan State University (2009), and an Illinois Nurse Educator Fellowship (2023). Dr.
   Whittington is a Certified Nurse Educator.

   The senior contributing authors would like to particularly thank nursing consultants Amy B. Britt, Bon Secours Mercy
   Health, and Marcy Caplin, Associate Professor, Kent State University College of Nursing, for their expertise and
   assistance with content review and development. Thank you also to Dr. Allison Mann, PharmD, Clinical Associate
   Professor of Pharmacy Practice, University of Wyoming.

   Contributing Authors
   Amy B. Britt, Bon Secours Mercy Health

   Millie Hepburn, Sacred Heart University

   Lisa R. McDonald, Capella University

   Lee Anne Oliver, Beaufort County Community College

   Marygrace Piskorowski, SUNY at Buffalo

   Sharon R. Simon, Shenandoah University

   Miranda Smith, The University of Alabama in Huntsville

   Access for free at openstax.org
Preface                                                                                                             5

Nicole M. Stephens, Galveston College
Cynthia Wagner, University of North Georgia
Reviewers
Oluwakemi Lois Adeola, Howard University
Jennifer M. Bell, Ball State University
Jocelyn D. Betts, Chicago State University
Amy B. Britt, Bon Secours Mercy Health
Ximena Burgos, University of Texas - El Paso
Marcy Caplin, Kent State University
Karen Crosby, Endicott College
Amanda N. DiEugenio-Swift, Eastern University
Stacha Hayes, Emory University
Veela Hughes, Albany State University
Karen D. Joris, Professor Emeritus, Lorain County Community College
Barbara Ludwig, Rockhurst University
Amy Mersiovsky, Texas A&M University - Central Texas
Jennifer Nickell, Portland Community College
Lee Anne Oliver, Beaufort County Community College (Retired)
Anita Ramani, Gurnick Academy of Medical Arts
Margaret Riley, Nurse Educate
Ellen Schoen, Vanderbilt University School of Nursing
Miranda Smith, The University of Alabama in Huntsville
Nicole M. Stephens, Galveston College
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity builds trust, understanding, equity, and genuine learning. While students may encounter
significant challenges in their courses and their lives, doing their own work and maintaining a high degree of
authenticity will result in meaningful outcomes that will extend far beyond their college career. Faculty,
administrators, resource providers, and students should work together to maintain a fair and positive experience.
We realize that students benefit when academic integrity ground rules are established early in the course. To that
end, OpenStax has created an interactive to aid with academic integrity discussions in your course.
6  Preface

   (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
   Visit our academic integrity slider (https://openstax.org/r/openguide). Click and drag icons along the continuum to
   align these practices with your institution and course policies. You may then include the graphic on your syllabus,
   present it in your first course meeting, or create a handout for students.
   At OpenStax we are also developing resources supporting authentic learning experiences and assessment. Please
   visit this book's page for updates. For an in-depth review of academic integrity strategies, we highly recommend
   visiting the International Center of Academic Integrity (ICAI) website at https://academicintegrity.org/
   (https://openstax.org/r/academicintegrityabc).
   Community Hubs
   OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
   Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support
   OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or
   download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and
   relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching
   and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. To reach the
   Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.
   Technology Partners
   As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost tools
   that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book page on
   OpenStax.org.
   Special Thanks
   The Division of Digital Learning at the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB) has a history of dedicated
   research initiatives, services, and programs that have advanced open education in Texas by providing support,
   advocacy, and resources to Texas institutions in their OER efforts. The Division maintains a diverse OER portfolio
   including OERTX, a digital library and community space for open education work. The leadership and collaboration
   of the Division of Digital Learning staff made the OER Nursing Essentials (ONE) project possible, throughout
   research, planning, and development phases of the eight-textbook series.
   This work was supported in whole or in part by the THECB. The opinions and conclusions expressed in this
   document are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the opinions or policies of the THECB.

   Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 1

Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

FIGURE 1.1 Good nutrition, including fruits, is the foundation of good health. (credit: modification of work "Culinary fruits front view" by Bill
Ebbesen/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 What Is Nutrition?
1.2 Interdisciplinary Teams and Nutrition in Nursing Practice
1.3 Nutrition and Population Health
1.4 Vulnerable Populations
1.5 Evidence-Based Practice and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION Good nutrition is fundamental to improving and maintaining health regardless of age or current
health status (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2021). Accordingly, nurses must be knowledgeable
and prepared to incorporate nutrition science into their practice. Traditionally, the science of nutrition had focused
on nutrient intake and biochemical processing only. However, food intake serves other various purposes, from
celebrating milestones to providing comfort when stressed or grieving. Over time, food and food preparation has
evolved to center around pleasure and convenience rather than simply a means of sustenance. Consequently,
nurses must integrate these social and cultural factors with evidence-based nutritional guidelines to help their
clients meet their physical, psychological, and social needs.

1.1 What Is Nutrition?

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 1.1.1 Define nutrition.
  · 1.1.2 Identify key events in the history of nutrition.
8  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

   A Basic Definition of Nutrition

   Nutrition is the intake of food to meet the needs of the body. Accordingly, nutrients are substances found in foods
   and beverages that are essential for survival. Nurses must understand the components of nutrition and its impact on
   bodily functions to provide effective nursing care.

   Several food-related concepts are fundamental to understanding how nutrition affects the body. The term food
   refers to edible substances made of protein, carbohydrates, fat, or other nutrients. Food is comprised of
   macronutrients and/or micronutrients. Macronutrients are water and energy-yielding nutrients (carbohydrates, fats,
   and proteins) needed in large amounts by the body. Micronutrients include vitamins and minerals. Food is the
   building block of the diet, which describes the quantity and quality of food and drinks consumed.

   Nutrition in Foods
   Understanding calories is essential to understanding how the body uses nutrients for fuel. Calories, which measure
   the amount of heat it takes to raise 1 kg of water by 1ºC, are used to indicate the amount of energy needed or
   ingested daily. Human bodies need calories to function, digest food, grow, and move. The 2020-2025 Dietary
   Guidelines issued jointly by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Health and Human
   Services recommend adult women consume an estimated 1,600 to 2,400 calories daily and adult men 2,000 to
   3,000 calories daily based on age and activity level (USDA & USHHS, 2020).

   The number of calories found in food varies based on food type. Table 1.1 lists the number of calories found in
   macronutrients. Food preparation can modify the number of calories present. For example, a raw tomato has fewer
   calories than a fried tomato. Water is classified as a macronutrient. Although it serves a vital role, it does not provide
   energy to the body.

   Macronutrient                             Calories per Gram  Recommended Daily Intake

   Carbohydrate                              4                  45-65%

   Fat                                       9                  20-35%

   Protein                                   4                  10-35%

   TABLE 1.1 Macronutrients Energy Yield and Recommended Daily Intake (source: USDA & USHHS, 2020)

   CALORIE CALCULATOR

   Counting calories is one way to determine if clients are consuming an appropriate amount of food to meet their
   needs. Calorie needs vary based upon client age, sex, and level of physical activity. Use this calorie calculator
   (https://openstax.org/r/calculnet) when working with clients to determine their individual caloric needs.

   The History of Nutrition in the Provision of Client Care

   Modern nutrition science advanced significantly during the 20th century (Mozaffarian, Rosenberg & Uauy, 2018).
   The identification of essential vitamins and minerals in the early 1900s launched the quest to identify and treat
   vitamin-deficient medical conditions such as beriberi. Subsequent nutritional discoveries led to the practice of
   fortifying certain foods to prevent deficiencies and setting the first recommended dietary allowances (RDAs).

   During this same time frame, the federal government began to oversee and manage the food supply. In 1906, the
   Pure Food and Drugs Act was passed, which launched the federal regulation of foods by the agency later known as
   the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA, 2018). The FDA was initially established to oversee how food was
   prepared for consumers. This became necessary because as more people moved from rural to urban areas, they
   depended on others to grow and produce the food they needed.

   In 1938, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) of 1938 was passed, significantly enhancing labeling
   requirements. The FDCA required food labels to include the product's recognizable name and standardized
   information related to the identity, quality, and amount in the container (Lam & Patel, 2022).

   Later, in the second half of the 20th century, the focus of nutrition shifted toward nutrition and its relationship to
   health (USDA & USHHS, n.d.). In 1977, the first-ever federal guidance related to diet quality was published in
   Dietary Goals for the United States. These goals were intended to improve the typical American diet to decrease the

   Access for free at openstax.org
1.1 · What Is Nutrition?                                                                                                9

incidence of heart disease. The development of these goals prompted pushback from some members of the food
industry. For example, the goals originally recommended to reduce the intake of red meat in the diet. However,
groups such as the National Cattlemen's Beef Association opposed this recommendation since it would negatively
affect the beef industry. Consequently, the language in the federal guidelines was changed from minimizing red
meat to selecting foods that will minimize saturated fat intake (Stillerman, 2019).

Continuing this new shift in perspective, in 1982 the Committee on Diet, Nutrition, and Cancer, National Research
Council presented their findings on the relationship between diet and cancer. These findings served as a foundation
to promote nutritional factors and dietary needs that decrease the incidence of cancer. Not only did the report
discuss foods linked to the potential development of cancer, but it also identified foods that supported cancer
prevention. This study specifically mentioned macronutrients and micronutrients found in the diet and their impact
on cancer development and/or prevention. This introduction of macronutrients and micronutrients to the public
facilitated several agencies to take active roles in promoting dietary agendas. For example, the Nutrition Labeling
and Education Act of 1990 prompted all food packaging entities to label foods with nutritional information and
serving sizes.

Through the years, visual displays of government food guides have been modified to reflect the changing
perspectives. The first guide, released in the 1940s, divided foods into seven groups and encouraged people to eat
foods from all groups as well as food not included in the seven groups without specifying amounts. The widely
recognized Food Guide Pyramid was first introduced in the 1990s and underwent several revisions until it was
replaced by MyPlate in 2011 (Davis & Saltos, n.d.; USDA, 2021). The most recent dietary guidelines for Americans,
2020-2025, uses the original MyPlate visual guide to recommend small, simple changes to improve diet quality.

Nutrition for Wellness

The Global Wellness Institute defines wellness as pursuing activities, choices, and lifestyles leading to holistic
health. Multiple factors influence a person's health, including nutrition. Good nutrition is essential for keeping the
population healthy (CDC, 2021).

Origin of Nutrition Related to Wellness
The ancient Greek physician who influenced much of modern medicine, Hippocrates, is credited with saying, "Let
food be thy medicine and medicine be thy food" (King, 2019). This appears to be one of the earliest statements
acknowledging the role of nutrition in maintaining health. In 1948, the World Health Organization (WHO) defined
health as "a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity" (WHO, n.d.). This definition reflected a growing emphasis on a holistic perspective of health.

Weight Versus Body Mass Index
Several measurements are recognized and used to assess a person's nutritional status and identify individuals at
risk for illness or disease. These indicators go beyond simply measuring a person's weight to assess body
composition and weight distribution. Body mass index (BMI) is a formula that calculates the ratio of weight and
height to classify individuals as underweight, healthy weight, overweight, or obese. The waist-to-hip ratio (WHR)
calculates the ratio of the circumferences of the waist to the hip. Evidence has shown that individuals with excess
weight around their midsection may be at higher risk for certain health conditions. These assessments can be done
at home or with a health care provider to gain important information about an individual's dietary-related health.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  BMI and Diverse Populations
  Recently, the routine use of BMI as a lone indicator of obesity has been scrutinized as a result of research that
  shows BMI may not be a reliable indicator for diverse populations. The American Medical Association (AMA) has
  adopted a new policy clarifying the use of BMI as one means of identifying obesity. The policy states that BMI
  should not be used exclusively to identify obesity; instead, it should be used in conjunction with other
  assessment tools. The policy acknowledges the BMI assessment is based on data from non-Hispanic White
  populations and does not consider differences in body shape and composition across different race/ethnic
  groups, sexes, or age groups (AMA, 2023).
10  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

    CALCULATING BMI

    BMI is a screening tool used to identify clients who are overweight or obese. Considering the recent policy
    change by the AMA, nurses should stay abreast of new research to determine how to incorporate BMI
    measurements when working with diverse client populations. BMI does not measure body fat directly but
    correlates with other more direct measures of body fat such as skinfold thickness measurements. High BMI can
    be correlated with obesity-linked adverse health outcomes. To determine BMI, input the client's height and
    weight into the Adult BMI Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/cdchealthyweight). Use Table 1.2 to interpret the
    results.

    BMI                              Weight Status
    < 18.5                           Underweight
    18.5 to < 25                     Heathy weight
    25.0 to < 30                     Overweight
    30.0 to < 35.0                   Class 1 obesity
    35.0 to < 40.0                   Class 2 obesity
    > 40.0                           Class 3 obesity

    TABLE 1.2 BMI Weight Classifications (source: CDC, 2022a)

    MEASURING WHR

    Clients may be self-conscious about having body measurements taken. Provide privacy for your client when
    taking these measurements. To determine WHR, with the client standing upright, use a tape measure to measure
    the distance around the smallest part of the client's waist (waist circumference) and then the largest part of the
    client's hip (hip circumference). Then divide the waist circumference by the hip circumference or use this online
    calculator (https://openstax.org/r/thecalculatorsite) to determine the WHR. The result is determined using Table
    1.3.

    Health Risk                               Women            Men
    Low                                        0.80             0.95
    Moderate                                  0.81-0.85        0.96-1.0
    High                                       0.86            > 1.0

      TABLE 1.3 WHR Health Risk Classifications (source: Van De Walle, 2019)

    Health Promotion

    Healthy People 2030 is a framework of U.S. public health objectives designed to improve the health and well-being
    of the population (USHHS, ODPHP, n.d.). Since its initial release in 1980, it has been updated each decade to shape
    health promotion and disease prevention strategies in the U.S. (CDC, 2023). In terms of nutrition, Healthy People
    2030 aims to help people get the recommended amounts of healthy foods to reduce their risk for long-term
    diseases and improve their health (USHHS, ODPHP, n.d.)

    1.2 Interdisciplinary Teams and Nutrition in Nursing Practice

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 1.2.1 Discuss the interdisciplinary nature of nutrition and client care.
      · 1.2.2 Approach nutrition in nursing practice using the National Council of State Boards of Nursing

          (NCSBN) Clinical Judgment Model.

    An Interdisciplinary Team Approach to Meeting Client's Nutritional Needs

    The nurse is one part of an interdisciplinary team caring for the client. Nutrition affects all aspects of a person's care.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                        1.2 · Interdisciplinary Teams and Nutrition in Nursing Practice                            11

Decisions made by each practitioner affect the client's nutritional status and influence decisions by other team
members. A coordinated, interdisciplinary approach can improve health care quality and outcomes (Bendowska &
Baum, 2023).

Although the primary health care provider (PCP) typically orders a specific diet for clients to follow, the PCP will
often have a dietitian meet with the client to review their history, physical examination, and lab values to determine
a nutrition care plan for the client. Additional input regarding nutrition may be obtained from other members of the
team based upon their area of expertise and the client's needs. The nurse can work with the client and family to
identify preferences and likelihood of adherence to a specific diet regime. The nurse can assist the client in
understanding specific benefits of nutritional recommendations, as well as develop a plan for the client to adopt
healthy eating into their lifestyle.

Interdisciplinary Team Introduction
Dietary evaluation can begin in either the acute care setting or outpatient setting. When started in the acute care
setting, a nutritional plan (meal plan) is generally developed to address a specific need with a short-term goal. For
example, a client with chronic congestive heart failure experiencing an acute exacerbation would need to decrease
sodium consumption to decrease fluid retention. Dietary evaluation in the outpatient setting can help develop a plan
that focuses on steps that yield long-term goals. For example, a client diagnosed with Class 1 obesity could benefit
from weight reduction to decrease the risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Or, a patient already diagnosed with type 2
diabetes could benefit from dietary counseling as an intervention to manage the condition. See Table 1.4 for an
example of the roles of an interdisciplinary team.

Client and   Health Care   Dietitian    Nurse                                              Speech     Other Specialists
Family       Provider                                                                      Therapist
                                                                                                      Occupational therapist,
Shares       Makes initial Assesses     Assesses                                           Assesses   physical therapist, mental
                                                                                                      health counselor--for
personal     dietary order client's     client's                                           client's   example, occupational
                                                                                                      therapists can assess self-
preferences, based on      nutritional  understanding ability to                                      feeding skills and the
                                                                                                      need for adaptive
ability to   history and   needs and    of proposed                                        swallow    equipment

obtain and   physical exam, develops    nutritional plan

prepare      laboratory    nutritional plan and provides

specific     results, and  based on     ongoing

foods/       client        client's     assessment of

nutritional  interaction   preferences  eating habits

supplements                and budget

TABLE 1.4 Roles of an Interdisciplinary Team as They Relate to Clients' Nutritional Needs

Integrative Nutritional Essentials and Evidence-Based Practice
Integrative nutrition combines medical nutritional therapy with functional medicine and other disciplines to
provide education and guidance for a personalized diet based on whole foods and lifestyle recommendations
(Center for Integrative Nutrition, n.d.). The integrative nutrition approach supports a multidisciplinary approach to
managing nutrition. Evidence-based practice (EBP) involves using the best evidence to deliver health care (Chien,
2019). Nutritional interventions should be based on evidence to improve patient outcomes.

Clinical Nursing Practice and Integrative Nutritional Essentials

Nursing practice has always had a holistic focus (Thornton, 2019). With this perspective, the nurse should view the
client's physical and nutritional status in concert with other factors, consistent with the framework of integrative
nutrition. In a holistic practice, psychological, social, and cultural factors should be addressed when working with
clients to develop a nutritional plan (meal plan).

The National Council of State Boards of Nursing Clinical Judgment Model

The NCSBN developed the NCSBN Clinical Judgment Measurement Model (NCJMM) in conjunction with the updated
National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX). This model is an evidence-based tool for NCLEX testing and pre-
licensure preparation. The model is used to evaluate prospective entry-level nurses' clinical judgment and decision-
making ability (NCSBN, 2023).
12  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

         NCJMM OVERVIEW

      The NCJMM adds complexity and clinical context to NCLEX testing items to better simulate real-world practice
      (NCSBN, 2019). This NCJMM video (https://openstax.org/r/ncsbnorgvideo) provides an overview of the model.
      Understanding the model can better prepare nurses to take the NCLEX and apply what was learned in school to
      post-graduate work.

    Nursing Process
    The nursing process represents a five-step approach to client-centered care: assessment, diagnosis, planning,
    implementation, and evaluation (Toney-Butler & Thayer, 2023). During the assessment phase, most health and
    medical history questions are relevant to the client's nutritional status. Questions specifically related to nutrition are
    those asking for a dietary recall (record of what the client has eaten during a specified time frame) or asking about
    food frequency (how much of a food is consumed and how often). Other relevant questions include questions about
    food preferences, food preparation ability and concerns, how the client accesses food, and cultural and religious
    concerns related to nutrition. Again, many aspects of the physical assessment are related to nutrition. However, the
    nurse can easily collect assessment findings directly related to nutrition: height, weight, and other body
    measurements such as waist-hip measurements.

    NCSBN Clinical Judgment Model Identification
    The NCJMM has expanded the traditional nursing process model to focus on clinical judgment and to align more
    closely with real-world nursing practice (Ignatavicius & Silvestri, 2023).

    This educational resource will use the NCJMM as the framework to drive nursing care. The NCJMM provides a
    systematic approach to assess the client, analyze their situation, and form a plan of care incorporating best EBP.

         NCJMM AND NCLEX EXAM

      The NCJMM is an evidence-based framework that outlines the clinical decision-making process for nursing
      students and new graduates. Visit this NCLEX website (https://openstax.org/r/nclexclinical) to learn more about
      this model and how it relates to the traditional nursing process. This model is the foundation for designing the
      NCLEX exam that all nursing students must pass to become registered nurses.

    1.3 Nutrition and Population Health

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 1.3.1 Identify the roles that government agencies and nonprofit organizations play in the creation,
          implementation, and enforcement of nutritional regulations.

      · 1.3.2 Describe current USDA dietary guidelines, including MyPlate.
      · 1.3.3 Analyze the primary sources of consumer nutrition information.
      · 1.3.4 Assess the importance of client education for promoting healthy nutritional habits.

    The U.S. Department of Agriculture

    It is difficult to separate an individual from the community when assessing personal ability to meet nutritional
    needs. Factors such as food accessibility, ability to prepare foods, and traditional dietary preferences play a role in
    how a client can adopt a dietary lifestyle conducive to health and wellness. Government regulations and programs
    and the availability of appropriate consumer nutritional education can influence these factors.

    The USDA leads 29 agencies that oversee food production and consumption. The USDA (n.d.) recognizes poor
    nutrition as a substantial factor in illness in the U.S.--poor nutrition is linked to diabetes, obesity, and heart disease.
    These illnesses impact the nation more broadly by decreasing productivity and increasing health care costs. To
    foster health, the USDA promotes research to build support and collaboration to provide all Americans equitable
    access to healthy foods. The USDA's Food and Nutrition Service works to address food insecurity and provide
    evidence-based nutritional guidance to consumers (USDA Food and Nutrition Service, n.d.).

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       1.3 · Nutrition and Population Health                         13

As part of the USDA's commitment to connecting all Americans with access to affordable, healthy food, the USDA
manages programs designed to provide Americans of limited income or with special needs with healthy food. For
example, the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) provides a monthly allotment
for enrollees to purchase certain nutrient-dense foods. The National School Lunch Program (NSLP) provides
nutritional, low-cost or free lunches to eligible school-age children. Table 1.5 lists food assistance programs
available through the USDA for qualified individuals.

  Program                                              Website
  Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants,
  and Children (WIC)                                   https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic (https://openstax.org/r/
  Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FNMP)              fnsusdagov)

  Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program (FFVP)             https://www.fns.usda.gov/fmnp/wic-farmers-market-
                                                       nutrition-program (https://openstax.org/r/fmnp)
  Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
                                                       https://www.fns.usda.gov/ffvp/fresh-fruit-and-
  Farmers Market Grant Program administered jointly    vegetable-program (https://openstax.org/r/ffvp)
  with the National Association of Farmers Market
  Nutrition Programs (NAFMNP)                          https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-
  Healthy Fluid Milk Incentives (HFMI)                 assistance/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-
                                                       program-snap/ (https://openstax.org/r/ers)
  The Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP)
                                                       https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/farmer-producer/
  National School Lunch Program (NSLP)                 farmers-market-grant-program (https://openstax.org/
  School Breakfast Program (SBP)                       r/snap)
  Special Milk Program (SMP)
  Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP)            https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/healthy-fluid-milk-
  Summer Food Service Program (SFSP)                   incentive (https://openstax.org/r/snaphealthy)
  Team Nutrition
  The Patrick Leahy Farm to School Program             https://www.fns.usda.gov/tefap/emergency-food-
                                                       assistance-program (https://openstax.org/r/tefap)
TABLE 1.5 USDA Resources for Food Assistance Programs
                                                       https://www.fns.usda.gov/cn (https://openstax.org/r/
                                                       fns)

The USDA also plays an essential role in regulating food production and distribution to ensure food quality and
safety. The Food Safety and Inspection Service is the primary USDA agency that enforces safe processing and
packing regulations of meat, poultry, and egg products.

The USDA actively promotes nutrition through educational materials. From the provision of curricula available for
school-age children in both English and Spanish, Team Nutrition--an initiative to support child nutrition--utilizes
visually appealing materials to promote nutrition various ways.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 are designed for policymakers and health professionals to assist
in their efforts to promote a healthy, nutritious diet (USDA & USHHS, 2020). MyPlate, a resource directed towards
consumers and based on the Guidelines, provides practical information on nutritious foods for consumers to use
daily. The MyPlate campaign uses the image of a plate colorfully sectioned into recommended proportions of food
for a nutritious meal. Fruits and vegetables comprise half of the plate, grains are approximately one-fourth of the
plate, and protein occupies the remaining section. Low-fat or fat-free dairy is represented by a glass next to the
plate. The MyPlate website encourages everyone to "start simple with MyPlate" and "make every bite count" (USDA,
n.d.).
14  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

      SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

      Cultural Food Traditions
      The USDA recognizes the importance of incorporating cultural food traditions when planning a healthy diet. The
      Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 are meant to be a framework for individuals to use to plan meals
      that are nutritious yet reflective of their culture/ethnic food preferences. To assist with educating clients from
      diverse backgrounds, MyPlate educational materials are available in many different languages.

    The U.S. Food and Drug Administration

    One of the oldest U.S. government agencies is the FDA, which has been the driving force behind labeling. Earlier
    versions of food labels focused solely on listing accurate ingredients. In recent years, labels have evolved to provide
    more detailed nutritional information to consumers. The FDA recently updated the Nutrition Facts label on packaged
    food and drinks to incorporate current research and public input (Figure 1.2). The changes were designed to make it
    easier for consumers to make good food choices to improve health and wellness. In addition to the new changes,
    the FDA also engaged in a campaign to strategically support consumer education to decrease poor nutrition that
    contributes to disease and death.

         NEW NUTRITION FACTS LABEL

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/1-3-nutrition-and-population-health)
      This is a 30-second "commercial" designed to highlight key changes in the new Nutrition Facts label. Watch the
      new nutrition facts label video to see how nutrition information can be presented in an entertaining format.

    FIGURE 1.2 The FDA updated the Nutrition Facts label in 2016. (credit: "On May 20, 2016, the FDA announced the new Nutrition Facts
    label for packaged foods to reflect new scientific information, including the link between diet and chronic diseases such as obesity and
    heart disease"/U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Public Domain)

         EDUCATION ON THE NEW NUTRITION FACTS LABEL

      Learn more about the FDA's new Nutrition Facts label using this interactive resource: Interactive Nutrition Facts

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                1.3 · Nutrition and Population Health                    15

Label (https://openstax.org//r/accessdatafda). Select different label components to learn more about each one
and how each appears on the new label. Then, test your knowledge of the new label by taking a brief quiz.

In addition to consumer education, the FDA offers professional continuing education on the new Nutrition Facts
label. Visit Healthcare Professionals | FDA (https://openstax.org/r/fdafood) to access educational materials
designed to help health care professionals understand the new label and how to incorporate it into their practice.

U.S. Nonprofit Organizations

Nonprofit organizations work to advance good nutrition through advocacy for pro-nutrition policies and by providing
consumer education and wellness promotion. These organizations may focus solely on nutrition or on reducing the
effects of illness and disease. For example, in 2006, the American Heart Association promoted health via nutrition
by presenting the Diet and Lifestyle Goals for Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction. These guidelines, reviewed
and updated in 2021, recommend the following nutritional recommendations as part of a comprehensive plan to
decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease:

  · A variety of fruits and vegetables
  · Whole grains
  · Healthy sources of protein (mostly plants, nuts, fish and seafood, low-fat or nonfat dairy, and lean unprocessed

      meat and poultry)
  · Liquid non-tropical vegetable oils
  · Minimally processed foods
  · Minimal added sugar intake
  · Foods prepared with little or no salt
  · Limited or preferably no alcohol intake (AHA, 2023)

Health care organizations also provide free nutritional resources. For example, Johns Hopkins Medicine offers
Health, a vast online resource discussing healthy eating, vitamin use, diets for specific illnesses, and consumer tips.
Table 1.6 lists nonprofit websites to explore available information related to nutrition, health, and wellness.

  Organization                                                  Website
  Action for Healthy Kids
  American Diabetes Association                                 https://www.actionforhealthykids.org/
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/actionforhealthykids)
  American Heart Association
                                                                https://diabetes.org/healthy-living/recipes-nutrition/
  Johns Hopkins Medicine                                        healthy-food-choices-made-easy
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/diabeteshealthy)
  Mayo Clinic
  Meals on Wheels America                                       https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-
  National Alliance for Nutrition and Activity                  eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/hearthealthy)
TABLE 1.6 Nonprofit Websites Providing Nutritional Information
                                                                https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/wellness-
                                                                and-prevention/food-and-nutrition
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/hopkinsmedicine)

                                                                https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/mayoclinic)

                                                                https://www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org/
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/mealsonwheelsamerica)

                                                                https://www.cspinet.org/protecting-our-health/
                                                                nutrition/national-alliance-nutrition-and-activity
                                                                (https://openstax.org/r/cspinet)

Consumer Health Information

The trend toward consumer awareness and personal responsibility has dramatically affected how food and nutrition
16  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

    are currently promoted. Nurses can use the wealth of available resources to promote a healthy relationship with
    food for individuals, families, and populations.

    Consumer health information is widely available through the Internet and other media sources (television, podcasts,
    magazines, etc.). When using consumer health resources, first assess the scientific validity of the information (North
    Dakota State University, 2019). For all media sources, the author or speaker should be qualified to write or speak on
    the topic, and the research sources supporting the material should be clearly identified. Online information should
    come from a reputable website. Government websites (ending in .gov), educational organization websites (ending in
    .edu), and nonprofit agencies (ending in .org) are considered the most reliable sources of online information.

    The nurse should instruct clients to review nutritional information with a questioning attitude. Clients should be
    wary of nutritional information that includes any of the following:

      · Strategies that sound too good to be true
      · Nutritional recommendations that are too simplistic or dramatic, and unlikely to be supported by scientific

          evidence
      · Identifying specific foods as "good" or "bad"
      · Nutritional guidance that is promoted by nonscience-based testimonials or celebrities or that has supporting

          research "underway"
      · Guidance not supported by more than one study and not recommended by reputable scientific organizations

          (North Dakota State University, 2019).

    Of course, even the most accurate information may not be appropriate for a particular client. The nurse should use
    clinical judgment to determine whether the nutritional information applies to the client's situation. Additionally, the
    nurse should consider the client's literacy level and ability to understand what is being explained.

    Health Literacy
    An essential factor in the effectiveness of labeling or any health education is the ability of the client to read and
    understand the information. Health literacy is the ability to "obtain, process, and understand basic health
    information and services needed to make appropriate health decisions" (USHHS, ODPHP, 2021). In 2010, the
    USHHS released a National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy. Fundamental to this plan is the belief that all
    people have the right to make informed decisions and that health services should be delivered in ways that support
    this right. Services should be provided in ways that are easy to understand and that promote healthy living (USHHS,
    ODPHP, 2021). Accordingly, limited health literacy is linked to poor health outcomes (USHHS, ODPHP, 2021).

         CLINICAL TIP

     Improve Communication with Health Professionals

      Helping clients communicate with the health care professionals they work with will improve their care and
      health-related outcomes. Encourage clients to use these strategies to promote good communication:

        · Recommend the client write down or record information during their visit.
        · Encourage the client to ask questions if something is not clear. Have the client confirm who to call if

            questions arise later.
        · Advise the client to let the health care team know if the client does not understand what is being said. If the

            information is confusing or complicated, provide materials written in plain language that does not include
            medical terminology.
        · Suggest that someone accompanies the client to their next appointment (if appropriate). This person can
            help take notes and ask questions. If the client does not speak the same language as the health care
            provider, an interpreter credentialed for health care services is needed. Family members should not be
            expected to act as medical interpreters. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease
            Prevention and Health Promotion, 2010)

    Client Readiness to Learn and Client Teaching Strategies
    Nurses should ensure clients have the skills and knowledge they need to participate effectively in their health care
    (Hendler, 2022). However, attempting to teach clients when they are not interested in learning is challenging.

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.4 · Vulnerable Populations                                                                                             17

Accordingly, the nurse's overall client assessment involves determining the client's readiness to learn. The following
questions can help the nurse identify cues relevant to learning readiness:

  · Does the client express an interest in the subject?
  · Does the client ask relevant questions?
  · Is the client's body language consistent with someone who is paying attention?
  · Does the client appear distracted and disinterested?

To try to increase the client's interest in learning, the nurse should take time to establish rapport. The nurse should
ask the client questions to learn more about the client's preferences and needs and explain the benefits of learning
the material.

Assessing readiness to learn is part of a more extensive assessment that should occur when preparing to teach
clients. Hendler (2022) summarizes an approach to effective teaching:

  · Assess the client's learning style.
  · Determine the client's strengths and weaknesses.
  · Identify the client's learning needs.
  · Identify any relevant cultural or religious considerations.

During the teaching session the nurse should:

  · Use appropriate resources for the client's situation and literacy level. Obtain an interpreter who is credentialed
      in medical interpretation if needed.

  · Involve family or close friends in the session when possible since they are involved in the client's health care
      and daily living.

  · Communicate using plain language that minimizes the use of medical jargon.
  · If possible, teach the content over multiple sessions.

Evaluation of Effectiveness of Client Teaching
The nurse should evaluate client teaching to determine if the client has understood the information and applied it to
their life. Most frequently, client teaching is evaluated using feedback from the client. This can be verbal feedback.
For example, can the client answer relevant questions correctly? The nurse could have the client explain in their own
words what the nurse has said; the nurse could also demonstrate the material taught, if applicable. If possible, the
nurse should check in with the client later to monitor progress and answer any additional questions. Also, the nurse
should monitor any relevant client outcomes. For example, have blood glucose levels or hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c)
levels improved after instructing a client with newly diagnosed diabetes on diet management of the condition?

Holistic Assessment of Cultural Considerations

A client's culture is intertwined with their health, requiring providers to continually learn more about their values,
beliefs, and ways of life (Gbareen, Barnoy & Theilla, 2021). A cultural assessment involves more than identifying any
language barriers. The nurse should seek to understand the client's perspective, preferences, or social norms that
are part of the client's life and affect the client's food preparation and consumption.

1.4 Vulnerable Populations

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 1.4.1 Assess the impact of food insecurity on health and food choices.
  · 1.4.2 Describe ways to promote food security.

Social Determinants of Health

Nurses must consider that clients' health problems can be affected by nonmedical factors. Individual clients are
part of larger groups whose health is affected by social, demographic, and environmental forces. Unfortunately,
certain populations are more likely to experience negative health outcomes related to these influences.

Social determinants of health (SDOH) are nonmedical factors that affect individuals' health (USHHS, 2021;
ODNPHP, n.d.). Examples of SDOH include the following:
18  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

      · Safe housing, transportation, and neighborhoods
      · Racism, discrimination, and violence
      · Education, job opportunities, and income
      · Access to nutritious foods and physical activity opportunities
      · Polluted air and water
      · Language and literacy skills

    One of the goals of Healthy People 2030 is to address SDOH and create social, physical, and economic conditions
    that promote health and well-being for all.

    Food Insecurity

    Food insecurity is access to nutritious foods that is limited or uncertain because of social or economic factors
    (National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities [NIMHHD], n.d.). Clients with food insecurity do not
    have consistent, reliable sources of nutrient-dense foods. Poverty, long-term health conditions, and racial
    discrimination are some of the factors that can lead to food insecurity (Feeding America, 2023). In 2020, almost
    15% of U.S. households experienced food insecurity at some point in time (NIMHHD, n.d.). Nurses should screen
    clients for food insecurity as part of a nutritional assessment.

      SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

      Food Insecurity
      As part of a nutrition assessment, clients should be screened for food insecurity. The USDA has a Household
      Food Security Survey (HFSS) that can be used. However, researchers have developed a brief two-question tool
      based upon the HFSS that can be used to quickly screen clients. The Hunger Vital Sign includes two statements
      that can be read during a client interview; the client should respond to each statement as "often true,"
      "sometimes true," or "never true" for their household in the last 12 months. If the client responds "often true" or
      "sometimes true" to either question, the screening for food insecurity is positive.

       1. "We worried whether our food would run out before we got money to buy more."
       2. "The food we bought just didn't last, and we didn't have money to get more."

      The Hunger Vital Sign screening is easy to use and is increasingly being built into electronic health record
      systems (Gattu et al., 2019).

    Impact on Health and Food Choices
    Local environments influence food insecurity significantly (NIMHHD, n.d.). For example, food deserts are geographic
    areas that lack access to affordable, healthy food. These can be rural or urban areas that lack grocery stores with
    healthy food options. In some areas, there may be stores that sell food, but the food is not nutritious. Food swamps
    are areas with stores that sell food, but the food is high in calories, sugar, sodium, and/or fat--often referred to as
    junk food.

    When people do not have reliable, nutritious food sources, they cannot follow recommended diets. As such, food
    insecurity is associated with poor health outcomes. People with food insecurity are at increased risk for long-term
    health conditions, including diabetes, obesity, and heart disease (NIMHHD, n.d.).

    Promoting Food Security
    Food security means having enough food for an active, healthy life (NIMHHD, n.d.). Promoting food security
    necessitates educating and referring clients to additional resources (Hunger + Health, 2023). Food
    literacy--understanding labels and making good food choices--is critical to improving food security (Devine &
    Lawlis, 2019). Sometimes the client can access adequate quantities of food, but it is not quality, nutrient-dense
    food. For example, the client may eat a lot of fast food or junk food from a convenience store. Although education is
    essential to improving the client's diet, education alone is not enough. The client needs access to the types of foods
    recommended through client teaching. Nurse referrals to community agencies for food and other financial
    assistance are essential.

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.5 · Evidence-Based Practice and Nutrition                                                                             19

Vulnerable Populations

Some groups in the U.S. are considered vulnerable populations because nonmedical factors limit their ability to
achieve health and wellness (CDC, 2022b). Examples of vulnerable populations include racial or ethnic minority
groups, low-income groups, migrants, older adults, and children. When assessing clients, nurses should consider
whether they are part of a vulnerable population and plan interventions accordingly.

The County Health Rankings & Roadmaps (CHR&R) provide data to raise awareness of factors that influence health
in a community. This information is available for anyone to access. Nurses can use this information to learn more
about the clients they treat. Communities can use the information obtained from these rankings to promote health
equity and improve the overall health of their citizens. The CHR&R model identifies SDOH and how they relate to
citizens' health factors. Communities can develop policies and programs to influence these health factors that
influence health outcomes.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Connect Health Literacy and Health Equity
  Teaching nutrition using resources and strategies that address health literacy needs also promotes health
  equity. Teach clients in a way that matches their cultural, language, and environmental needs, so they are more
  likely to understand and accept what is being taught (USHHS, 2021). Health literacy can make information
  easier to understand and health equity can make the information more inclusive.

     COUNTY HEALTH RANKINGS

  How healthy is your community? Review health data for any county in the U.S.--visit the County Health Rankings
  & Roadmap website (https://openstax.org/r/countyhealthrankings) and search by state, county, or zip code to
  obtain health data for a community of interest. Compare health-related metrics in a location of interest with
  metrics from other locations. The database includes several nutrition-related metrics, including obesity rates,
  food environment index, excessive drinking, access to health care, and other SDOH.

1.5 Evidence-Based Practice and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 1.5.1 Apply EBP to client nutrition education and care.
  · 1.5.2 Use EBP to evaluate trending nutritional views.
  · 1.5.3 Use EBP to evaluate trending social media influencers.

Applying Evidence-Based Practice

Health information is readily available via the Internet. Unfortunately, only some of this information is vetted for
appropriateness and validity. Nurses should steer clients toward reliable sources of evidence-based information.

EBP is fundamental to nursing practice--whether collaborating with an interdisciplinary team or working individually
with clients directly. Throughout the remainder of this educational resource, the nurse will have opportunities to
apply EBP to various nutritionally based client scenarios. Working through these scenarios, via unfolding client case
studies, will require the nursing student to apply concepts of clinical judgment (introduced from the NCJMM) to
foster health and well-being to clients across all body systems and the lifespan. Unfolding case studies will build on
prior knowledge and scenarios. When using EBP to navigate the case studies, an understanding of nutrition and
body system disorders will be used to develop the best plan of care for the client.
20  1 · Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

    SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

    Diversity Implications
    Research on nutrition has traditionally focused on biological relationships between diet and health. Although
    this is important, researchers must consider other factors. SDOH, health disparities, and health inequities all
    affect clients' nutritional intake and need to be addressed in research. Doing this will help researchers shift their
    nutritional recommendations from a "one size fits all approach" to evidence-based recommendations that can
    be utilized by diverse populations (Mattes et al., 2022).

    Evaluating Trending Nutritional Views

    As mentioned earlier, an overwhelming amount of information is available to the consumer through the Internet.
    Consumers use the Internet to search health-related issues, find health care providers, and explore available
    resources. New (and sometimes not so new) nutrition trends are always appearing. Table 1.7 lists some of the more
    prevalent trends in recent years. Encourage clients to use the approaches previously described in Nutrition and
    Population Health to review and discuss with their health care provider any trends that they are considering.

    Trend        Description

    South Beach  Consume nutrient-rich carbohydrates and fats
    Diet

    Raw foods    Eat unprocessed/organic foods at a certain temperature

    Fasting/     Consume liquids designed to eliminate toxins
    cleanse

    Organic      Consume food certified as grown without chemical pesticides

    NonGMO       Consume food certified as having no genetic modifications

    Vegan/       Eliminate animal-source protein/products from the diet either completely or selectively
    vegetarian   depending on specific type of vegetarian diet

    Gluten free  Minimize or eliminate the ingestion of gluten found in wheat, barley, and rye

    Paleo        Eliminate modern processed foods to focus on vegetables, fruits, nuts, eggs, fish, and lean
                 meats

    Atkins/Keto  Consume high-protein, low-carb foods

    Calorie      Track food intake using calories; lose weight by eating fewer calories than required
    counting

    Whole 30     Avoid inflammatory foods for better gut health

    Probiotics   Eat foods containing probiotics to enhance gut and digestive health

    Weight       Track food intake using point system; lose weight by eating a certain level of points
    Watchers

    Diet apps    MyFitnessPal, for example, to quantify exercise and macronutrients

    Mediterranean Focus on fruit, vegetables, beans, nuts, lean meats, fish, and olive oil

      Intermittent Focus on when to eat, not necessarily what to eat
      fasting

    TABLE 1.7 Nutritional Trends from 2000 to the Present

    Evaluating Social Media Sources for Nutrition Information

    Over 4 billion social media users view information on social media sites. Social media can provide 24/7 support from
    other users or support groups, instant communication, and cost-effective health care options. Social media and
    other Internet sites also pose security risks, provide false information, promote inappropriate sharing of research
    findings, and promote self-diagnosis without the benefit of an assessment from a trained, experienced health care
    provider. A recent study of nutritional information on Instagram found the quality of the content to be extremely low

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              1.5 · Evidence-Based Practice and Nutrition                21

(Kabata et al, 2022). When looking at social media posts, consumers should consider (Johns Hopkins Sheridan
Libraries, 2023):

  · The poster--Is this person qualified to post on this topic?
  · Network--Do other credible people or organizations follow this account?
  · Content--Can other sources validate the information?
  · Contextual updates--Is this material they usually post about?
  · Age--Is this an established account, or recently created?
  · Reliability--Is the information source reliable?

As the American Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics noted, EBP uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal
evidence. This fundamental difference informs the nurse who evaluates trends in nutrition, especially those found
on social media, and makes trusted recommendations to clients.

Benefits of Social Media Sources
Several sources channel the benefits of using social media to influence nutrition and nutritional education positively.
Food Hero, an online nutrition resource provided by Oregon State University through funding from the USDA,
provides an excellent format for social media sources to use. From the inclusion of several cultural resources to
videos on demand and gardening tips, their site provides information in a dynamic format. Food Hero is found on
Snapchat, YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, and Pinterest and serves as a great example for best practices on social
media. Several other examples can be found by following the links in Table 1.8.

Website           URL

Clem & Thyme      https://clemandthyme.com/# (https://openstax.org/r/clemandthyme)
Nutrition

kaelyrd           https://www.kaelyrd.com/about (https://openstax.org/r/kaelyrdabout)

Gathered Nutrition https://gatherednutrition.com/ (https://openstax.org/r/gatherednutrition)

no food rules     https://colleenchristensennutrition.com/course/ (https://openstax.org/r/
                  colleenchristensennutrition)

Christy Harrison  https://christyharrison.com/foodpsych (https://openstax.org/r/christyharrison)

TABLE 1.8 Registered Dietitians with Social Medial Platforms

Pitfalls of Social Media Sources
As mentioned earlier, the Internet is full of conflicting information. The nurse should encourage clients to evaluate
nutrition information on social media sites in the same way information from websites and the media is scrutinized.
Much of the nutrition advice on social media is based on anecdotal findings and experiences rather than scientific
inquiry. Non-scientific social media content can promote eating disorders, distorted views of body image, and an
unrealistic promotion of diet culture, all of which negatively impact nutrition and wellness.
22 1 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· Nutrition is the intake of food to meet the body's        interventions for clients. The client must be ready
   needs. Analyzing the quantity of food intake is not      to learn, and the nurse must use an individualized
   sufficient; the food consumed must be nutritional.       approach to teaching. Evaluate the effectiveness
                                                            of client education by receiving feedback from the
· Several noninvasive body measurements are                 client and tracking health outcomes.
   needed for a nutritional assessment: weight, BMI,     · SDOH are nonmedical factors that affect
   and WHR.                                                 individuals' health and contribute to food
                                                            insecurity. The nurse can address food insecurity
· Nutrition is vital to health promotion, and nutrition     through client education and referrals to
   plays a prominent role in Healthy People 2030.           community resources.
                                                         · Vulnerable populations are at risk for poor health.
· The nurse is but one member of the                        Community health needs assessments and
   interdisciplinary team caring for the client. The        community health rankings provide valuable
   team must work together to manage the client's           information to address nonmedical factors
   nutrition.                                               influencing health.
                                                         · EBP is essential to select interventions that can
· Based on the nursing process, the NCJMM                   lead to good health outcomes.
   incorporates clinical judgment to make decisions      · Consumer nutrition information is abundant on the
   required in current nursing practice.                    Internet, but not necessarily reliable or accurate.

· The USDA and the FDA are the federal agencies
   that oversee food production, labeling, and
   consumption. Nonprofit organizations also play an
   essential role in promoting nutrition.

· Education is an integral part of nutrition-related

Key Terms

body mass index (BMI) a tool using weight and                appropriate health decisions
    height to screen and classify individuals as         integrative nutrition combines medical nutritional
    underweight, healthy weight, overweight, or obese
                                                             therapy with functional medicine and other
calories the units used to measure the amount of             disciplines to provide education and guidance for a
    energy needed or ingested daily                          personalized diet based on whole foods and lifestyle
                                                             recommendations
diet the quantity and quality of food and drinks         macronutrients water and the energy-yielding
    consumed                                                 nutrients (carbohydrates, fats, and proteins) needed
                                                             in large amounts by the body
evidence-based practice (EBP) using critically           micronutrients vitamins and minerals
    reviewed, scientifically proven evidence to deliver  MyPlate a resource directed towards consumers,
    nursing care                                             provides practical information for consumers to use
                                                             daily to consume nutritious foods
food edible substances made of protein,                  nutrients substances found in foods that can
    carbohydrates, fat, or other nutrients                   promote health and minimize illness
                                                         nutrition the intake of food to meet the needs of the
food deserts areas that lack access to affordable,           body
    healthy foods                                        social determinants of health (SDOH) nonmedical
                                                             factors that affect individuals' health
food insecurity limited or uncertain access to           vulnerable population a group of people whose
    adequate and affordable nutritious foods because of      health is negatively impacted by nonmedical factors
    social or economic factors                           waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) the ratio of waist-to-hip
                                                             circumferences
food literacy the ability to understand labels and how   wellness the pursuit of activities, choices, and
    to make good food choices                                lifestyles leading to holistic health

food security having access to enough food for an
    active, healthy life

food swamps areas that have stores that only sell
    calorie-dense, non-nutritive food

health literacy how much a person obtains,
    processes, and understands basic health
    information and services needed to make

Review Questions

1. While instructing a client on how to read and interpret a food label, which of the following would suggest the
    food is not a healthy choice?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 1 · Review Questions 23

     a. 1 gram saturated fat
     b. 10 grams added sugars
     c. 4 grams dietary fiber
     d. 3 grams protein

2. According to the MyPlate model, which macronutrient comprises the largest part of the plate for an adult?
     a. Protein
     b. Fruits and vegetables
     c. Grains
     d. Dairy

3. Which of the following clients should be prioritized for referral to a multidisciplinary team to manage an acute
    nutritional concern?
     a. A new mother who wants guidance on losing weight postpartum
     b. An adult whose blood glucose levels have increased over the past 6 months
     c. A client being discharged from the hospital after a myocardial infarction
     d. A client with a history of colon cancer

4. A new mother needs financial assistance securing nutritious food options for her infant. Which federal agency
    is the most appropriate resource for this client?
     a. TEFAP
     b. WIC
     c. HFMI
     d. SNAP

5. The nurse is analyzing a popular diet plan with a client. Which of the following information would cause the
    nurse to question the validity of the presented diet?
     a. It specifies a target calorie range the client is expected to follow.
     b. The diet's supporting evidence comes from a single physician affiliated with the required meal plan.
     c. Following it necessitates keeping a detailed journal describing food intake.
     d. Different nutrients must be consumed in prescribed amounts.

6. Which of the following client statements should prompt the nurse to screen the client for food insecurity?
     a. "I don't have a steady income."
     b. "My oven does not work well."
     c. "Sometimes my food expires before I can eat it."
     d. "I don't know any heart-healthy recipes."

7. Which of the following actions by the nurse would occur during the outcome evaluation phase of the NCJMM?
     a. Educating the client who wants to drastically limit caloric intake
     b. Recording the client's food intake for the past 24 hours
     c. Reviewing the client's prescribed diet with a dietician
     d. Measuring the client's WHR at a follow-up visit

8. Which of the following is a social determinant of health?
     a. Family history of a disease
     b. Age
     c. Employment status
     d. Number of children

9. The nurse is helping an adult, English-speaking client understand a newly prescribed diet. What is the best
    approach when selecting appropriate educational materials for the client?
     a. Provide materials designed to accommodate various reading abilities.
24 1 · Suggested Reading

         b. Find as many materials as possible related to the diet.
         c. Provide written materials in a variety of languages.
         d. Ask the client whether or not they need supplemental materials.
  10. A client reports feeling overwhelmed by all the nutrition advice showing up on the client's social media
        account feed. How should the nurse respond?
         a. "Show me what you are looking at on social media."
         b. "You cannot believe most of what you see online. You should rely on your health care providers for

              nutrition information."
         c. "Try not to spend so much time on social media as it is a sedentary activity."
         d. "It can be overwhelming. Let's talk about what you should look for to determine if the information is valid

              and reliable."

Suggested Reading

Impactful Ninja. (2023). 9 Best Charities That Promote Health and Well-Being (Complete 2023 List).
    https://impactful.ninja/best-charities-for-health-and-well-being/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Healthy Food. https://www.usda.gov/nutrition-security/healthy-food
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food. https://www.fda.gov/food
World Health Organization. (2023). Nutrition. https://www.who.int/health-topics/nutrition#tab=tab_1

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 2

A Holistic View of Macronutrients

FIGURE 2.1 A Hawaiian spirulina bowl is an excellent source of the macronutrient protein. (credit: modification of work "Hawaiian Spirulina
Smoothie Bowl" by Jennifer Johnston; NRCS Pacific Islands Area/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 Carbohydrates
2.2 Fats
2.3 Protein
2.4 Hydration
INTRODUCTION Macronutrients, or nutrients needed in large amounts, include carbohydrates, fats, and proteins
and are critical for cells, tissues, and organs. These macronutrients power cellular energy, prevent disease, and
facilitate optimal body function. Without macronutrients, life would cease.

2.1 Carbohydrates

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 2.1.1 Describe the nutritional function of carbohydrates.
  · 2.1.2 Identify the impact of carbohydrates on wellness promotion and illness prevention.

Carbohydrate Function and Metabolism

Carbohydrates are a large food category containing starches, cellulose, and sugars. They are composed of organic
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen molecules and are found naturally in fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains, and dairy
products. The term carbohydrate refers to both simple and complex carbohydrates.
Converting carbohydrates found in food to cellular energy begins with enzyme action in the mouth and is completed
26  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    by enzymes formed in the small intestine and auxiliary organs. Table 2.1 lists some enzymes and their breakdown
    products. The end product of carbohydrate metabolism is a simple sugar; the three main ones involved in human
    nutrition are glucose, galactose, and fructose. Glucose, a simple sugar, provides energy to cells and is the preferred
    fuel for the brain and nervous system. It is a monosaccharide, which is a sugar molecule that cannot be further
    metabolized.

    Enzyme                Produced By      Site of Action   Substrate Acted                        Breakdown Product
    Salivary amylase                       Mouth            Upon
                          Salivary                                                                   · Disaccharides
                          glands                            Starch                                       (maltose)

                                                                                                     · Oligosaccharides

    Pancreatic            Pancreas         Small            Starch                                 · Disaccharides
    amylase                                intestine                                                  (maltose)

                                                                                                   · Monosaccharides

    Oligosaccharides Small                 Small            Disaccharides                          · Monosaccharides

                          intestine        intestine

    TABLE 2.1 Some Enzymes and Their Breakdown Products

    Monosaccharides link with each other in different formations to create disaccharides, compounds made up of two
    monosaccharide molecules. The disaccharide sucrose is formed from one glucose molecule and one fructose
    molecule; lactose is formed from glucose and galactose, and maltose is formed from two glucose molecules.
    Disaccharides are present in a wide variety of foods: lactose in milk products, maltose in molasses and other
    fermented foods, and sucrose in a variety of foods as table sugar. Once a disaccharide is broken into
    monosaccharides, a rise in blood glucose can be seen in 10-15 min. These rapid spikes in blood glucose can be
    dangerous for individuals with diabetes.

    Complex Carbohydrates and Fiber

    Complex carbohydrates, also called polysaccharides, comprise long chains of glucose molecules, creating starch or
    fiber. The chains of glucose molecules in starch are digestible and are slowly metabolized to a monosaccharide.
    Fiber is made up of plant substances, such as cellulose, and moves through the digestive system in an undigested
    form. Fiber is best known for its gastrointestinal health benefits. Research shows that fiber protects against
    colorectal cancer, diabetes, diverticulitis, heart disease, inflammatory bowel syndrome, and obesity (Precker, 2022;
    USDA, 2022). Although the recommended fiber amount varies with age and sex, an estimated 95% of American
    adults and children do not consume recommended amounts of fiber (Quagliani & Felt-Gunderson, 2016). The most
    prudent advice on increasing dietary fiber is to increase high-fiber foods gradually to avoid cramping, gas, and
    bloating, while ensuring adequate fluid intake. Table 2.2 lists some common foods and their fiber content.

    Food Item                                     Standard Portion Size      Fiber Content (Grams)

    Guava                                         1 cup                      8.9

    Pinto beans                                   ½ cup                      7.7

    Brussels sprouts, cooked                      ½ cup                      6.4

    Sweet potato, cooked                          1 cup                      6.3

    Pumpkin seeds, whole                          1 oz                       5.2

    Green peas, cooked                            ½ cup                      4.4

    Spinach, cooked                               1 cup                      4.3

    Baked potato with skin                        1 medium                   3.9

    Orange                                        1 medium                   3.7

    Ready-to-eat cereal, toasted oat              1 cup                      3.0

    TABLE 2.2 Common Foods and the Amount of Fiber in Standard Portion Sizes (source: USDA, 2022)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.1 · Carbohydrates        27

Food Item                                Standard Portion Size           Fiber Content (Grams)

Crackers, whole wheat                    1 oz                            2.9

Edamame, cooked                          ¼ cup                           2.1

TABLE 2.2 Common Foods and the Amount of Fiber in Standard Portion Sizes (source: USDA, 2022)

Ultraprocessed Foods
Food not eaten in its original state is considered processed. Processed foods can include something as minimally
processed as wheat milled into flour or as complex as a hot dog made from five or more ingredients. It is estimated
that ultraprocessed foods (UPFs), commercially produced food products with a long shelf life and usually high in
sodium and fat, provide 50-60% of individuals' total daily energy consumption in some high-income countries
(Beslay et al., 2020). During ultraprocessing of grains, they are refined, thereby losing essential nutrients, and sugar
and salt are added. Therefore, UPFs are much more likely to have lower amounts of fiber and higher amounts of
sugar and salt than their unrefined versions, as well as chemical preservatives, such as nitrates and sulfides, to
extend shelf life. Table 2.3 includes examples of how whole foods, or foods in their natural state, are transitioned
into UPFs. Research studies on UPFs and type 2 diabetes have found that participants with the highest UPF
consumption had a higher risk for type 2 diabetes, with a statistically significant dose-response relationship
(Llavero-Valero et al., 2021; Seal et al., 2021; Wood et al., 2023).

Whole Food Item        Minimally Processed Food Item                     Ultraprocessed Food Item

Peanuts                Natural peanut butter                             Peanut butter pretzels

Apple                  Natural applesauce                                Apple danish

Soybeans               Tofu                                              Soy-based meat alternatives

Corn                   Old-fashioned grits                               Corn chips

Grapes                 100% grape juice                                  Grape jelly

Wheat                  100% whole wheat bread                            White bread

TABLE 2.3 Some Whole Foods and Their Transition to Ultraprocessed Foods

Nurses can help increase food literacy by holding meaningful discussions with clients about where food comes from
and how it is changed as it enters the consumer marketplace. Clients should be able to identify UPFs and
understand their relationship to health issues such as obesity, hypertension, and cancer (Fiolet et al., 2018).
Creating meal plans with whole and minimally processed foods ensures the consumption of more complex
carbohydrates instead of simple sugars.

Carbohydrates and Nutrition-Related Disease

When discussing carbohydrate-related diseases with clients, the nurse should always consider the type of
carbohydrate and the amount of sugar, fat, and salt added to carbohydrate-rich foods during processing.
Carbohydrates should make up 50-65% of caloric intake. However, there is a significant difference in health impact
if 50% of carbohydrates come from sugar-sweetened beverages and salty snacks instead of whole grains, fruits, and
vegetables. Individuals with a plant-forward philosophy typically consume less meat and more fresh and minimally
processed grains, fruits, and vegetables. A plant-forward meal plan provides more fiber, less sodium, and,
consequently, lower spikes in blood glucose. Research suggests that carbohydrates found in whole foods, especially
fiber, promotes health by contributing to good gut microbiota (Clemente-Suarez, 2022). Overconsumption of any
macronutrient can contribute to weight gain. A regular diet of ultraprocessed carbohydrates has been associated
with overweight, obesity, heart disease, and type 2 diabetes (Wood et al., 2023).

Two diets rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats are the Mediterranean diet and the Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension diet (DASH). The Mediterranean diet is an excellent example of a diet high in
28  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    complex carbohydrates because it is rich in fruits, vegetables, beans, legumes, nuts, and seeds. The diet also
    includes fish, seafood, and poultry, as well as dairy products in moderate amounts. This diet is high in omega-3 fatty
    acids (from fish) and low in fat. The Mediterranean diet can be beneficial because it reduces heart disease, improves
    serum lipid profiles, and decreases hypertension (Hauser et al., 2022).

    Research has shown that the DASH diet can substantially lower blood pressure (Hauser et al., 2022). The DASH diet
    includes minimally processed foods, and sugary beverages, sweets, and red and processed meats are discouraged.
    Other research has found that rates of diabetes, cancer, metabolic syndrome, and obesity are lower in individuals
    following diets like the Mediterranean and DASH diets (Shoaibinobarian et al., 2023).

      SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

      Carbohydrates and Athletes
      Athletes need increased molecular energy in the form of carbohydrates to sustain their energy supply during
      exercise. When someone is exercising, circulating glucose is the first source of energy. This energy source is
      quickly depleted, and the body then relies on stored glycogen, a large polysaccharide stored in limited amounts
      in the skeletal muscle and liver. When these stores are depleted, the body metabolizes fat for additional energy.
      Fat releases energy slower than carbohydrates do and requires over twice as much oxygen to complete the
      breakdown. Recent research indicates that manipulating fat intake before an athletic event may further increase
      endurance (Iwayama et al., 2023). Endurance athletes have practiced "carbohydrate loading" since the 1960s,
      which means they deliberately maximize the amount of carbohydrate in their diet approximately three days
      before a competition (Thomas et al., 2016), thereby enlarging their glycogen stores. A diet higher in
      carbohydrates than usual, coupled with days of no exercise, allows for the maximum buildup of stored energy.

    Milk Carbohydrate and Lactose Intolerance

    People are often surprised to discover that dairy products contain sugar. Lactose, often called "milk sugar," is a
    disaccharide composed of galactose and glucose. Breaking down lactose into a monosaccharide requires the
    enzyme lactase. Lactase peaks at birth so that infants can digest breast milk. If lactose intolerance is diagnosed, it is
    not recommended to change to a completely dairy-free diet, as many intolerant patients can tolerate up to 12-15 g
    of lactose per day without side effects (Catanzaro et al., 2021). Some people do not have this enzyme due to injury
    or a defect in the small intestine. Lactose intolerance appears to occur more frequently in Africa and Asia, while
    northern Europeans show better tolerance of lactose-containing foods. In the United States, it is estimated that
    about 33% of the population has lactose intolerance (Alzahrani et al., 2022).

    Without lactase, individuals will develop lactose intolerance symptoms such as bloating, gas, and diarrhea. They can
    take steps to help minimize discomfort and still consume milk-based foods by consuming lactose-free dairy
    products or taking lactase enzymes before meals to aid digestion. Additional calcium and vitamin D sources should
    be pursued if clients limit their dairy intake. A possible replacement for these nutrients is plant-based dairy
    products such as calcium- and vitamin D-fortified almond, rice, soy, hemp, and coconut milk if food allergies are not
    a concern (Katoch et al., 2022).

    Carbohydrates and Blood Glucose

    For individuals attempting to stabilize their blood sugar, intentional monitoring of food intake is critical, as sugars,
    starches, and fiber can affect blood glucose levels. Monosaccharides can cause spikes in blood glucose, requiring
    the hormone insulin to move it into the cells. Starch and fiber cause a less dramatic rise in blood glucose. For
    healthy adults, whole or minimally processed carbohydrates should supply 50-65% of daily calories. The American
    Diabetes Association (ADA, 2019) recommends that the percentage of daily carbohydrates be individualized for
    those with diabetes. Current recommendations include a focus on self-management of diabetes, including
    individualization of carbohydrate levels based on food preferences and metabolic goals.

    The glycemic index is a tool for better understanding the impact of certain foods on blood glucose. More than 4,000
    foods have been ranked based on the availability of highly absorbable monosaccharides (Atkinson et al., 2021). For
    example, processed foods made with refined flour and sugar, including cookies, cakes, and candy, have a high
    glycemic index, whereas whole foods, such as unrefined grains and nonstarchy vegetables, have a lower glycemic

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    2.2 · Fats  29

index. It is important to note that the glycemic index evaluates only individual foods, not entire meals, and no
nutrient qualities are included in the glycemic index rankings (Charles, 2022).

The glycemic load is a newer and more comprehensive approach for assessing the impact of carbohydrates on
blood glucose. The glycemic load uses the glycemic index and the number of total carbohydrates in a food serving to
predict the timing and rise of blood glucose. It is a more accurate assessment of healthy food intake than the
glycemic index alone (Charles, 2022).

2.2 Fats

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 2.2.1 Describe the nutritional function of fats.
  · 2.2.2 Identify the impact of fats on wellness promotion and illness prevention.
  · 2.2.3 Examine special considerations for individuals who face challenges securing adequate fat intake.

Fat Function and Metabolism

Fats are found primarily in animal foods such as meat, high-fat dairy products, and fried food, although plants are
also sources of fat in the form of oils. Fat is a concentrated energy source, supplying more than double the caloric
energy of carbohydrates or protein. See Table 2.4 for the comparison of energy in macronutrients. (Note that alcohol
also provides calories, but unlike the macronutrients, it does not provide vitamins, minerals, or fiber. Its calories are
commonly referred to as "empty" because they have no nutritional value.)

Fat helps maintain body temperature, is a critical part of fat-soluble vitamin transport, protects body organs by
cushioning them, and is an essential component of cell membranes. Hormones secreted by accessory organs assist
in fat metabolism. Although an enzyme, lingual lipase, exists in the mouth, the bulk of fat digestion occurs in the
small intestine, where ingested triglycerides (fats composed of three fatty acids and one glycerol molecule) break
down into monoglycerides and glycerol.

Macronutrient  Calories (Energy) per Gram                                          Primary Food Source
                                                                                   Grains, fruits, vegetables
Carbohydrate   4                                                                   Meat and dairy products
                                                                                   Meats, nuts, legumes
Fat            9                                                                   Municipal supply, well, bottled
                                                                                   Beer, wine, hard liquor
Protein        4

Water          0

Alcohol        7

TABLE 2.4 Energy Contribution of Carbohydrates, Fat, Proteins, Water, and Alcohol

Fat adds a smooth taste to foods and contributes to satiety. For instance, fat contributes to the flavor of a well-
marbled steak, a loaded baked potato, chicken cooked with skin, cereal with whole milk, coffee with cream, and
deep-fried fish with french fries. These foods are high in calories and saturated fats and may take twice as long to
digest as carbohydrates, remaining in the stomach and intestine longer and staving off hunger pangs. During fat
digestion, the intestinal cells secrete the hormone cholecystokinin, which slows pancreatic function and causes
longer gastric emptying, making the person feel full (Borer, 2023).

The fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K are found only in fat-containing foods. They travel through the blood with fat
molecules from the small intestine and are stored in the liver until needed. Because the fat-soluble vitamins are
stored in the body, there is no need for daily ingestion. The storage mechanism makes deficiencies rare in the United
States except for vitamin D deficiency, which has seen a large uptick globally over the last decade. According to
Guilbeau and Watson (2022), an estimated 18% of people in the United States have inadequate levels of vitamin D
and 5% have vitamin D deficiency. Fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies may occur when fat is restricted or when a client
receives total parental nutrition without lipids.

According to the U.S. Dietary Guidelines for Americans for 2020-2025, no more than 20-35% of daily calories
should come from fat; the exception is toddlers aged 2-3 years, for whom the goal is 30-40% (U.S. Department of
Agriculture & U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). Fat is an essential nutrient critical for
metabolic functions including vitamin synthesis, long-term energy storage, and the production of essential fatty
30  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    acids. However, given its caloric density, too much fat, like too much carbohydrate or protein, can raise caloric intake
    above caloric output, causing weight gain.

    Saturated Fat
    A saturated fat is usually solid at room temperature and is found in animal-based foods and some plant oils.
    Saturated fat was first linked with heart disease in the 1950s by Ancel Keys, who proposed the diet-heart
    hypothesis (Teicholz, 2023). It has been widely accepted that a decrease in saturated fats is protective against the
    development of cardiovascular disease (MacDonald et al., 2022). The U.S. Dietary Guidelines for Americans
    2020-2025 continue to include the recommendation to lower the intake of saturated fat. The American Heart
    Association recommends a dietary pattern that achieves 5-6% of calories from saturated fat. For example, if an
    individual needs about 2,000 calories a day, 120 calories at most should come from saturated fat, or approximately
    13 g/day (American Heart Association, 2021). Table 2.5 lists amounts of saturated fat in some everyday foods.

    Food Item                              Measure of Edible Portion  Saturated Fat Content (Grams)

    Dried coconut, raw                     1 piece, about 2" x 2"     13.4

    Trail mix, tropical                    1 cup                      11.9

    Chimichanga with beef                  1 chimichanga              8.5

    Butter                                 1 Tbsp                     7.2

    Cheddar cheese, cut pieces             1 oz                       6.0

    Milk, whole (3.3% fat)                 1 cup                      5.1

    Pork salami, dry type                  2 3" x ¹/" slices          2.4

    Chicken thigh, roasted                 1 thigh                    1.6

    TABLE 2.5 Common Foods and Their Saturated Fat Content (source: Gebhardt & Thomas, 2022)

    Monounsaturated Fats
    Monounsaturated fats (MUFAs) such as olive oil have become the "go-to" fat, replacing polyunsaturated fats, which
    received much of the attention in the 1980s. Table 2.6 lists some common oils and their monounsaturated fat
    content. All fats have the same number of calories per gram (9 g), whether saturated or not.

    Oil                                    Monounsaturated Fat Content (Grams per 1 Tbsp)

    Safflower                              10.2

    Olive                                  9.9

    Almond                                 9.5

    Canola                                 8.2

    Peanut                                 6.2

    Soybean, hydrogenated                  5.8

    Sesame                                 5.4

    Palm                                   5.0

    Corn                                   3.3

    Sunflower                              2.7

    Coconut                                0.9

    TABLE 2.6 Various Oils and Their Monounsaturated Fat Content (sources: Gebhardt & Thomas, 2022; USDA, 2019)

    There is a difference between animal monounsaturated and plant monounsaturated fats. Animal-based mono-
    unsaturated fats are present in eggs, poultry, red meat, fish, and full-fat dairy. Evidence demonstrates that research
    subjects who had "a higher intake of monounsaturated fatty acids from animals had a 21% higher risk of death from
    any cause" (American Heart Association, 2018). A decrease in mortality was observed when monounsaturated fats
    such as olive oil were substituted for saturated fats (Guasch-Ferre et al., 2019).

    Polyunsaturated Fats
    Two well-known polyunsaturated fats are omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. Omega-3 fats play a role in heart

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           2.2 · Fats   31

health and are found in eggs, soybeans, flaxseed, canola oil, and fatty fish such as salmon. The role of omega-6 fatty
acid in heart health is more complex than that of omega-3. Its greatest effect appears to be strengthening of the
immune system. Omega-6 fatty acids are found in sunflower, safflower, soy, sesame, and corn oils.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids are known for their health properties and anti-inflammatory action (Currenti et al.,
2022). Polyunsaturated fats should make up no more than about 11% of the 20-35% of daily calories from fat (Liu
et al., 2016). Table 2.7 presents a comparison of the polyunsaturated content of common cooking oils.

The majority of daily fat consumption should come from unsaturated sources, i.e., monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fats (Schweichler, 2022).

Oil         Percentage of Polyunsaturated Fats

Flaxseed    73

Soybean     55-58

Corn        59

Cottonseed  52

Peanut      32

Sunflower   29

Canola      32

Safflower   13

Olive*      11

Butter**    3

Coconut**   2

  *High in monounsaturated fat (71%)
  **High in saturated fat (butter: 63%, coconut: 87%)

TABLE 2.7 Percentage of Polyunsaturated Fats in Common Oils (source: Gebhardt & Thomas, 2022; USDA, 2019)

Trans Fats
Artificially produced trans fats have been used as food stabilizers in baked goods, snacks, and fried fast foods for
more than 100 years (Amico et al, 2021). Trans fats make potato chips crisp and margarine spreadable, and they
add texture to peanut butter. Trans fats also appear on food labels as partially hydrogenated oils, which are created
when food manufacturers take unsaturated oils and mechanically add hydrogen ions, thereby making the liquid oil
more saturated and partially firm.

Decades of research associating trans fats with elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL), a significant cholesterol-
carrying molecule in the blood, and lowered high-density lipoprotein (HDL), a protein/lipid molecule that removes
cholesterol from the blood, coupled with much grassroots advocacy, resulted in mandated food labeling of trans fat
in 2006. Yet, it took more than 25 years to enact a ban on artificial trans fats in food products from the time they
were first noted to be harmful (Amico et al., 2021). Small amounts of naturally occurring trans fats are found in meat
and dairy products. However, they do not appear to have the same negative impact as artificial trans fats and are not
harmful if consumed in moderation (Bendsen et al., 2011).

Cooking and Food Preparation Techniques

Fat adds flavor to food, but most Americans consume more daily fat than recommended for heart health. Fat is an
essential nutrient, and in a varied meal plan of whole grains, lean meats, and fresh fruits and vegetables, excessive
dietary fat is not usually an issue. However, cooking techniques can take the healthiest of foods and add unneeded
fat. A common example of a cooking technique that adds fat is deep frying, which can increase a food's caloric
content by 50% or more. Vegetables are low in fat, but when breaded and fried, the caloric and fat content climb,
significantly reducing the health benefits. For example, battering and frying mushrooms, onion rings, and cauliflower
change the nutrition profile by adding a significant amount of fat to a food group with negligible fat.

Alternatives to deep frying have emerged with the widespread marketing of countertop air fryers. This innovative
cooking tool "fries" food with hot air and can save 70-80% of calories (Watson, 2021). Other more conventional
32  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    ways to eliminate fat include grilling, baking, roasting, or boiling food items and adding flavor with seasonings or
    with low-fat rather than full-fat sauces. In baking, a 50% reduction of fat can be accomplished by substituting
    applesauce, canned pumpkin, pureed prunes, or mashed bananas for butter. (Using low-fat margarine in baking is
    not recommended because these products have added water and will affect the texture of the baked item.) Fat in
    the form of monounsaturated fatty acids can be added by sautéing vegetables in olive oil or by adding avocado or
    minimally processed peanut butter to toast.

    Food preparation techniques, such as adding heavy dressing to a green salad, can also alter a food's nutrition
    profile. Loading a baked potato with butter, sour cream, cheese, and bacon can increase its calories dramatically.
    Eating simple foods without high-fat enhancements is a real starting point for better health.

    Special Considerations for Individuals Who Face Challenges Securing Adequate Fat Intake

    Fat intake is a challenge for many people who consume a Western diet. However, the challenge is not securing
    adequate fat but controlling the overconsumption of fat. For more than 100 years, scientists and researchers have
    believed that fat plays a role in heart disease. Researchers are widely convinced that saturated fat increases LDL
    cholesterol and is a significant causal factor in the development of heart disease (Kris-Etherton & Krauss, 2020).

    The lack of enzymes or emulsifying agents (i.e., bile) that help digest fat impacts dietary guidance on fat intake.
    Clients who have their gallbladder removed are encouraged to avoid high-fat, fried, and greasy foods, such as fatty
    sauces and gravies (Rajan, 2021), for at least a week after surgery.

    Today, a "food replacement message" is this: Replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat, or monounsaturated
    fat, and trading ultra-processed foods for a diet rich in whole, minimally processed foods may lower heart disease.
    This food replacement message resonates with the U.S. dietary guidelines and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
    MyPlate food guide and should be at the core of food literacy.

    2.3 Protein

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 2.3.1 Describe the nutritional function of proteins.
      · 2.3.2 Identify the impact of proteins on wellness promotion and illness prevention.
      · 2.3.3 Examine special considerations for individuals who face challenges securing adequate protein

          intake.

    Nutritional Function of Proteins

    Proteins are found in every cell and perform various functions in the human body. The digestion of proteins begins in
    the stomach with the enzyme pepsin and hydrochloric acid. The acidic environment denatures the proteins, and the
    enzyme divides the protein into smaller polypeptides, which are linear organic molecules consisting of many amino
    acid residues bonded together in a chain, forming part or all of a protein. The small intestine also releases digestive
    hormones, including secretin and cholecystokinin, which stimulate the enzymes to break down the proteins into
    individual amino acids. Accessory organs release additional enzymes and contribute to the breaking of complex
    proteins into smaller individual amino acids, which are transported across the intestinal mucosa.

    In the final stages of metabolism, amino acids remain in the amino acid pool, a total number of essential amino
    acids and nonessential amino acids available for building proteins, which is regulated by the liver. Circulating amino
    acids recombine to form every protein required for maintenance and growth. In contrast, excess protein is
    converted to glucose or triglycerides depending on the body's need for energy. The sequence of the amino acids and
    folding of the protein molecule determines the function (Figure 2.2).

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.3 · Protein                                                   33

FIGURE 2.2 The structure of a protein determines its function. (credit: modification of work from Biology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Amino acids are classified as essential if they come from food and nonessential if the body can synthesize them. See
Table 2.8 for a list of amino acids and their classification. Amino acids are continually needed to replace normal cell
breakdown. Each protein has a specific sequencing of amino acids; when one is missing, protein synthesis stops
until the muscle breaks down to free up the needed amino acids for the amino acid pool. The intricate folding of the
protein molecule is based on the function required. For example, the proteins in nails, when compared to those in
the eyes, are very different in structure because the functions are highly diverse.

Amino Acid     Essential/Nonessential

Alanine        Nonessential

Arginine       Nonessential

Asparagine     Nonessential

Aspartic acid  Nonessential

Cysteine       Nonessential

Glutamic acid  Nonessential

Glutamine      Nonessential

Glycine        Nonessential

Histidine      Essential

Isoleucine     Essential

Leucine        Essential

Lysine         Essential

TABLE 2.8 Essential and Nonessential Amino Acids and Their Classification
34  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    Amino Acid                       Essential/Nonessential

    Methionine                       Essential

    Phenylalanine                    Essential

    Proline                          Nonessential

    Serine                           Nonessential

    Threonine                        Essential

    Tryptophan                       Essential

    Tyrosine                         Nonessential

    Valine                           Essential

    TABLE 2.8 Essential and Nonessential Amino Acids and Their Classification

    Protein Intake for Wellness Promotion and Illness Prevention

    Protein is essential for all tissues, and regular protein intake is essential to prevent proteolysis, a breakdown of
    proteins that causes loss of lean muscle mass. Because protein is essential for all tissues, it is a superstar of dietary
    intake. However, protein myths have elevated this macronutrient to an extreme level. High-protein diets, protein
    powder, and amino acid supplements are popular as individuals pursue well-muscled bodies. Most adults require
    only 1-1.2 g of protein per kilogram of body weight daily. For example, a person who weighs 165 lb (75 kg), should
    consume 75-90 g of protein daily. Protein is not stockpiled in the body. Therefore, a diet high in protein will not
    make for larger muscles or longer hair and nails, but an excessive amount of protein can contribute to weight gain.
    Unneeded protein is stripped of its amino group, the nitrogen is excreted in the urine, and the carbon remnant is
    converted to either glucose or triglyceride for use as energy.

    Proteins from animal sources provide the highest quality proteins or "complete proteins" because they contain all
    the essential amino acids. Meat, fish, poultry, and eggs are complete proteins. However, individuals following a
    plant-based diet can achieve complete proteins by eating various legumes, grains, and nuts. Interestingly, soy is the
    only legume classed as "complete" because it contains all the essential amino acids (Metropulos, 2019). However, it
    is less digestible than animal protein, as humans cannot digest cellulose in the plant cell structure.

    All animal proteins contain cholesterol, so a high-protein diet of beef, pork, poultry, and eggs will also be higher in
    fat and cholesterol. Lean meats cooked without added fat, poultry without skin, and egg whites instead of whole
    eggs will help control fat and cholesterol and provide adequate, high-quality protein.

    Protein supplements are unnecessary if an individual is in good health, moderately active, and knowledgeable about
    nutrition. A well-balanced diet with lean proteins and necessary fat, carbohydrate, and micronutrients can provide
    adequate nutrients without purchased supplements. The bioavailability (the way food is absorbed) of the
    macronutrients and micronutrients is better for whole foods. For example, chocolate milk is a "close to perfect"
    postexercise supplement (Amiri et al., 2019). It contains the ideal ratio of carbohydrates to protein and includes the
    milk proteins casein and whey, which metabolize at different rates for replenishment in the short and long term
    (Garden-Robinson & Christenson, 2019).

    Nitrogen balance is widely used as an indicator to assess protein loss or gain. This indicator can be especially useful
    following trauma or prolonged illness (Dickerson, 2016). If dietary nitrogen intake in the form of protein is greater
    than what is lost, a positive nitrogen balance is achieved, reflecting a gain of total body protein. Positive nitrogen
    balance is essential for growth and healing.

    Conversely, a negative nitrogen balance reflects protein degradation, with protein loss higher than protein retention.
    A negative protein balance in acute care substantially impacts survival (Dupuis et al., 2022). Healthy adults achieve
    nitrogen balance when protein intake is the same as protein degradation. Table 2.9 lists the protein content of
    animal- and plant-based foods.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2.3 · Protein                            35

Food Item                                            Measure of Edible Portion              Grams of Protein
                                                                                            26
Beef, lean only (braised, simmered, or pot roasted)  3 oz                                   35
                                                                                            19
Chicken, roasted (meat only)                         1 cup (diced)                          7
                                                                                            23
Edamame (cooked)                                     1 cup                                  1
                                                                                            22
Egg (scrambled, in margarine with whole milk)        1 large                                18
                                                                                            8
Halibut (baked or broiled)                           3 oz                                   27
                                                                                            8
Hummus                                               1 Tbsp                                 8
                                                                                            12
Leg of lamb, lean only                               3 oz

Lentils, dry (cooked)                                1 cup

Peanut butter (regular, smooth)                      1 Tbsp

Pork chop loin, lean only (fresh, cooked)            3 oz

Quinoa (cooked)                                      1 cup

Skim milk                                            1 cup

Yogurt, plain (made with lowfat milk)                8 oz

TABLE 2.9 Protein Content of Selected Foods (sources: Gebhardt & Thomas, 2022; USDA, 2019)

Special Considerations for Individuals Who Face Challenges Securing Adequate Protein
Intake

Negative nitrogen balance occurs in several disease states, ranging from poor protein intake, which can be related to
eating disorders or bariatric surgery, to hypermetabolic states requiring increased protein. Concurrently,
carbohydrates and fats must meet energy needs to channel proteins specifically for tissue repair and restoration
(Munoz & Posthauer, 2022). For example, more calories and protein are needed to repair and restore function during
burn or wound healing, especially in children, in whom protein needs can be as high as 2.5-4.0 g/kg/day (Clark et
al., 2017). Enteral nutrition within 24 hours of hospital admission is optimal, as oral meals cannot usually meet
these metabolic requirements.

Metabolic-associated fatty liver disease has been traditionally treated with protein restriction, resulting in improved
liver function. However, malnutrition has been noted in more than 50% of clients following a low-protein diet,
contributing to low survival rates. Protein ingestion in liver disease must be individualized because although some
clients with cirrhosis may tolerate normal protein intake, others may require targeted amino acid therapy to reduce
the breakdown of lean muscle mass (Ampong et al., 2020).

Individuals with chronic renal disease also require protein in lower amounts. The kidneys eliminate protein waste
products, so when an individual consumes less protein, the kidneys do not have to work as hard in filtering
metabolites. The amount of prescribed protein in clients with chronic renal disease depends on their glomerular
filtration rate (GFR). If the client progresses to dialysis, protein should be increased because of protein loss in the
dialysate. Table 2.10 illustrates the decrease in recommended protein intake as the GFR decreases. When the GFR
level drops below 15, the decision to begin dialysis depends on individual symptoms.

Stages of Kidney        Clinical Indicators                          Amount of Protein (g/kg of Ideal
Disease                                                              Body Weight)

Stage 1                 GFR  90 (normal); abnormal level of protein  No more than 0.8
                        detected in urine

Stage 2                 GFR 60-89                                    No more than 0.8

Stage 3a                GFR 45-59                                    0.55-0.60

Stage 3b                GFR 30-44                                    0.55-0.60

Stage 4                 GFR 15-29                                    0.55-0.60

TABLE 2.10 Protein Needs in Kidney Disease and Dialysis (sources: American Kidney Fund, 2022; National Kidney Foundation of Hawaii,
n.d.)
36  2 · A Holistic View of Macronutrients

    Stages of Kidney    Clinical Indicators  Amount of Protein (g/kg of Ideal
    Disease                                  Body Weight)

    Stage 5             GFR < 15             0.55-0.60

    Dialysis                                 1.0-1.2

    TABLE 2.10 Protein Needs in Kidney Disease and Dialysis (sources: American Kidney Fund, 2022; National Kidney Foundation of Hawaii,
    n.d.)

    2.4 Hydration

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 2.4.1 Describe the nutritional function of hydration.
      · 2.4.2 Identify the impact of hydration on wellness promotion and illness prevention.
      · 2.4.3 Examine special considerations for individuals who face challenges securing adequate hydration.

    Hydration Function

    Water is the universal solvent; every cell, tissue, and organ requires water to transport essential substances.
    Molecules dissolve into the watery blood environment and move through the body, providing cellular support. Blood
    also carries breakdown products for elimination. Staying hydrated is essential to good health and can be
    accomplished by responding to thirst and intentionally monitoring fluid intake. See Figure 2.3 for the use of urine
    concentration as an indicator of hydration status.

    FIGURE 2.3 A color chart indicates the hydration level of urine. A very pale color indicates overhydration, whereas darker colors indicate
    underhydration. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
    BY 4.0 license)

    Water has zero calories and is readily available. Plain water is best; tea, coffee, and sodas also provide fluids but
    often contain caffeine and sugar. How much water or other fluids are needed daily depends on body size, disease
    state, and activity level. According to the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, the recommended amount of water
    consumed per day is about 11.5 cups for women and 15.5 cups for men. This includes fluids consumed from both
    foods and beverages. Approximately 20% of this water comes from food consumption, which brings the fluid
    recommendations to about 9 cups per day for women and 13 cups per day for men (Gordon & Klemm, 2022).

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 · Hydration                                                                                                         37

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Hydration and Older Adults
  Older adults are at risk for dehydration because of diminished thirst and may cut back their fluid intake to avoid
  trips to the bathroom. Encouraging fluids can help mitigate poor fluid intake.

Both food and fluids help an individual stay hydrated, enabling all body functions to perform optimally.
Commercially bottled water is convenient, but given the problem with plastic waste, as well as the lack of fluoride in
most bottled water, the use of refillable water bottles is an eco-friendly and bone-healthy alternative. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (2020) reports that that bottled water may lack a sufficient amount of fluoride,
which is important for oral health and preventing tooth decay.

Other highly advertised beverages include hydration drinks containing electrolytes, sugar, and caffeine. These
drinks, sometimes referred to as sports drinks, may be helpful after intense exercise in adults but are not typically
needed for children unless they are experiencing nausea and vomiting and require electrolyte replacement (Munoz-
Urtuba et al., 2023). The more vigorous and longer the duration of the exercise, the more support research has
provided for rehydration beverages containing both carbohydrates and electrolytes (McDermott et al., 2017).

Two simple ways the nurse can check for hydration status include tenting of the skin and the color of urine. The
darker the urine, the greater the need for fluid (Figure 2.3).

Water Safety

Drinking water piped into homes may come from municipal water supplies or originate from a private well. Whereas
municipal water supplies are monitored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, well water is considered
"private water," and the safety is in the hands of the well owner (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2023). Safe
drinking water does not receive much attention until a public health emergency occurs. Natural disasters such as
hurricanes, floods, and tornadoes can introduce microorganisms or chemicals to municipal water supplies, making it
unsafe. The county or state health departments issue notifications for unsafe water. Usually, boiling water can kill
microorganisms (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021); however, a water filter is needed to remove
chemicals and heavy metals (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022).

     HEALTHY WATER

  Healthy water is usually taken for granted until sanitation or safety concerns make it a public health issue. The
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022) provide education on a vast array of healthy water topics
  (https://openstax.org/r/cdcgovhealthywater).
38 2 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· Carbohydrates, fats, protein, and water are             · Fats play many essential roles in the body, but
   essential for all body systems.                           because of their caloric density, they can
                                                             contribute to obesity and cardiovascular disease.
· Helping clients manipulate proper energy intake
   while maintaining dietary recommendations and          · Protein is critical to cell development; complete
   satisfying personal tastes requires a basic               proteins (providing all of the essential amino acids)
   understanding of nutrition.                               are regularly needed. Protein can contribute to a
                                                             diet higher in fat.
· Carbohydrates provide easily metabolized sugars
   contributed by grains, legumes, dairy products,        · Water guidelines cover normal fluid losses but may
   fruits, and vegetables.                                   need to be altered for certain conditions.

Key Terms

amino acid pool molecules of essential and                    and proteins; it removes cholesterol from the blood
    nonessential amino acids regulated by the liver and   low-density lipoprotein molecule comprising lipids
    available for use by the body
                                                              and proteins; it transports cholesterol throughout
bioavailability the ability of an organic substance to        the bloodstream
    enter the circulation and produce an active effect    monosaccharide sugar molecule that cannot be
                                                              further metabolized
carbohydrates large food category that includes           polypeptides linear organic molecules consisting of
    starches, cellulose, and sugars                           many amino acid residues bonded together in a
                                                              chain, forming part or all of a protein
complex carbohydrates long chains of                      proteolysis enzymatic breakdown of proteins or
    monosaccharides such as those found in starch             peptides into amino acids
                                                          triglycerides compounds formed from glycerol and
disaccharides compounds containing two                        three fatty acid groups; the main constituents of
    monosaccharide molecules                                  natural fats and oils
                                                          ultraprocessed foods foods altered by commercial
glucose simple monosaccharide that is an important            techniques, usually by adding five or more artificial
    energy source and is found in carbohydrates               substances
                                                          whole foods foods that have been processed or
glycemic index system that ranks foods on a scale             refined as little as possible and are free from
    from 1 to 100 based on their effect on blood glucose      additives and other artificial substances
    levels

glycemic load method of indicating the amount of
    carbohydrate contained in a specified serving of a
    particular food and its impact on blood glucose

glycogen stored form of glucose
high-density lipoprotein molecule comprising lipids

Review Questions

1. Amber County has issued a public health warning because arsenic was found in the drinking water. What is
    the safest way for community members to address this contamination?
     a. Obtain water from a neighboring county.
     b. Boil the water.
     c. Buy a water softener.
     d. Purchase bottled water.

2. The nurse is assisting a client to calculate their daily caloric intake. How many calories per gram should the
    nurse advise the client to assign for water?
     a. 0
     b. 4
     c. 5
     d. 7

3. The nurse is teaching the client about the Mediterranean diet. Which instruction will the nurse give the client?
     a. Decrease consumption of complex carbohydrates.
     b. Increase intake of fish.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   2 · Review Questions 39

       c. Avoid eating legumes.
       d. Increase intake of dairy products.

 4. Which instruction would the nurse give to a client who is lactose intolerant?
       a. Eat lactose-free dairy products.
       b. Drink milk in small amounts.
       c. Take a lactase enzyme after consuming a dairy product.
       d. Drink milk fortified with vitamin D.

 5. The nurse is teaching the client about dietary sources of omega-3 fatty acids. Which food source will the
      nurse include?
       a. Meat
       b. Poultry
       c. Vegetables
       d. Salmon

 6. The nurse is assessing a client who describes the color of their urine as pale yellow. Which statement would
      the nurse give to the client?
       a. "You probably have a urinary tract infection."
       b. "You need to drink more fluids."
       c. "You need to decrease your water intake."
       d. "You are well hydrated."

 7. The nurse instructs a client who has been following a vegetarian diet and has asked questions about the
      quality of protein in grains. After explaining about complete proteins that provide all of the essential amino
      acids in one food, the nurse presents the following list and asks the client to choose the one that is a
      complete protein. Which food choice, selected by the client, indicates to the nurse that the client understands
      the instruction?
       a. Oats
       b. Barley
       c. Soy
       d. Wheat

 8. Which food choice indicates to the nurse that a client understands postoperative dietary guidelines for
      gallbladder surgery?
       a. Fried grouper
       b. Ribeye steak
       c. Pasta with marinara sauce
       d. Green salad with cheese, ham cubes, and ranch dressing

 9. The nurse is providing dietary instruction to a team of college athletes. Which source of energy does the nurse
      explain is used first during exercise?
       a. Circulating glucose
       b. Stored glycogen
       c. Skeletal muscle
       d. Fat stores

10. The nurse is caring for a client with stage 3 chronic kidney disease. What is the maximum protein intake for
      this client who weighs 75 kg?
       a. 40 g
       b. 45 g
       c. 50 g
       d. 55 g
40 2 · Suggested Reading

Suggested Reading

Blum, D. (2023, January 7). The Mediterranean diet really is that good for you. Here's why. The New York Times.
    https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/06/well/eat/mediterranean-diet-health.html

Cafasso, J. (2019, August 3). Everything you need to know about lactose intolerance. Healthline.
   https://www.healthline.com/health/lactose-intolerance Kandola, A. (2019, May 14). What to know about simple
   and complex carbs. Medical News Today. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325171#complex-
    carbohydrates

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2021, December 29). DASH eating plan. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
    education/dash-eating-plan

Newman, T. (2023, May 30). Types of fat: Can fat be good for you? Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/141442#unsaturated-fats

Tinsley, G. (2023, July 5). Carb loading: How to do it plus common mistakes. Healthline.
    https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/carb-loading#TOC_TITLE_HDR_3

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 3

A Holistic View of Micronutrients

FIGURE 3.1 Vitamins and minerals are found in vegetables and fruits such as strawberries, which are high in vitamin C and antioxidants.
(credit: modification of work "Pike Place Farmers Market Express June 25" by Seattle City Council/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1 Vitamins
3.2 Minerals
3.3 Supplements
INTRODUCTION Vitamins and minerals are essential for good health yet cannot be isolated from the food that
contains these vital substances. When studying the science of nutrition, academics tend to present vitamins and
minerals in tidy packages, although stepping back and looking at the bigger picture of food and dietary patterns is
quite important. Viewing nutrition holistically can bring focus to the more advantageous practice of consuming
minimally processed foods.
Consider this case: Curtis is an elementary school-aged child living in a large generational family home in an urban
neighborhood where food choices are limited and higher priced. Curtis's primary caregiver is his aunt, due to his
parents' unpredictable work hours. Curtis was a selective eater as a toddler, and it was easier to adhere to his
preferences than to negotiate and battle at mealtime (Taylor & Emmett, 2019). Now, in third grade and after years of
poor food variety, Curtis's parents have growing concerns about his health and nutritional status.
42  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    3.1 Vitamins

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 3.1.1 Describe the nutritional function of vitamins.
      · 3.1.2 Identify the impact of vitamins on wellness promotion and illness prevention.
      · 3.1.3 Examine special considerations for populations that face challenges securing adequate vitamin

          intake.

    Vitamin Function

    The human body obtains vitamins--nutrients the body needs in small amounts to function and stay healthy--in two
    ways: food and supplementation. Vitamins were first referred to as "accessory factors" that were present in food in
    small amounts but essential for health. It was not until the start of the 20th century that these factors were named
    vitamins and, at the beginning of the 21st century, became a multibillion-dollar industry, with over 50% of
    Americans saying they regularly take vitamins of some variety (Mishra et al., 2021).

    Vitamins are separated into two classes: fat-soluble and water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) are
    absorbed along with fats in the diet and are stored in the body's fatty tissue and liver. These vitamins play critical
    roles in vision, bone health, immune function, and coagulation. Water-soluble vitamins (all other vitamins besides
    A, D, E, and K) are dissolved in water. Excess intake of water-soluble vitamins is excreted in the urine.

    All vitamins are found naturally in foods and have specific functions. In general, vitamins play the following essential
    roles (Fletcher, 2019):

      · Boost the immune system
      · Decrease the risk for certain cancers
      · Strengthen teeth and bones
      · Maintain healthy skin
      · Help the body metabolize proteins and carbohydrates
      · Support healthy blood
      · Aid brain and nervous system functions

    Vitamins A, D, E, and K
    Fat-soluble vitamins include vitamins A, D, E, and K. Fat-soluble vitamins play essential roles in many physiological
    processes, such as vision, bone health, immune function, and blood clotting (Reddy & Jialal, 2022). Fat-soluble
    vitamins, like dietary fat, are absorbed through the lymphatic system and then released into the blood, carried by
    transport proteins. Because these vitamins are stored, daily intake is not required. Excess intake of fat-soluble
    vitamins, as found with some supplements, can cause toxicity--side effects from taking large doses of supplements
    or medications.

    Absorption of fat-soluble vitamins occurs in the small intestine where they are mixed with bile salts, fatty acids, and
    phospholipids; absorbed by chylomicrons (microproteins); and carried to the lymphatic system. Since all vitamins
    require carrier proteins for transportation across the lipid bi-layer, absorption can be affected adversely by a genetic
    abnormality in the transport molecules (Ofoedu et al., 2021).

    Vitamin A is active in the genetic development of retinol pigments and contributes to healthy bones, teeth, and soft
    tissue. Vitamin A also plays a role in reproduction, facilitating semen production and cell differentiation in fetal
    development. Vitamin A is critical in immune function, helping to grow the cells that produce the mucus that lines
    the gastrointestinal tracts, sinuses, and genitourinary tract. This mucus traps and protects the human body from the
    myriad bacteria it encounters daily. Beta-carotene--a precursor to vitamin A--is an antioxidant that protects against
    certain cancers and aging by stabilizing free radicals; a free radical is an unstable molecule made during normal cell
    metabolism that has one unpaired electron (Figure 3.2).

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 · Vitamins                                                                                                                           43

FIGURE 3.2 An antioxidant stabilizes a free radical by donating an electron to the unpaired electron of the free radical. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that closely resembles a hormone's functions. This vitamin can trigger effects in
tissue throughout the body, turning on and off the production of proteins. Vitamin D, like vitamin A, plays a role in
immunity by promoting the secretion of infection-fighting substances found in white blood cells (Dimitrov et al.,
2021).

Vitamin D naturally occurs in some foods (fatty fish and egg yolks), is added to others (like milk and orange juice),
and is available as a vitamin supplement. Vitamin D is unusual because the body can synthesize it from a cholesterol
precursor--7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC)--in the epidermis with the help of ultraviolet light. In addition, vitamin D
assists in promoting calcium uptake in the gut and ensures adequate calcium and phosphorus for bone
mineralization. Bones can become thin, fragile, and deformed without sufficient vitamin D. Vitamin D prevents
rickets, the softening of the bones, which results in bowed legs, and protects against osteoporosis, the loss of bone
density, which leads to porous structure (National Institutes of Health [NIH], 2023e).

Vitamin E, a fat-soluble vitamin, acts as an antioxidant and stops the development of free radicals during fat
oxidation. Fat oxidation is a chemical reaction in which a healthy molecule loses or is robbed of one of its electrons,
which then produces an unhealthy free radical. In addition to protecting the cell from reactive oxygen species (ROS)
(reactive species capable of causing damage to biomolecules), vitamin E helps establish a robust immune system
and improves the endothelial cells on the surface of blood vessels, making them more resistant to the adherence of
clots (NIH, 2021c).

Many other claims about vitamin E exist; however, due to the difficulty in establishing biomarkers and correlating
them with clinical outcomes, recommendations for vitamin E intake continues to emerge (Institute of Medicine [U.S.]
Panel on Dietary Antioxidants and Related Compounds, 2000). Recently, the Food and Nutrition Board suggested
that vitamin E intake among healthy adults is probably higher than the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) but
warns that those following a low-fat diet could experience a deficiency (NIH, 2021c).

Vitamin K, a fat-soluble vitamin, is a coenzyme required for blood clotting and bone metabolism. Vitamin K is
present in the liver and other body tissues, including the brain, heart, pancreas, and bone. Compared with other fat-
soluble vitamins, minimal amounts of vitamin K circulate in the blood due to rapid metabolism and excretion (NIH,
2021d). The clinical status of vitamin K should be regularly evaluated in individuals who take anticoagulants or have
bleeding disorders. Infants are injected with vitamin K at birth to decrease the risk of a hemorrhagic event (Hand et
al., 2022).

Because fat-soluble vitamins are stored in tissue, higher amounts of these vitamins result in toxicity. In some water-
soluble vitamins, high-potency supplementation can also result in adverse health issues (Table 3.1).
44  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    Vitamin                          Toxicity Symptoms*
    Vitamin A
                                       · Acute Toxicity: Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, altered mental status, and muscle
                                           pain and weakness

                                       · Chronic Toxicity: Anorexia, hair loss, dry mucous membranes, fever, fatigue,
                                           hyperlipidemia, hypercalcemia, bone and joint pain, and epistaxis

                                       · Note: Isotretinoin has closely related symptoms to that of vitamin A toxicity

    Vitamin D                              · Acute Toxicity: Anorexia, muscle weakness, headache, apathy, bone pain,
                                              nausea, and vomiting

                                           · Chronic Toxicity: Polydipsia, abdominal cramping, polyuria, and back pain

    Vitamin E                              · High doses of vitamin E are usually related to vitamin supplementation
                                           · Acute Toxicity: Headaches, tiredness, double vision, diarrhea, easy bruising,

                                              and muscle weakness

    Vitamin K                              · Toxicity: Jaundice in newborns, hemolytic anemia, and hyperbilirubinemia;
                                              toxicity also inhibits the effects of oral anticoagulants

    Thiamine (B1)                          · Toxicity: Tachycardia, hypotension, vasodilation, weakness, convulsion, and
                                              anaphylaxis

    Niacin                                 · Acute Toxicity: Flushing, pruritus, vasodilation, headache, diarrhea, and
                                              vomiting

                                           · Chronic Toxicity: Jaundice, abnormal liver function, and liver toxicity

    Vitamin B6                             · Toxicity: Tachypnea, sensory neuropathies, and diminished tendon reflexes

    Vitamin C                              · Toxicity: Nephrolithiasis, diarrhea, nausea, increased estrogen levels

      *Not intended to be comprehensive

    TABLE 3.1 Vitamin Toxicity Symptoms (source: Rosenbloom, 2023)

    B Vitamins
    This section outlines water-soluble vitamins, which includes the family of B vitamins and vitamin C. There are eight
    B vitamins (at times referred to as B complex): thiamine (B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pantothenic acid (B5),
    pyridoxine (B6), biotin (B7), folate (B9), and cobalamin (B12).

    All B vitamins act as coenzymes for catalytic activity and several processes that support every aspect of cellular
    function, including brain and nervous system functions (Hanna et al., 2022). Although almost all the B vitamins are
    involved in metabolism, one cannot be substituted for another. Therefore, a specific B vitamin deficiency is
    associated with a specific disease. In general, deficiency diseases related to B vitamins are rare, partly because of
    the wide availability of these vitamins in everyday food items, but also because B vitamins that are commonly lost in
    food processing are added back into the food. For example, when the bran and germ are removed from grains,
    leaving only the endosperm, B vitamins and vitamin E are also removed (Figure 3.3). Food manufacturers add back
    the vitamins during food processing. This process is called food enrichment and is subject to government oversight
    by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Institute of Medicine [U.S.] Committee on Use of Dietary Reference
    Intakes in Nutrition Labeling [IOM], 2003; Newman et al., 2020).

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.1 · Vitamins                                   45

FIGURE 3.3 Food processing strips the whole grain of bran and germ and results in a refined grain. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Table 3.2 illustrates the function of B vitamins as coenzymes, assisting in metabolizing carbohydrates, fat, and
proteins, thus producing energy for body cells via the citric acid cycle. The citric acid cycle occurs in the cell
mitochondria, also known as the cell's powerhouse--this is where the final breakdown for carbohydrates, amino
acids, and fatty acids occurs.

Macronutrient B Vitamin Catalysts                          Metabolic Pathway

Carbohydrate Niacin, vitamins B1 and B2, pantothenic acid  Citric acid cycle in the mitochondria of each
                                                           cell

Fat      Vitamin B2, niacin, pantothenic acid              Citric acid cycle in the mitochondria of each

                                                           cell

Protein  Vitamins B2, B6, and B12; biotin; pantothenic     Citric acid cycle in the mitochondria of each
         acid                                              cell

TABLE 3.2 Energy Production from the Metabolism of Macronutrients with B Vitamin Catalysts

B vitamins must have macronutrients (carbohydrates, fat, and protein) available for energy production. Taking a
vitamin supplement instead of a balanced meal does not provide a substrate for coenzyme action. Instead,
obtaining vitamins through foods is preferred. Remember that none of the other B vitamins can cover a deficiency of
another.

Choline, Biotin, and Folate
Other water-soluble substances that are less known include choline, biotin, and folate. Choline is an essential
nutrient, not classified as a vitamin or a mineral, and is naturally present in food. Choline is often grouped with the B
vitamins because it has similar functions. Vitamin research continues to improve classification, and in 2022 for the
first time, a set amount, or Daily Value, for choline intake was included in the Daily Values (DVs), the list of all
vitamins and minerals needed (FDA, 2022a). This nutrient is a source of methyl groups needed for many steps in
lipid metabolism and is required to generate the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Although the body produces some
choline endogenously in the liver, the amount is sometimes insufficient; additional choline must be ingested through
food sources. Most people in the U.S. consume less than the recommended choline intake, yet a deficiency in
healthy, nonpregnant individuals is rare, possibly because of the contribution of self-synthesized choline (NIH,
2022b).

Biotin is a water-soluble vitamin that works as a cofactor that catalyzes the metabolism of fatty acids, glucose, and
amino acids. Biotin is found in many animal and plant foods. There has never been a reported case of biotin
deficiency in a healthy individual consuming a Western diet (NIH, 2022a).

Folate (B9) functions as a coenzyme in synthesizing ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Folate
is also critical in the metabolism of amino acids required for normal cell division. A lack of folate will result in large
red blood cells, which is associated with megaloblastic anemia--a condition in which the bone marrow produces
unusually large, structurally abnormal, immature red blood cells (NIH, 2022c). Large doses of folate can result in
46  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    kidney damage.

    The chemical structure of folate differs from the more commonly known folic acid. Folates are naturally found in
    foods, although folic acid is the fully oxidized form of the vitamin used in fortified foods and most dietary
    supplements. Since 1998, the FDA has mandated that food manufacturers add folic acid to "enriched breads,
    cereals, flours, corn meals, pasta, rice, and other grain products to reduce the risk of neural tube defects (NTDs)"
    (NIH, 2022c). NTDs result from a developmental error in the closure of the neural tube early in pregnancy and are
    one of the most common congenital disabilities in North America (National Center on Birth Defects and
    Developmental Disabilities, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2023). The fortification program is
    estimated to have increased mean folic acid intakes in the U.S. by about 200 mcg/day, a substantial increase. An
    unintentional consequence of folate fortification is that people consuming the folate-fortified foods receive extra
    folate, not just women of childbearing age. However, in the older adult, the consumption of folic acid from fortified
    foods increases the risk of masking megaloblastic anemia caused by a vitamin B12 deficiency (van Gool et al.,
    2020).

    Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid)
    Vitamin C or ascorbic acid, a water-soluble vitamin, is best known for its coenzyme and antioxidant properties (Abiri
    & Vafa, 2021). Vitamin C protects cells from premature aging caused by free radicals. Vitamin C stabilizes the cell by
    accepting or donating an electron. The body is constantly moving electrons around, so vitamin C is used in almost
    every tissue in the body. Free radicals are the leading cause of disease and inflammation, so vitamin C's ability to
    neutralize those free radicals (acting as an antioxidant) is central to lowering heart disease and cancer risk.

    Vitamin C also promotes collagen synthesis. Although collagen synthesis is required for maintaining normal vascular
    function, it also provides metabolic substrates for new blood vessel development (angiogenesis), enhancing blood
    supply, and bringing more oxygen to the tissues. Vitamin C is necessary for a healthy immune system and increases
    the absorption of non-heme iron.

    The body tightly monitors the plasma concentration of vitamin C. Approximately 70-90% of vitamin C is absorbed in
    moderate intakes of 30-180 mg/day. Absorption becomes less efficient at doses above 1000 mg/day, with about
    50% of the excess excreted in the urine (NIH, 2021b). Most healthy, non-smoking Americans consume enough
    vitamin C-rich foods to meet the daily requirements of 90 mg/day for males and 75 mg/day for females. According
    to national nutrition studies, the average vitamin C intake is about 95 mg/day without vitamin supplementation. See
    Table 3.3 for common fruits and vegetables containing vitamin C.

    Food and Serving Size                  Milligrams of Vitamin C   % Daily Value
                                                                     106
    Red pepper (fresh), ½ cup              95                        78
                                                                     71
    Medium orange, 1                       70                        54
                                                                     43
    Medium kiwi, 1                         64                        32
                                                                     19
    Strawberries, ½ cup                    49

    Broccoli, ½ cup                        39

    Cantaloupe, ½ cup                      29

    Baked potato, 1                        17

    TABLE 3.3 Vitamin C Levels in Common Foods (source: NIH, 2021a)

    Large doses of vitamin C can have an adverse effect in people with a family history of kidney or gallstones.
    Supplementing vitamin C at a level three times or more of the RDA (approximately 3000 mg) can double the amount
    of oxalate filtering through the kidney and greatly increases the chance of stone formation.

    Most water-soluble vitamins are absorbed in the small intestine through the process of diffusion. Riboflavin,
    however, requires the assistance of a carrier molecule for it to enter the bloodstream. Many water-soluble vitamins
    function as coenzymes in other cellular reactions and may require additional chemical action before tissues use
    them. Differences in ease of absorption or food bioavailability, dosage, and chemical form of the vitamin all influence
    the amount of the vitamin absorbed in the small intestine (Ofoedu et al., 2021).

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 3.1 · Vitamins  47

SAFETY ALERT

Smoking and Increased Vitamin C Needs

Clients who smoke should increase their vitamin C by 35 mg/day. They have decreased plasma concentrations of
this antioxidant due to an increase in free radicals. According to Lykkesfeldt and Tveden-Nyborg (2019), "Active
smoking typically depletes the vitamin C pool by 25-50% compared to never-smokers."

Certain populations or disease states require vitamin supplementation. In most cases, this is due to an increased
need related to disease, aging, pregnancy, and breastfeeding. Table 3.4 displays the water- and fat-soluble vitamins
and gives situations where vitamin supplementation may need to occur.

Vitamin                Special Considerations/Reference
Water-Soluble
Thiamin (B1)             · Chronic alcohol exposure (increase)
                         · Older adults (increase)
                         · HIV/AIDS (increase)
                         · Bariatric surgery (increase)
                         · Diabetes (increase)

Riboflavin (B2)        · Vegan (increase) and vegetarian athletes (increase)
                       · Genetic mutation: riboflavin transporter deficiency (increase upon the emergence of

                          symptoms, not effective with long onset)

Niacin (B3)            · Hartnup disease--caused by the body's inability to absorb amino acids from the
                          diet results in the inability to produce vitamins and proteins--(increase)

                       · Carcinoid syndrome (increase)
                       · Undernutrition (increase)
                       · Inadequate riboflavin, pyridoxine, and/or iron intakes (increase)

Pantothenic acid (B5)  · Genetic pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 2 mutation (unclear if
                          supplementation is helpful)

Pyridoxine (B6)        · Rheumatoid arthritis (increase)
                       · End-stage renal disease (increase)
                       · People with alcohol dependencies (increase)
                       · Celiac disease
                       · Crohn's disease
                       · Ulcerative colitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and other malabsorptive

                          autoimmune disorders (increase)

Biotin (B7)            · Pregnant and breastfeeding (increase)
                       · Genetic mutation resulting in biotin enzyme deficiency (increase)
                       · Chronic alcohol exposure (increase)

Folate (B9)            · Chronic alcohol exposure (increase)
                       · Pregnant and all women of childbearing age (increase)
                       · People with malabsorptive disorders, including tropical sprue, celiac disease,

                          inflammatory bowel disease (increase), genetic mutation that reduces the ability to
                          convert folate to one of its active forms (increase)

TABLE 3.4 Recommended Vitamin Supplementation for Various Diseases (sources: NIH, 2021a--d; 2022a--f; 2023a--d)
48  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    Vitamin          Special Considerations/Reference
    Cobalamin (B12)
                       · Vegetarians (increase)
                       · Surgery of gastrointestinal tract such as in weight loss (increase), pernicious anemia

                           (injections), older adults (increase), breastfed infants of vegan mothers (increase)

    Choline                          · Pregnant women (increase)
                                     · Genetic alterations (increase)
                                     · Long-term total parenteral nutrition (increase)

    Vitamin C                        · Smokers and passive "smokers" (increase)
                                     · Limited food variety (increase)
                                     · Infants fed evaporated or boiled milk (increase)
                                     · End-stage renal disease on chronic hemodialysis (increase)

    Fat-Soluble                      · Premature infants (increase)
    Vitamin A                        · Cystic fibrosis (increase)
                                     · Females and children in lower resourced countries (increase)
                                     · Long-standing Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis (unclear as to the benefit of

                                        increase)

    Vitamin D                        · Breastfed infants (increase)
                                     · Older adults (increase)
                                     · Reduced sunlight exposure (increase)
                                     · Darker skin tones (increase)
                                     · Gastric bypass surgery (increase)
                                     · Fat malabsorption as found in liver disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, Crohn's

                                        disease, and ulcerative colitis (increase)

    Vitamin E                        · Abetalipoproteinemia (large increase), fat malabsorption (increase)

    Vitamin K                        · Newborns not treated with vitamin K at birth (intramuscular injection)
                                     · Fat malabsorption as found in cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, and

                                        short bowel syndrome (increase)

    TABLE 3.4 Recommended Vitamin Supplementation for Various Diseases (sources: NIH, 2021a--d; 2022a--f; 2023a--d)

    Vitamin Intake for Wellness

    To help consumers make healthy food choices and consume adequate amounts of vitamins, the FDA mandates that
    foods carry a nutrition facts food label. Although the label does not display every vitamin or mineral, Figure 3.4 is an
    example nutrition food label, outlining the most important nutrient information deemed by the FDA (2022a).

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 · Vitamins                                                                                                                         49

FIGURE 3.4 This nutrition facts food label shows percent DVs of one serving (1 cup) of a food item. (credit: "Sample Label for Frozen
Lasagna"/U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Public Domain)

The nutrition facts food label in Figure 3.4 indicates that this food item is low in added sugars and vitamin D and is
considered high in saturated fat, calcium, and sodium. Restated more simply, one serving of this food item provides
one-quarter of the daily calcium and saturated fat requirements and over one-third of the daily allowance for
sodium, if consuming approximately 2,000 calories daily. Usually, a meal consists of more than one food item, so
adding naturally low-sodium and low-fat foods like fresh fruit or vegetables will help to balance this food
nutritionally.

Individual food manufacturers create nutrition facts labels based on the amount of nutrients in a standard serving
size of that food. The percent Daily Value (DV) is the percentage of the nutrient the food item provides for an adult
consuming about 2,000 calories daily. FDA guidance states that 5% DV or less of a nutrient per serving is considered
low, and 20% DV or more of a nutrient per serving is considered high (FDA, 2022). Note that reaching 100% of the
DV for sugar, fat, saturated fat, and sodium should not be a target or goal.

     NUTRIENT DAILY VALUES REFERENCE GUIDE

  The FDA recently updated their reference guide of DVs. A review of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
  website (https://openstax.org/r/fdagovfood) shows how nutrient recommendations increased or decreased since
  the last review.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Curtis, a third grader who has a long history of being a picky eater, does not like getting up early, so most days he
does not eat breakfast before leaving for school. He also does not like the school-provided lunch, so his aunt sends
50  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    him to school with a commercially packaged and processed lunch of cheese and meat with crackers. After school,
    Curtis has a two-pack of toaster pastries with a glass of water, and his aunt usually makes him a box of macaroni and
    cheese for supper--they know he will eat it without a complaint. During his last visit to the pediatrician, Curtis's
    caregivers voiced frustration with Curtis's eating habits and wondered if he was getting all his vitamins and minerals.
    After checking Curtis's height and weight, the pediatrician explained that Curtis was at the 95th percentile for weight
    and advised his family to serve more fruits and vegetables and monitor his weight.

    To answer the following questions, search the Internet for food label information on a combo lunch pack (such as
    Lunchables), boxed macaroni and cheese, and toaster pastries.

        1. What micronutrient does the nurse assess is over the recommended amount in Curtis's diet?
             a. Folate
             b. Vitamin D
             c. Biotin
             d. Sodium

        2. What micronutrients would be increased with the addition of the fruits and vegetables as advised by the
            nurse?
             a. Vitamins B1 and B2
             b. Vitamins B6 and niacin
             c. Vitamins A and C
             d. Biotin and pantothenic acid

    Meal Planning

    Cooking techniques can impact the retention of water-soluble vitamins. The best cooking techniques for preserving
    water-soluble vitamins in vegetables include stir-frying, microwaving, and steaming. Each of these limits the amount
    of water and shortens cooking time, which decreases lost vitamins.

    Vitamins B1, B2, and folate are sensitive to heat or light. Exposure to heat for as few as 5 minutes can decrease the
    content of the vitamin by as much as 90%. Vitamin C is degraded by heat and can begin to decrease within 5
    minutes of exposure to a high temperature. For the best retention of a vitamin, cook for a shorter time, use less
    water, and lower the temperature.

    Another way of maximizing vitamin intake is through intentional meal planning. MyPlate from the U.S. Department of
    Agriculture (USDA) is a simple tool for building a meal rich in vitamins and minerals that focuses on nuts, legumes,
    fruits, vegetables, complex carbohydrates, lean meat, and dairy. Another effective way to present a balanced and
    nutrient-rich meal is to create a plate of one-quarter protein, one-quarter high carbohydrate or starchy food, and
    one-half fruits and vegetables.

    3.2 Minerals

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 3.2.1 Describe the nutritional function of minerals.
      · 3.2.2 Identify the impact of minerals on wellness promotion and illness prevention.
      · 3.2.3 Examine special considerations for populations that face challenges securing adequate mineral

          intake.

    Mineral Function

    Minerals are common in cereals, bread, meat, fish, milk, dairy, nuts, fruit (especially in dried form), and vegetables.
    About 20 minerals are essential for body function, all in varying amounts depending on their role. The
    macrominerals are needed at levels higher than 100 mg/day, and trace minerals are needed in amounts less than
    100 mg/day (Farag et al., 2023). Table 3.5 lists the macro (M) and trace (T) minerals and their functions.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.2 · Minerals   51

Mineral        Function

Calcium (M)    Contributes to the structure of bones and teeth and controls blood vessel contraction and
               dilation, muscle function, blood clotting, nerve transmission, and hormone secretion

Phosphorus (M) Contributes to the structure of bones and teeth and to the genetic material of DNA and RNA

Potassium (M)  Maintains intracellular fluid volume and is important for muscle contraction, specifically heart
               contractions

Sodium (M)     Maintains extracellular fluid volume and plays a crucial role in normal nerve and muscle
               function

Chloride (M)   Plays a role in acid-base homeostasis, contributes to maintenance of urine and plasma
               electroneutrality, and may even effect neurohormonal activation (Soliman et al., 2022)

Magnesium (M)  Responsible for activation of enzymes, membrane function, intracellular signaling, and
               muscle contraction

Sulfur (M)     Operates as a cofactor involved in regulating oxidative processes and is an endogenous
               metabolite of the amino acid, methionine

Iron (T)       Helps develop red blood cells, metabolize cellular energy metabolism, and develop the
               immune system

Zinc (T)       Performs the role of antioxidant by protecting cell membranes from free radical damage as a
               coenzyme of more than 300 enzymes

Iodine (T)     Serves as a necessary component of thyroid hormones

Chromium (T)   May facilitate the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins by increasing the
               effectiveness of insulin--the precise mechanism for this activity has yet to be identified

Copper (T)     Operates as a cofactor in the process of cellular oxidation and is required for the oxidation of
               iron

Fluoride (T)   Promotes remineralization of bones and teeth

Molybdenum (T) Aids in the metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids and is an enzyme cofactor

Manganese (T)  Serves as a cofactor for enzyme productions related to protein, fat, and carbohydrate
               metabolism; functions as antioxidant

Selenium (T)   Removes excess hydrogen peroxide from thyroid and is also needed for DNA synthesis

TABLE 3.5 Essential Minerals and Their Functions

Minerals work synergistically. For example, the sodium-to-potassium ratio is essential in maintaining normal blood
pressure and impacts blood pressure more than sodium or potassium alone. Likewise, the proper relationship
between calcium and phosphorus is vital in maintaining normal bone structure. As with vitamins, one mineral
cannot assume the function of another mineral, and a shortage or deficiency of any mineral will impact body
function.

Mineral absorption takes place primarily in the small intestine. For some minerals, absorption efficiency depends on
specific needs such as calcium absorption in pregnancy. During pregnancy, calcium absorption takes place actively,
which requires energy to transport across the cell membrane. In times of plentiful serum calcium, the body switches
to a passive diffusion method of absorption.

Mineral absorption can be helped or hindered by other dietary components that occur naturally in food. For
example, iron is best absorbed in an acid environment, so health professionals recommend taking an iron
supplement with orange juice. Juxtaposed is the absorption of minerals in the presence of phytates (found in whole
grains) that interfere with calcium, iron, magnesium, and zinc absorption.

NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH

The NIH provides thorough information on their website (https://openstax.org/r/odsod) about dietary
supplements, herbs, vitamins, probiotics, and more.
52  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    Mineral Intake for Wellness

    Minerals play an essential role in various metabolic and physiologic processes. A deeper dive into cellular nutrition
    reveals that minerals are critical for the metabolism of every cell in the body. A well-balanced mineral intake is
    essential throughout the human life cycle, although specific needs may vary based on age and sex (Farag, et al.,
    2023). For example, the iron needs of premenopausal clients are higher than postmenopausal clients because of
    the iron loss during menstruation. A diet comprised of vegetables, legumes, nuts, lean meats, and seafood provides
    all the essential minerals needed throughout a person's life.

    Food fortification (the practice of intentionally increasing the content of one or more micronutrients) makes
    meeting the required mineral DV easier. For example, in the mid-1920s, in response to an increase in goiter, iodine
    was added to table salt (Leung, Braverman, and Pearce, 2012). Goiter is an increase in thyroid size resulting from
    either iodine deficiency or hyperthyroidism. Vitamin D was first added to milk in 1933 in response to the presence of
    childhood rickets (IOM, 2003; United Nations, 2019). Today, food fortification continues. Two more current
    examples are the addition of calcium to orange juice and iron and folate to breakfast cereals. Even though some
    breakfast cereals are fortified with essential vitamins and minerals, many should not be considered nutritionally
    sound because they are high in added sugar. Fortification does not guarantee nutritional excellence.

         MINERAL DAILY VALUES

      As with vitamins, there are also mineral DV percentages. You can find vitamin and mineral information
      (https://openstax.org/r/factsheets) on the NIH website, which contains a list of vitamins and minerals with
      hyperlinks to more detailed information on each (select the mineral of interest and then proceed to the option of
      health professional).

         TRENDING TODAY

     Micronutrients

     As you work through this Trending Today feature, recall that nurses should rely on evidence-based practice
     (EBP), which uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal evidence, to inform their practice and care of clients.
     Nurses should encourage clients to evaluate nutritional information on social media with the same scrutiny.

      Research indicates an increasing use of micronutrient supplements, specifically single-nutrient supplements
      (Cowan et al, 2020). Is it better to take a supplement to ensure you have an adequate supply of micronutrients,
      or is it possible to get the micronutrients your body needs via food sources?

      On social media, influencers promote awareness of micronutrient consumption in a person's diet as a way to
      assess their individual levels. TikToker @TheWellnessPharm suggests that individuals use a micronutrient testing
      kit to help determine if they have consistently low levels of specific nutrients. Similarly, Instagram hosts several
      forums dedicated to the discussion of obtaining daily micronutrient requirements from specific foods, often
      promoting intuitive or mindful eating practice.

      Take some time to review the following social media content and think critically about the information provided
      and its appeal to clients:

        · @TheWellnessPharm (https://openstax.org/r/tiktok) (TikTok)
        · Any Instagram forum dedicated to the discussion of obtaining daily micronutrient requirements from specific

            foods (Instagram)
        · Nutrition for Resilience - Micronutrient Forum (https://openstax.org/r/mnforum) (Website)

      Now answer the following questions:

      1. Which account did you prefer when viewing or reading? Explain.
      2. What is the purpose of the content you viewed or read?
      3. How would you evaluate these sources for use of EBP, and which sources used EBP?
      4. If a client came to you with this information, how would you educate them to critically use these sources?

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3.3 · Supplements        53

5. What alternative sources would you recommend to clients to educate them about this topic?

3.3 Supplements

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 3.3.1 Describe vitamin and mineral supplements' role in nutrition and wellness.
  · 3.3.2 Evaluate vitamin and mineral supplements as part of a nutritional plan, including the potential for

      interactions.
  · 3.3.3 Examine special considerations for the nutritional needs associated with vulnerable populations

      and across the lifespan.

Regulations and Recommendations for the Use of Supplements

Eating a diet with fresh and minimally processed foods is the best source of vitamins and minerals. However, even
people with healthy eating habits sometimes need help to bridge occasional nutrient gaps, and supplements may
help.

Deciding on the right vitamin-mineral supplement can be difficult, considering that hundreds of different types are
available and no real guidance is provided at the point of sale (NIH, 2018). With almost 60% (Mishra et al., 2021) of
the population taking multiple vitamin and mineral supplements, guidance is important. People who are more likely
to need a supplement include those with the following characteristics (Weyh et al., 2022):

  · With restricted diets
  · Who are pregnant
  · With loss of appetite due to sickness, injury, or surgery--note that vitamin/mineral supplements alone do not

      provide calories or protein needed for healing
  · With severe food allergies resulting in a restricted diet
  · With a depleted immune system

Broadly, vitamin-mineral supplements are divided into three main groups: basic, high-potency, and specialized
(Table 3.6). Examples of when each group would apply include:

  · Basic--Individuals needing to bridge occasional vitamin and mineral gaps.
  · High-potency--Pregnant women have higher iron and folate needs and need a diet formulated for prenatal care.
  · Specialized--Clients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) may need to supplement with specific

      vitamins and minerals: vitamin C (500 mg), vitamin E (400 IU), beta-carotene (15 mg), zinc (80 mg), and copper
      (2 mg), which is effective in slowing AMD (NIH-National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health,
      2018; NIH, 2023).

Vitamin-   Description
Mineral
Category

Basic      These vitamins have a usual daily dosage and contain a variety of vitamins and minerals in
(broad     amounts that do not exceed the DVs. Many of the vitamins in this group are developed for specific
spectrum)  populations such as males, females, seniors, and children to better meet the unique needs of age
           and sex.

High-      These multivitamin/minerals (MVMs) contain amounts of some vitamins and minerals that are well
potency    over 100% of the percent DV. They might also include other nutrients and botanical ingredients.
           These high-potency vitamins may be marketed in multiple packages for convenience and daily
           use.

Specialized These MVMs are used for different needs like immune function, eye health, or athletic

(condition- performance. They are often combinations of vitamins, minerals, botanicals, probiotics, and

specific)  coenzymes. Some of these products include nutrients much higher than the percent DV.

TABLE 3.6 Categories of Vitamin and Mineral Supplements (source: NIH, 2023a)
54  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    Vitamin-mineral supplements fall under the regulatory powers of the FDA. However, the weak regulation and the
    vast array of supplements can confuse the consumer. The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) of
    1994 altered the FDA's authority to regulate dietary supplements (NIH Office of Dietary Supplements, 1994). Under
    DSHEA, the FDA does not authorize or evaluate dietary supplements for safety or effectiveness before reaching
    store shelves; unfortunately, this makes a "buyer beware" situation. Vitamin manufacturers can lawfully introduce
    dietary supplements without even notifying the FDA. Since DSHEA was enacted, the dietary supplement market has
    exploded, with the number of products multiplying nearly 20 times since 1994 (FDA, 2022).

    Supplements and Nutritional Plans

    Nurses should take a food-first approach to vitamins and minerals as the most prudent advice for clients. Food has
    multiple advantages over a manufactured pill by providing complex carbohydrates, fiber, protein, unsaturated fats,
    and antioxidants.

    Table 3.7 is an example of a food-first approach with a diet full of vitamins and minerals from dairy, legumes, lean
    meat, nuts, fish, fruits, and vegetables. A vitamin- and mineral-rich daily menu could be as simple as the following
    meals:

      · Breakfast--cereal with 5 g or less of added sugar, low-fat animal or plant milk (fortified with calcium and
          Vitamin D), and a banana

      · Lunch--carrot sticks, a tuna sandwich on whole wheat bread, and orange sections
      · Snack--roasted almonds
      · Dinner--broiled pork chop, collards, and lightly salted sweet potato fries (air-fried)

    Vitamin/Mineral                  Food Source/Serving Size

    Vitamin A                        1 small carrot provides 6000 IU of vitamin A (100% of DV)

    Vitamin B3 (niacin)              3 oz of tuna has 11 mg of niacin (about 50% of DV)
    Vitamin B6                       1 medium banana contains about 0.4 mg vitamin B6 (about 25% of DV)
    Vitamin E                        1 oz of almonds has over 7 mg vitamin E (about 50% of DV)

    Vitamin B1                       1 3-oz pork chop provides 0.4 mg of thiamin (33% of DV)
    Vitamin C                        1 medium orange provides 70 mg of vitamin C (78% of DV)

    Vitamin D                        8 oz of fortified milk contains 100 IU vitamin D (25% of DV)

    Selenium                         1 slice of whole wheat bread contains 10 mcg of selenium (about 20% of DV)

    Calcium                          1 cup of boiled collard greens contains 266 mg of calcium (about 26% of DV)

    Zinc                             3 oz of lean beef contains 5 mg of zinc (about 50% of DV)

    TABLE 3.7 Examples of Vitamins and Minerals Found in Common Food Sources (Note that all of the above-mentioned foods contain
    multiple vitamins and minerals.)

    According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH-National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health,
    2018), supplement manufacturers can make three health-related claims on their labels:

    · Health--describes a relationship between a food, food component, or dietary supplement ingredient and
       reducing the risk of a specific disease or health-related condition

    · Nutrient--describes the relative amount of a nutrient or dietary substance in a product
    · Structure or function--describes how a product may affect the organs or systems of the body and cannot

       mention any specific disease

    The dosage of specific vitamin and mineral supplements a client should consume will vary because the
    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) differs based on age and sex. For example, note the differences in
    recommended daily iron intake for each of these groups:

    · Adolescent (age 12 to 18 years) female: 15 mg
    · Adolescent (age 12 to 18 years) male: 11 mg
    · Adult (age 18 plus years) female: 18 mg
    · Adult (age 18 plus years) male: 8 mg

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Supplements                                                                                                           55

Because of specific needs, vitamin-mineral supplements are customized and marketed to population segments
based on activity and age. For example, vitamins for children sport bright and catchy labels, gummy textures, and
fruity tastes. Prenatal vitamins often have labels with pastel colors. Supplements for older adults are packaged in
silver labeled bottles. Vitamin-mineral supplements can also be found as liquid drinks, including water, milk, and
coffee.

Clients may ask if they need a vitamin-mineral supplement. There is little scientific support for taking a vitamin-
mineral supplement when no deficiency signs and symptom exist (Seres, 2023); foods provide many vitamins,
minerals, and phytochemicals and are more bioavailable than those found in supplements (Harguth, 2022). In some
situations, vitamin-mineral supplements are essential for good health, but promoting food as the first line of health
defense is strongly supported by science and health professionals.

Recommended Dietary Allowance

The RDAs are published by the Food and National Academies of Sciences every 5-10 years. RDAs were developed
during World War II for nutritional guidance in feeding soldiers and food relief in the U.S. and internationally. They
were set at the minimum level for good health and not every nutrient has an RDA (Murphy et al., 2016). The
nutrients listed in the RDA are used as a goal for healthy individuals at every age. They are preventative in nature
and not meant to be treatment for disease.

Dietary Guidelines are updated every 5 years; they help interpret and apply the RDAs to dietary patterns. In 1985,
the Dietary Guidelines scientific report supporting their recommendations totaled 19 pages. In the 2020 version,
the total was over 800 pages, demonstrating the prolific research occurring over the past 40 years on vitamins and
minerals, dietary patterns, and health. The 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines' call to action "Make Every Bite Count"
includes four overarching values:

  · Follow a healthy dietary pattern at every life stage.
  · Customize and enjoy nutrient-dense food and beverage choices to reflect personal preferences, cultural

      traditions, and budgetary considerations.
  · Focus on meeting food group needs with nutrient-dense foods and beverages and stay within calorie limits.
  · Limit foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium, and limit alcoholic beverages (U.S.

      Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020).

These Dietary Guidelines are reflected throughout this chapter as nutrient-dense foods are emphasized over
supplements.

     DIETARY GUIDELINES

  Read more on the history of dietary guidelines from 1980-2020; of special note is the expansion in guidance
  over the last 30 years and the incorporation of recommendations into the overarching guideline. Review this
  website for a look (https://openstax.org/r/dietaryguidelines) at how the guidelines have emerged over the last
  three decades and this website for free materials (https://openstax.org/r/dietaryguidelinesresources) related to
 the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

After Curtis's last visit to the pediatrician, his aunt tries to introduce Curtis to some of her favorite Haitian dishes,
such as rice with a pork sauce, beef and pumpkin soup, and banana fritters. Curtis refuses to taste any of the native
Haitian foods. His aunt is now watching several other children after school in addition to Curtis, and Curtis's parents
continue to work rotating shifts and extra hours. Curtis spends most of the school year eating the same limited
number of foods for lunch, snacks, and dinner. He rejects all attempts to include fruits and vegetables in his diet; it is
56  3 · A Holistic View of Micronutrients

    cheaper, easier, and faster to adhere to Curtis's food preferences.

    Curtis is sick more often than his classmates, which causes him to miss many days of school and fall behind in his
    work. His mom is concerned and asks the school nurse what she should do about his inability to fight infections. The
    school nurse indicates Curtis's picky eating habits were contributing to frequent illness.

        3. How could Curtis "Make Every Bite" count?
             a. Increase consumption of toaster pastries since they are vitamin B fortified.
             b. Add another powdered cheese packet to his macaroni and cheese.
             c. Provide a vitamin gummy daily.
             d. Experiment with fruit and vegetable smoothies for an after school snack.

        4. Which vitamins should the nurse recommend to help build Curtis's immune system?
             a. Vitamin C and vitamin E
             b. Vitamin K and vitamin C
             c. Choline and biotin
             d. Vitamin D and vitamin K

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3 · Chapter Summary 57

Chapter Summary

· A well-rounded, varied diet of mostly unprocessed          sources.
   foods will provide many of the DVs recommended         · Vitamin-mineral supplements should be selected
   by the FDA.
                                                             based on age, sex, and specific need.
· High doses of water-soluble vitamins are excreted       · Coenzyme and antioxidant properties are critical
   in the urine, although fat-soluble vitamins are
   stored in the tissues. High doses of fat-soluble          functions of vitamins and minerals.
   vitamins can lead to toxicity and even death.          · Nutrition facts food labels and MyPlate can assist

· Certain disease states require higher vitamin and          in choosing foods high in vitamins and minerals.
   mineral intake, supplemented beyond dietary            · RDAs and DVs reflect current nutrient research.

Key Terms

angiogenesis new blood vessel development                     proteins
antioxidant artificial or natural substances that may     megaloblastic anemia a condition involving a vitamin

    prevent or delay some types of cell damage                B12 and/or folate deficiency in which the bone
citric acid cycle final oxidation of protein, fat, and        marrow produces very large, structurally abnormal
                                                              red blood cells
    carbohydrate                                          osteoporosis loss of bone density resulting in porous,
coenzyme a non-protein compound that binds with               fragile bone
                                                          oxidation a chemical reaction in which a "healthy"
    an enzyme to speed up a cellular reaction                 molecule loses or is robbed of one of its electrons,
Daily Value one value for each nutrient selected for          producing an unhealthy free radical
                                                          percent Daily Value the contribution of a vitamin or
    the labels of dietary supplements and foods               mineral in a food portion based on the standard
Daily Values a list of the vitamins and minerals that         benchmark of a total daily 2,000-calorie diet
                                                          Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) average
    an individual should consume each day                     daily nutrient intake level necessary to meet the
fat-soluble vitamins vitamins that are absorbed               bodily requirements of nearly all (97-98%) healthy
                                                              individuals
    along with fats in the diet and are stored in the     rickets softening of the bone due to vitamin D
    body's fatty tissue and liver                             deficiency resulting in bowed legs
food enrichment the practice of adding back               toxicity side effects from taking large doses of
    nutrients that were lost in food processing               supplements or medications
food fortification the practice of intentionally          vitamins nutrients the body needs in small amounts
    increasing the content of one or more                     to function and stay healthy
    micronutrients (i.e., vitamins and minerals)          water-soluble vitamins vitamins that dissolve in
free radicals a type of unstable molecule that is             water
    made during normal cell metabolism
goiter an increase in thyroid size resulting from either
    iodine deficiency or hyperthyroidism
Hartnup disease a condition caused by the body's
    inability to absorb amino acids from the diet
    resulting in the inability to produce vitamins and

Review Questions

1. Which vitamin has the greatest chance of toxicity if taken in large doses?
     a. Vitamin A
     b. Riboflavin (B2)
     c. Vitamin C
     d. Pantothenic acid

2. The nurse provides dietary instruction to a client who is having difficulty controlling their blood glucose level.
    Which mineral deficiency should the nurse anticipate?
     a. Chromium
     b. Calcium
     c. Copper
     d. Iron
58 3 · Review Questions

    3. The nurse is teaching a client how to read a supplement label. Which of the following statements by the client
        about what information can be included in a supplement label indicates additional instruction is needed?
         a. "It will describe how the ingredients can affect my body."
         b. "It will list the amount of the ingredients in the supplement."
         c. "It will describe how much of the supplement I should take."
         d. "It will describe how the supplement will cure my high blood pressure."

    4. The nurse is assessing a child with bowed legs. Which vitamin deficiency should the nurse anticipate is
        related to this disorder?
         a. Vitamin C
         b. Calcium
         c. Vitamin D
         d. Riboflavin

    5. Which information should the nurse give to a client taking high doses of water-soluble vitamins?
         a. Excess water-soluble vitamins are stored in fatty tissue.
         b. Excess water-soluble vitamins are stored in the liver.
         c. Excess water-soluble vitamins quickly reach toxic levels.
         d. Excess water-soluble vitamins are excreted in the urine.

    6. Which vitamin supplement should the nurse recommend to a client who is trying to conceive?
         a. Thiamin
         b. Niacin
         c. Folate
         d. Choline

    7. Which minerals should the nurse instruct parents to include in the diet of preschool-aged children for the
        development of healthy bones and teeth?
         a. Phosphorus and potassium
         b. Iron and zinc
         c. Calcium and phosphorus
         d. Chloride and calcium

    8. Which mineral deficiency should the nurse anticipate in the client diagnosed with goiter?
         a. Iron
         b. Iodine
         c. Potassium
         d. Sodium

    9. Which food preparation technique should the nurse advise a client to use to prevent loss of water-soluble
        vitamins from the food?
         a. Use less water in food preparation.
         b. Cook food for a longer time.
         c. Cook at a higher temperature.
         d. Cut food into larger pieces.

  10. Which vitamin deficiency should the nurse anticipate in the client with chronic alcohol use?
         a. Riboflavin
         b. Niacin
         c. Vitamin C
         d. Thiamin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    3 · Suggested Reading 59

Suggested Reading

Choosing a vitamin/mineral supplement: https://myhealth.alberta.ca/Health/Pages/conditions.aspx?hwid=ud3713
Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/2020-2025-dietary-

    guidelines-online-materials
Do you need a dietary supplement?: https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/2021/12/do-you-need-dietary-supplements
Evolution of Dietary Guidelines: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/media/799
My Plate: https://www.myplate.gov/
Vitamin and Mineral Supplement Fact Sheets: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/list-VitaminsMinerals/
60 3 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 4

The Digestive Process

FIGURE 4.1 The digestive process breaks down food and fuels the body for function. (credit: modification of work "Chef Salad" by
Gesalbte/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 Digestion
4.2 Physical Assessment of Digestive Organs
4.3 The Function of Digestive Organs
4.4 The Nurse's Role in the Promotion of Gut Health
INTRODUCTION Eating food can be enjoyable, but it is also necessary for survival. When food is consumed, the
body breaks it down, and it becomes the fuel for energy and function. The level of nutrition in food impacts the
amount of energy gained in the body. The greater the nutritional value of food, the better for the body. The chapter
will explore the digestive process and will review the role the nurse plays in promoting nutrition for gut health.

4.1 Digestion

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 4.1.1 Describe the digestive process.
  · 4.1.2 Describe the organs of digestion.
  · 4.1.3 Identify congenital anomalies within digestive organs.

The Digestive Process

The digestive process includes four steps: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and metabolism. Ingestion is the first
step and involves the process of bringing food and liquids into the body through the mouth. Next is digestion, in
62  4 · The Digestive Process

    which the body breaks down solid food through a process that includes both mechanical and chemical actions to
    form smaller, more absorbable substances for the gastrointestinal tract (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2022). Absorption is
    when cells take in the broken-down substances, and metabolism is when those absorbed substances are converted
    to energy.

    Digestion occurs as an integrated process between the body's upper and lower gastrointestinal tract and accessory
    organs. The body needs to have proper digestive processes to ensure correct function. Common end products of
    digestion are amino acids, simple carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, and minerals.

    Digestive Organs

    The main organs of digestion, known as the gastrointestinal system, begin at the mouth and end at the anus. This
    system is divided into the upper gastrointestinal system, which starts at the mouth and ends at the duodenum (the
    start of the small intestine), and the lower gastrointestinal system, which starts at the small intestine and includes
    the large intestine (the colon, rectum, and anus). Other organs in the digestive system that aid in digestion but are
    not part of the main gastrointestinal system and don't come in direct contact with food are the accessory organs: the
    pancreas, liver, and gallbladder (Figure 4.2).

    FIGURE 4.2 The digestive system consists of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract and accessory systems and is responsible for
    processing food. The main digestive organs, known as the gastrointestinal system, begin at the mouth and end at the anus. (credit:
    modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    The purpose of the digestive system, and all the systems that work in harmony with it, is to receive food, release
    nutrients and water from the food, and transport these nutrients to the bloodstream for energy production. The
    digestive system is also responsible for absorbing water from the colon and for excreting nondigestible solid waste
    from the anus (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2022).

    Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 · Digestion                                                                                                             63

Upper Gastrointestinal System

The upper gastrointestinal system comprises the mouth, esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. The teeth, tongue,
and salivary glands, which are all accessories for digestion, are in the mouth and facilitate the breakdown of food
through mechanical (chewing) and chemical (enzymes) digestive processes. All of these components are required
for the mouth to effectively complete its role in the digestive process.

After this initial breakdown, food then travels out of the mouth, through the upper esophageal sphincter, down the
esophagus, through the lower esophageal sphincter, into the stomach, out of the stomach through the pyloric
sphincter, and into the duodenum (Figure 4.3). The process of digestion through this upper gastrointestinal tract,
starting at the mouth and ending in gastric emptying, can take 2-5 hours to complete (Readman, 2022).

FIGURE 4.3 Food journeys from the esophagus to the duodenum. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Lower Gastrointestinal System

The lower gastrointestinal system comprises the small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and anus. Food entering
the lower portion of the gastrointestinal system comes from the duodenum as chyme, a mixture of gastric juices and
digested food. After digestive processes are complete in the duodenum, chyme moves through the small intestine,
large intestine, and rectum, then out the body through the anus in the form of stool. Digestion through the lower
gastrointestinal tract can take from 12 to 65 hours (Readman, 2022).

Accessory Organs and Systems

The pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are organs outside of the main gastrointestinal tract but are part of the digestive
system (GI Associates and Endoscopy Center, 2022b). They directly aid in digestion by releasing enzymes and
digestive fluids. Cholecystokinin, a hormone produced by the small intestine, triggers the pancreas and gallbladder
to contract when fats and proteins enter. The pancreas, while also responsible for other body functions, produces
amylase, lipase, trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, elastase, carboxypeptidase, nucleases, and protease. These
enzymes break down sugars, fats, and starches (GI Associates and Endoscopy Center, 2022b). When sugar enters
the bloodstream, the pancreas produces insulin, a hormone that assists in the absorption of glucose into cells to
use for energy.

The liver produces bile, a digestive fluid that is stored in the gallbladder. When fatty foods enter the duodenum, the
gallbladder releases bile to break down the fat into fatty acids. If the gallbladder is removed, the bile will instead
travel directly from the liver to the small intestine.

Other accessory organs and tissues that assist in digestion include the salivary glands, tongue, nerves, and blood
(University of Rochester Medical Center, 2022). When food enters the mouth and chewing begins, teeth break down
the food into smaller parts, and saliva is released. Saliva is released by the sensory system, which is stimulated by
64  4 · The Digestive Process

    sight, smell, and taste. Glands and mucosal membranes of the intestinal walls secrete small amounts of digestive
    enzymes and lubricating mucus to assist with waste movement and nutrient absorption.

    Congenital Anomalies of the Gastrointestinal System

    While rare, congenital anomalies can affect the digestive system. Most congenital anomalies result from
    undeveloped or incorrectly positioned organs, causing blockages that prevent food passage or the exit of waste
    products (Columbia University Irving Medical Center, n.d.).

    Atresia, Stenosis, and Malformations
    Congenital abnormalities include atresia, stenosis, and malformations. Some of these abnormalities can be
    detected in utero or soon after birth, while others remain undetected through childhood until they cause physical
    symptoms (Ludwig et al., 2022). Atresia is a condition in which a passage in the body is blocked. For example,
    esophageal atresia is when a baby's esophagus has not developed correctly, and aural atresia is when the ear canal
    is underdeveloped. Stenosis, or narrowing, is a partial blockage of an area, and a malformation is an abnormal
    formation of a specific body part.

    Anorectal anomalies can include an anus that is very narrow or totally enclosed by a layer of tissue or skin, a rectum
    that does not connect to the anus (imperforate anus), or a rectum that connects to a part of the urinary or
    reproductive tract through a fistula, an abnormal connection (Boston Children's Hospital, 2022). Depending on
    which anomaly is present, the client may experience symptoms such as difficulty passing stool and constipation,
    total inability to have a bowel movement, or stool that exits through the urinary system or another system in the
    body, causing infection and incontinence (Boston Children's Hospital, 2022).

    Biliary anomalies affect the bile ducts. They can involve a progressive narrowing effect and/or a complete blockage,
    cystic formations that result in blockages in the biliary system, or biliary ducts that are malformed and do not
    properly connect to the pancreaticobiliary junction (Columbia University Irving Medical Center, n.d.; Stanford
    Medicine Children's Health, 2023b). These anomalies fall into two main types, cystic and non-cystic. Cystic
    anomalies are caused by saclike structures filled with pus or other fluid that form and block different parts of the
    biliary system, whereas non-cystic anomalies are actual structural defects of the biliary system (Stanford Medicine
    Children's Health, 2023). Common symptoms of these anomalies include jaundice, abdominal pain, pale or clay-
    colored stools, dark urine, enlarged liver margins, hyperamylasemia, enlarged splenic margins, and difficulty gaining
    weight.

    Malrotation and Volvulus
    Malrotation most often occurs in the small intestine and involves an incorrect rotation that happens during fetal
    development (Columbia University Irving Medical Center, n.d.). Volvulus is a severe complication of a malrotation in
    which blood flow is blocked to the digestive tract, causing ischemia, and/or to the intestines, causing stool blockage
    (Columbia University Irving Medical Center, n.d.). While malrotation can be the cause of volvulus, it can also occur in
    the absence of malrotation (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2022).

    Malrotations alone are usually asymptomatic. It is not until volvulus develops that a client experiences symptoms
    (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2022) such as sudden and severe nausea and vomiting, dark red or bloody stools, severe
    constipation or difficulty expelling stools, abdominal distention, bilious vomiting (vomiting that contains bile), and
    shock.

    4.2 Physical Assessment of Digestive Organs

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 4.2.1 Outline the assessment process of the digestive organs.
      · 4.2.2 Analyze and prioritize assessment findings.

    Mouth, Oropharynx, and Lips

    Because digestion is responsible for fueling the body, proper assessment of the digestive system is imperative to
    prevent disease, maintain wellness, and promote nutritional health. Both a physical assessment and a review of the
    client's health history should be completed. In reviewing the client's health history, the nurse should inquire about

    Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Physical Assessment of Digestive Organs                                                                             65

dietary practices, dietary intolerances or allergies, eating and bowel patterns, changes in eating or bowel patterns,
recent unintentional weight loss or gain, and medical diagnoses or surgical history. The nurse should obtain the
client's weight and height to calculate the client's body mass index (BMI).

An assessment of the mouth and the oropharynx (the middle part of the throat) begins with the lips. The nurse
should begin with the outer lips to judge for symmetry, color, texture, and contouring. The client should be asked to
smile so that the nurse can judge lip symmetry. If the client is unable to lift both sides of the lips equally, they are
not symmetrical, and this should be reported.

     SAFETY ALERT

 Lip Asymmetry

  If the client is exhibiting asymmetry in their lips that is new, especially in conjunction with new symptoms such as
  facial drooping or asymmetry, arm weakness, numbness, paralysis, or speech difficulty such as slurring or
  aphasia, the nurse should immediately alert the provider, as this could indicate an acute stroke (American Stroke
  Association, n.d.).

Next, the inner lips and buccal mucosa (the inner lining of the cheeks) should be inspected for color, texture,
moisture, and presence of abnormalities. To best visualize these structures, the nurse should direct the client to
relax their mouth. The nurse should then pull the bottom lip outward and away from the client's teeth by grasping
the lip between the thumb and index finger on each side and carefully pulling outward (Villa, 2022). Drooling may be
seen in young infants and toddlers up to age 2, but it should not be excessive.

Nurses should watch for numerous abnormalities, some more urgent than others. Assessment findings that the
nurse should report immediately include cyanosis, a bluish discoloration of the skin that can indicate low oxygen
levels, and new unilateral asymmetry with movement, as this could indicate a cerebrovascular accident.

Gums, Buccal Mucosa, Tongue, and Teeth
The inspection of the inside of the mouth will include the gums, buccal mucosa, tongue, and teeth. To begin, the
client should open their mouth. The nurse should then use a penlight and a tongue depressor or blade to retract
each cheek to complete a visual exam of all internal surfaces, looking for any abnormalities. To evaluate the teeth in
the back of the mouth, the nurse should place both index fingers into one side of the mouth to retract the cheek. The
client will then slowly open and close their mouth while the cheek is retracted so that tooth alignment can be
visualized. This should be completed on both sides of the mouth.

Nurses should inspect the gums in this same manner. If the client has dentures, bridges, or other removable dental
appliances, they should be removed if possible, and the nurse should repeat the evaluation for the gums separately.
Check gums for retraction or recession, color, reddened inflammation, soreness, bleeding, edema, or lesions
(Cleveland Clinic, 2022c).

     SAFETY ALERT

 Tongue Depressor or Blade Contradictions

  If the epiglottis (the small cartilage that covers the windpipe) is swollen, the nurse should not examine with a
  tongue depressor, blade, or flexible laryngoscope. Further, the nurse should not manipulate the oral cavity
  because this could trigger laryngospasm and close off the client's airway, causing a life-threatening emergency
  (Guerra & Waseem, 2022). Symptoms of epiglottitis include hyperthermia, sore throat, stridor (noisy breathing),
  dysphagia (trouble swallowing), and drooling (Mayo Clinic, 2022). Children may also act anxious and irritable and
  may sit up or lean forward to ease breathing, while adults may also have a muffled or hoarse voice or difficulty
  breathing.

To facilitate inspection of the tongue, the client should open their mouth and stick out their tongue to allow the
nurse to inspect for position, color, texture, and moisture. The nurse should ask the client to curl their tongue
upward and move it from side to side to assess mobility. Lastly, the nurse should instruct the client to push the tip of
66  4 · The Digestive Process

    their tongue to the roof of their mouth and should inspect the base of the tongue, the mouth floor, and the frenulum
    (the small tissue beneath the tongue that provides support) for color, texture, bleeding, moisture, and lesions.

    The hard and soft palates at the roof of the mouth should be inspected for color, shape, texture, and the presence of
    bony prominences. The nurse should instruct the client to open their mouth widely while tilting their head backward.
    The nurse should use a tongue depressor or blade to depress the tongue if needed and use a penlight to see the
    structures. The nurse should then ask the client to say "ah" and should inspect the uvula, the fleshy extension that
    hangs at the back of the throat and at the end of the soft palate, for position and mobility after inspecting the soft
    palate.

    Palates, Uvula, Oropharynx, and Tonsils
    The final steps of the assessment cover the palates, uvula, oropharynx, and tonsils. To begin, the nurse should use a
    tongue depressor or blade to push downward against the tongue halfway back on the same side of the tongue of the
    oropharynx that is being inspected. While holding the tongue out of the way, the nurse should use a penlight to
    examine the color, size, and discharge of the oropharynx and tonsils. The inspection should be repeated on the
    opposite side. Lastly, the nurse should elicit the gag reflex by using the tongue depressor or blade to stimulate the
    back of the throat (Sivakumar & Prabhu, 2023).

    As with the teeth and gum assessment, abnormal findings that the nurse should report immediately include
    cyanosis and any suspicious lesions. Additional findings that the nurse should immediately report include a uvula
    that is not midline or freely movable (this could be a sign of a tumor, trauma, or nerve damage), a uvula in a newborn
    that is forked or bifurcated (a possible indication of an undetected cleft palate), plaques or drainage in oropharynx
    (this could indicate acute infection), or swelling or drainage of tonsils (possible sign of an acute infection).

    Abdomen

    The assessment of the abdomen includes the upper gastrointestinal system (stomach and duodenum), the
    accessory organs of the digestive system (pancreas, liver, and gallbladder), and most of the lower gastrointestinal
    system (large and small intestines). This assessment must occur in a specific order: inspection, auscultation,
    percussion, and then palpation. This is important because auscultating before percussing and palpating ensures the
    nurse is listening to undisturbed bowel sounds.

         CLINICAL TIP

     Positioning the Client for Abdominal Assessment

      When preparing the client for abdominal assessment, position them so that their abdominal wall musculature is
      relaxed. To achieve this, the nurse should have the client lie supine and support the client's head and behind the
      knees with pillows.

    Step 1: Inspection
    Inspection should be the first step in the abdominal assessment (Roscoe, 2022). The nurse should do this with the
    client in a completely supine position with the abdomen exposed (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey, 2022). The nurse should
    inspect the skin integrity, abdomen contour, symmetry, and vascular patterns and visually inspect the abdominal
    movement associated with respirations, aortic blood flow, and peristalsis (the muscle contractions that move food
    through the digestive tract).

    Step 2: Auscultation
    Auscultation is the process of listening to the sounds of the body using a stethoscope. The process of auscultating
    the abdomen is to assess the bowel and vascular sounds and peritoneal friction rubs. To auscultate the abdomen,
    the nurse should:

      · With the diaphragm of the stethoscope, listen for bowel sounds in each of the four quadrants of the abdomen.
          Calculate the amount of time in between bowel sounds after listening for at least two and no more than 5
          minutes in each quadrant.

      · With the bell of the stethoscope, listen for the absence of bruits (the sound of blood flowing through a narrowed
          portion of an artery) in the aorta, renal arteries, femoral arteries, and iliac arteries in the abdomen. If the nurse

    Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Physical Assessment of Digestive Organs                                                                                   67

      suspects a delay in gastric emptying, place the stethoscope on the abdomen near the stomach, hold the client's
      hips, and gently shake them from side to side while listening to their abdomen for a succussion splash, a
      sloshing or splashing sound caused by excessive fluid remaining in the stomach (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey, 2022).
      This may be uncomfortable for the client, so the nurse should inform the client what to expect.
  · With the diaphragm of the stethoscope, listen for the absence of peritoneal friction rubs over the spleen and
      liver as the client breathes in deeply.

Step 3: Percussion
Percussion, or tapping, of the abdomen is an assessment technique to determine the presence of gas, fluid, or
masses. The systematic process of percussion is to start in the lower-right quadrant of the abdomen and proceed to
the upper-right quadrant, move to the upper-left quadrant, and finish in the lower-left quadrant. The nurse should
percuss several areas of each quadrant to listen to the quality of the sound. Tympany, or a resonant, hollow sound,
relates to gas, or flatus. Dullness, decrease, absence, or flatness of sound relates to fluid or solid masses.

Percussion is also used to best judge the size of the liver and may be helpful in identifying splenic enlargement
(Mealie, Ali, & Manthey, 2022). To percuss for splenic size, the nurse should percuss the most inferior interspace on
the left anterior axillary line, or the Castell's point, as the client breathes in deeply, to listen for the start of dullness
from tympany to discover the splenic edge. On the right side, the nurse should percuss down from the lung and up
from the bowel to discover the change from tympany to dullness to locate the liver margins.

Step 4: Palpation
The last step in the abdominal assessment is palpation. There are three palpation stages: superficial or light
palpation, deep palpation, and organ palpation. For superficial palpation, the nurse should hold their palm slightly
above the client's abdomen with their fingers parallel and then use their finger pads to depress the abdominal wall
lightly at only about 1 cm (0.39 in), which is about the level of the subcutaneous tissue (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey,
2022). The nurse should move their finger pads in a circular motion over all the quadrants while noting any areas of
tenderness, masses, crepitus (a grinding or crunching sound), irregularity in contour, or muscle guarding. If a known
area of pain is already present on the abdomen, start farthest from the area of maximal pain with any form of
palpation and end in that area last (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey, 2022).

After light palpation is complete, the nurse should move on to deep palpation. This is done slowly with the same
hand position and in the same manner, except the depth of pressing is increased with firmer and more steady
pressure to explore deeper. While palpating deeply in the periumbilical, inguinal, and suprapubic regions, the nurse
should have the client cough while feeling for a mass to ensure there is no hidden hernia.

After palpation of the abdomen, the nurse should palpate the digestive organs. To palpate the liver, the nurse should
place a hand below the lower-right rib margin and ask the client to exhale and then inhale deeply while the nurse
feels for the margins and any nodularity. The nurse should then palpate the gallbladder by placing their palpating
hand under the lower-right rib margin at the midclavicular line and asking the client to exhale deeply. The nurse then
pushes in deeper and slowly, asking the client to inhale while watching for a sudden cessation of inhalation due to
pain. The spleen is palpated by placing a hand in the lower-right quadrant and moving it toward the splenic flexure
until the hand reaches the lower-left rib margin, at which time the client should be asked to exhale and then inhale
deeply.

     SAFETY ALERT

 Deep Palpation Contraindications

  The nurse should not do deep palpation on clients with suspected abdominal aortic aneurysm, appendicitis,
  polycystic kidney disease, kidney transplant history, or a tender spleen because it could cause severe damage
  (Roscoe, 2022). For example, deep palpation may rupture an aneurysm, the appendix, or a cyst, or it may
  damage a newly transplanted kidney.

The nurse should report immediately abnormal findings that can indicate serious health problems within the lower
gastrointestinal tract and accessory organs. Refer to Table 4.1 for a summary of possible abnormal findings and
their causes.
68  4 · The Digestive Process

    Assessment Finding                                         Abnormality                  Sign/Symptom/
                                                                                            Syndrome
      Ecchymosis (discoloration) of flank and groin            Pancreatic hemorrhage        Grey Turner's sign
      Periumbilical ecchymosis                                                              Cullen's sign
      Purple-pink striae in the absence of pregnancy           Retroperitoneal and intra-
      Visible vascular pattern                                 abdominal hemorrhage         "Stretch marks"
      Very marked aortic pulsations                                                         Vein dilation
      Surrounding erythema, induration, and tenderness         Cushing's syndrome
                                                                                            Pulsations
      Combined with abdominal distention: jaundice and/        Portal hypertension or vena
      or caput medusae (swollen veins)                         cava obstruction             Deviation in umbilical
                                                                                            stump appearance
    TABLE 4.1 Abnormal Abdominal Findings and Possible Causes  Aortic aneurysm
                                                               (Shaw et al., 2023)          Abdominal distention

                                                               Omphalitis (specific to
                                                               infants)
                                                               (Gantan & Wiedrich, 2022)

                                                               Cirrhosis and liver failure
                                                               (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey,
                                                               2022)

    SAFETY ALERT

    Follow-up Testing

    While physical assessment can aid in identifying potential nutritional deficiencies, it is not diagnostic, and other
    follow-up testing is necessary to determine the best treatment needs and options.

    Rectum and Anus

    Assessment of the anus and rectum is the final step of the lower gastrointestinal system assessment. To assess the
    anus, the nurse should visually evaluate the outer tissue for color, integrity, and absence of lesions. The nurse
    should then ask the client to bear down as if defecating. With gloves on and the index finger lubricated, the nurse
    should feel the rectal sphincter and slowly dilate it by sliding the lubricated finger into the rectum. Palpate inside the
    rectum for masses, fissures, or other foreign bodies. After removal of the finger, inspect the finger for any signs of
    bleeding or melena (dark, black, or sticky feces). If present, or if internal bleeding is suspected, the nurse should
    perform a guaiac test, which will confirm if blood is present.

    CLINICAL TIP

    Important Newborn Assessment

    For a newborn, the nurse should establish anal patency. This is done by two means: first, the nurse should insert
    a lubricated rectal thermometer 1 cm to 2 cm (0.39 in to 0.78 in) into the newborn's rectum to record
    temperature, and second, the nurse should identify and document the passage of their first stool, called the
    meconium (Gantan & Wiedrich, 2022).

    4.3 The Function of Digestive Organs

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 4.3.1 Describe the function of digestive organs in ingestion, digestion, absorption, and elimination.
      · 4.3.2 Describe the pathophysiology associated with digestive organs.
      · 4.3.3 Identify the impact of aging on digestive organs.

    Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 · The Function of Digestive Organs                                                                                      69

Normal Function of the Digestive Organs

Before food ever enters the body, the sensory system starts the digestive process. The sight, smell, feel, and taste of
food influences the desire to eat. These senses trigger the salivary glands to begin releasing saliva in the
anticipation of eating, which helps break down food once it enters the oral cavity. When food enters the mouth,
chewing, also known as mastication, starts the breakdown of food. The tongue secretes mucins and lingual lipase
to help break down lipids. At the same time, the parotid, sublingual, and submandibular salivary glands release a
mixture of buffers, glycoproteins known as mucins, and salivary amylase to lubricate the food for swallowing and to
begin the digestion of complex carbohydrates and starches (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, 2022; Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022).

Food then passes to the pharynx. To swallow food into the esophagus and not the trachea, the swallowing center in
the brain stem of the central nervous system triggers certain actions:

  · The nasopharynx is closed off by the rise of the soft palate when the tongue initiates swallowing by pushing
      food to the back of the mouth.

  · The larynx is closed in the pharynx to prevent food from entering the trachea (Mealie, Ali, & Manthey, 2022;
      Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022).

  · Once this swallowing reflex is initiated, it cannot be stopped until completed.

Once food is swallowed, it enters the esophagus by passing through the upper esophageal sphincter. The food
travels down the esophagus body involuntarily by way of a series of muscular contractions known as peristalsis. It
then exits the esophagus through the lower esophageal sphincter into the stomach (National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2022).

While in the stomach, food is temporarily stored while mechanical and chemical processes break it down further
into chyme. The stomach uses its three muscular layers (the inner oblique, middle circular, and external longitudinal
layers) to contract and relax in a mixing and churning action to help mechanically break down food. To assist with
the chemical breakdown of food, the stomach releases hydrochloric acid secreted by its parietal cells, enzymes
such as pepsin, and hormones such as somatostatin and gastrin (Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022). The stomach
is also responsible for secreting an intrinsic factor (a glycoprotein that is necessary for the absorption of vitamin
B12) from the parietal cells.

The food, in the form of chyme, exits the stomach through the pyloric sphincter into the first of the three segments
of the small intestine, the duodenum. While in the duodenum, the pancreas (by way of the pancreatic duct) and liver
(by way of the gallbladder and biliary tree) empty enzymes into the duodenum through the sphincter of Oddi. The
liver secretes bile that is stored and concentrated in the gallbladder before it is released to aid in digestion (National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2022; Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022). The pancreas's
exocrine glands generate various enzyme precursors and enzymes that play a crucial role in the process of digestion
(Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022).

The food continues to the second segment of the small intestine, the jejunum, by way of peristalsis. This is where
the bulk of chemical digestion and nutrient absorption will occur before it moves into the last segment, the ileum,
which has some digestive and absorptive duties as well (Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022). Absorption in the
small intestine is done through nutrient exchange in extensive capillary networks that are located on the walls of the
small intestine. The surface area of the small intestine is increased to promote increased absorption through the use
of villi and microvilli that cover the walls and are home to the extensive capillary networks. There are also multiple
exocrine and endocrine glands that assist in the absorptive process by producing and releasing hormones, alkaline
mucinous materials, and enzymes.

Undigested food materials that pass through to the end of the small intestine through the ileocecal valve end up as
feces in the cecum, which is the first of the five segments of the large intestine (Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022).
While peristalsis moves the food through the large intestine, water and electrolytes are absorbed from the feces.
Final digestion of undigested food particles in the feces is completed by microbes that live in the large intestine.
Nutrients like vitamin K are produced and absorbed in the large intestine as well (Cleveland Clinic, 2022a; Ogobuiro,
Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022). The feces travel through the cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon,
and sigmoid colon before moving into the rectum, where stretch receptors signal the brain to defecate.
70  4 · The Digestive Process

    From the rectum, the stool exits the body through the anal canal by passing through the internal and then external
    anal sphincters. Relaxation of the internal anal sphincter is a reflexive action in response to the activation of the
    stretch receptors, and the relaxation of the external anal sphincter is a conscious process that allows for stool to exit
    the anus (Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022).

    Pathophysiology Associated with Digestive Organs and Function

    Many causes of diseases and disorders that impact the gastrointestinal system are linked with nutrition, as are many
    of their treatments. Table 4.2 lists several organs impacted by nutritional deficit and the corresponding disease(s).

    Organ             Nutritional Link                                               Disease or Disorder

    Salivary gland    Deficiency of vitamin B12 (cobalamin)                          Salivary gland tumors
    Gums              Deficiency of vitamin B12                                      Gingivitis
    Mouth             Deficiency of vitamin B12                                      Periodontal disease/cancers
    Lips              Maternal deficiency of vitamin B12                             Cleft lip
    Oral palate       Maternal deficiency of vitamin B12                             Cleft palate
    Esophagus         Food allergies                                                 Eosinophilic esophagitis

    Stomach           Deficiency of vitamin B12/lack of intrinsic factor             Pernicious anemia
    Intestine         Low fiber intake, low water intake, and high dairy intake      Constipation

    Anus/rectum       Low fiber intake, low water intake, and high dairy intake      Hemorrhoids, fissures, and
                                                                                     fistulas

    Gastrointestinal  Low fiber intake, low water intake, high fat intake, and high  Cancers
    system            cholesterol intake

    Intestine         Gluten                                                         Celiac disease

    Stomach/          Worsened by food that contains caffeine, spicy foods, acidic Gastroesophageal reflux

    esophagus         foods, and dairy products                                      disease (GERD)

    TABLE 4.2 Diseases and Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System Linked with Nutrition (sources: Cleveland Clinic, 2022b; Cochran,
    2022a-f; Munger et al., 2021; Ogobuiro, Gonzales, & Tuma, 2022)

    Aging of the Digestive System

    The nurse should be aware of considerations for aging clients in connection with the digestive system and the role of
    nutrition. Older adults tend to have a decrease in appetite over younger adults due to comorbidities and/or
    medications that decrease the desire to eat, cause nausea, or create dietary food restrictions due to drug
    interactions. Older adults may experience the following issues:

    · Appetite can decrease due to a loss in smell or taste or changes in the release of the hormones that control
       appetite (e.g., ghrelin, peptide tyrosine, tyrosine, cholecystokinin, insulin, and leptin) (Nigam & Knight, 2017).

    · Food may appear less attractive or appetizing due to changes made to food consistency for safety reasons
       (Bartel, 2022; Nigam & Knight, 2017).

    · The feeling of being full may happen faster or last longer due to the stomach wall losing elasticity, resulting in a
       loss of hydrochloric acid secretion into the stomach, making food accommodation more difficult and gastric
       emptying slower.

    · Esophageal reflux may occur, and food may backflow more easily into the esophagus (Austin Gastroenterology,
       2019).

    · Hyposecretion of hydrochloric acid and protective mucus that occurs with age can result in chronic atrophic
       gastritis, increased peptic ulcer disease, and decreased vitamin B12 absorption.

    · An increase in the bacterial populations in the small intestine may lead to increased bloating and abdominal
       pain as well as decreased absorption of calcium, folic acid, and iron (Bartel, 2022; Nigam & Knight, 2017).

    · Decreases in digestive enzymes from the pancreas result in a reduction in the digestion of proteins and fats.
    · The liver decreases bile production, rate of protein synthesis and metabolism, and its ability to detoxify

       substances (Nigam & Knight, 2017).
    · Risk for constipation increases because in the large intestine, there are reductions in neurotransmitters and

    Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · The Nurse's Role in the Promotion of Gut Health                                                                    71

      neuroreceptors, atrophies of mucosa and muscle layers, formations of diverticula, declines in the rate of cell
      division in the digestive epithelium, and increases in inflammatory conditions due to the increase in facultative
      anaerobes. The increase in constipation increases the risk for hemorrhoid development.

Biological changes due to age make it important for an older client to be educated so that they eat nutrient-dense
options for adequate nutritional intake. With a lower caloric intake demand due to a slower metabolic rate from
aging, older adults' need for calories will likely decrease, so the nutritional value of the foods they ingest is
important.

4.4 The Nurse's Role in the Promotion of Gut Health

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 4.4.1 Describe the homeostasis of gut health.
  · 4.4.2 Describe the impact of diet on gut health.
  · 4.4.3 Identify the impact of pharmacology on gut health.
  · 4.4.4 Identify pathophysiology and gut health.

Gut Health Homeostasis

For healthy digestion and absorption of food and nutritional health, the gut must maintain a healthy homeostasis,
the equilibrium maintained in the body through physiological processes and evidenced by intestinal microbiota
growth. The nurse plays an important role in client education that leads to optimal nutritional health.

The composition of the gut's microbial growth has a strong impact on the homeostasis of the gut. When the gut is
not in a state of homeostasis, the imbalance that results can cause dysbiosis, a disruption to the gut microbiome.
Many diseases have been linked to dysbiosis, including anxiety, depression, hypertension, cardiovascular disease,
cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, and diabetes, so the impact of an unhealthy gut surpasses just
gastrointestinal health (Afzaal et al., 2022).

To maintain proper gut homeostasis, bacterial growth requires energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate and
oxygen (Lee et al., 2022). Dietary factors, antibiotics, and underlying host conditions can reduce oxygen
consumption in the colonic epithelium, thereby reducing the available oxygen to the indigenous microbes.

The microbiota of the gut has many functions in the body. These bacterial residents help control nutrient
metabolism, defend against pathogens, contribute to carbohydrate digestion, synthesize methane from hydrogen
processed by bacterial metabolism, neutralize carcinogens, and synthesize biotin, folate, and vitamin K (Afzaal et
al., 2022).

Diet and Gut Health

Diet directly impacts the health of microbial growth (Lee et al., 2022). There are numerous foods that have a positive
impact on gut health. For example, fiber, water intake, fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and an overall well-
balanced diet have shown positive effects. Yogurt is known to have a positive impact because it contains active
bacterial cultures, which have been shown to be supportive of the gut microbiome environment (Stanford Medicine
Children's Health, 2023a). High-fat diets, in contrast, have been shown to have a negative impact. They tend to
contribute to diabetes, obesity, metabolic syndrome, and colon cancer (Afzaal et al., 2022; Baton Rouge General,
2023). In addition, high sodium intake and alcohol use can contribute to dysbiosis and have been linked to
hypertension.

A nurse can make a direct impact on client health by educating clients on why diet, gut microbiota, and homeostasis
are important. The nurse should speak to the specific reasons why fiber, water, probiotics, and whole grains are
valuable in a diet and why saturated fats, alcohol, and sodium are areas of concern. The nurse should discuss with
the client so they understand which types of food to increase or decrease. Table 4.3 lists common foods and their
impact on the gastrointestinal system.
72  4 · The Digestive Process

    Food                                          Impact on Gastrointestinal System

    Fresh fruits and vegetables, lentils, kidney  These foods are high in fiber and help maintain gut homeostasis,
    beans, split peas, chickpeas, quinoa, oats,   reduce cholesterol, promote healthy weight through satiety,
    popcorn, almonds, chia seeds, sweet           reduce constipation by adding bulk to stool, and possibly reduce
    potatoes, and dark chocolate                  gastrointestinal cancer risks due to potential antioxidant
                                                  properties (Gunnars, 2020; Moffitt Cancer Center, 2023).

    Water                                         Increasing fiber requires increasing water in the diet to ensure
                                                  there is sufficient water in the stool to account for the added
                                                  bulk.

    Saturated fats (found in fatty cuts of meat,  Saturated fats can lead to gut imbalance (Afzaal et al, 2022),
    pies, sausage, butter, lard, cheddar cheese,  raise bad cholesterol levels (NHS, 2023), and increase colon
    ice cream, sour cream, biscuits, cakes,       cancer risks (Baton Rouge General, 2023).
    pastries, milk chocolate confectionaries,
    palm oil, coconut oil, and coconut cream)

    High-sodium foods (breads; pizza;             High amounts of sodium can upset the homeostasis of the gut by

    sandwiches; deli meats and cured meats;       increasing dehydration.

    cheese; soups; burritos and tacos; snacks

    like chips, popcorn, and pretzels; chicken;

    and omelets)

    TABLE 4.3 Common Foods and Liquids and the Gastrointestinal System

    Pharmacology and Gut Health

    Pharmacology and nutrition are interdependent because they rely on the same body processes. When the body
    lacks nutrients, the body's ability to utilize certain drugs is impacted (Bhupathiraju & Hu, 2023). A lack in nutrients
    also impacts the body's ability to properly dispose of toxins from drugs and digestion waste. The nutritional state of
    a client greatly impacts the ability of their medications to be properly metabolized, used, and excreted.

    Probiotics, such as Lactobacillus, are supplements that are known to have positive impacts on the gut microbiome.
    These are useful in helping clients with dietary restrictions or who are taking certain medications that interfere with
    gut health. These supplements should be taken in combination with a healthy diet because they do not prevent
    gastrointestinal issues on their own but rather support healthy practices.

    There are medications that can help and hurt the microbiota of the gut. Antibiotics are a well-known culprit for
    altering microbial growth. Long-term antibiotic use has been linked to Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection and
    colon cancer. When a client needs antibiotics for longer than three days, it is common practice that they also be
    given a probiotic to counteract some side effects and the possibility of infection.

    There are other medications that are lesser known for being harmful. They include:

    · Proton pump inhibitors to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease, which can cause enteric infections like C. diff
       (Weersma et al., 2020)

    · Metformin, used to treat diabetes, which can increase Escherichia coli (E. coli) in the intestines and lower other
       bacteria, causing imbalances in the microbiome

    · Statins to treat hyperlipidemia, which can cause constipation or diarrhea, upsetting the homeostasis in the gut
    · Antidepressants, which can kill off beneficial gut bacteria and alter the normal microbiome of the gut
    · Opioids to treat chronic pain, which can cause severe bouts of constipation, upsetting the microbiome and

       preventing the excretion of wastes from the body
    · Laxatives, which can cause disruption of the microbiome through electrolyte disturbances, dehydration, and

       mineral deficiencies

    Pathophysiology and Gut Health

    Gut health and its impact on the body are often discussed in relation to bidirectional crosstalk at an axis point (the
    two-way communication that is focused at a specific intersection) between body systems that regulate health
    relative to one another (Tilg et al., 2022). The gut has many of these axes that connect it to the liver, brain, lung,

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        4.4 · The Nurse's Role in the Promotion of Gut Health  73

nervous system, sensory system, etc. The following section will look at the gut and its connection with the liver,
brain, and lung.

Gut-Liver, Gut-Brain, and Gut-Lung Axis
Gut-liver axis communication happens between nutrients, metabolites, microbial antigens, and bile acids within a
microbial community (Ding et al., 2020; Tilg et al., 2022). A disturbance in this gut-liver network has been linked to
an increase in hepatic inflammation and hepatic encephalopathy and decompensation of liver cirrhosis (Klein,
2022).

The gut-brain axis has been shown to have many devastatingly negative effects. The gut has been shown to produce
neuroactive compounds that modulate metabolism and immunity (Benakis & Liesz, 2022), which are essential
components to healing after a stroke. Because a stroke leads to intestinal dysmotility and permeability of the
intestinal barrier, and thus decreased metabolism and depressed immunity, stroke victims often have impaired
healing. Table 4.4 outlines some other diseases connected to the gut-brain connection.

Disease       Impact

Parkinson's   Overgrowth of intestinal bacteria results in an increase in opportunistic pathogens, causing the
disease       neurotransmitter L-dopa to be decreased (Wallen et al., 2022). Parkinson's disease is directly
              impacted by the availability of L-dopa, and symptoms are worsened when the availability is
              decreased.

Multiple      Overgrowth of certain gut bacteria causes an imbalance in homeostasis; exacerbations and
sclerosis     advancement of the disease can be affected (eBioMedicine, 2022; French, 2022).

Alzheimer's   Clients with Alzheimer's disease are shown to demonstrate excessive production and
disease       aggregation of amyloid-beta peptides that lead to extracellular plaque formation (Sidharthan,
              2022). Gut microbiota health impacts the disease because when it is unbalanced, it releases
              more of certain by-products that can alter inflammatory cytokine-signaling pathways, leading to
              amyloid-beta peptide accumulation.

Mental        A link has been found between systemic inflammations and anxiety, depression, and other
health        mental illnesses (GI Associate and Endoscopy Center, 2022a). The health of the gut has a large
              impact on the inflammatory state of the body. It also has a key function in the release of many
              neurotransmitters, one of which is serotonin, an important mood neurotransmitter.

Huntington's  When the gut microbiota is unbalanced, there is an influence on mood, cognition, and sleep,
disease       which are already negatively impacted by this disease (Wasser et al., 2020).

TABLE 4.4 Diseases Known to Be Linked to the Gut-Brain Axis Connection

Due to the recent COVID-19 pandemic, the gut-lung axis has been more recently explored. Overall, the gut's role in
the health of the body's overall immunity and the reduction of systemic inflammation has been applied to COVID-19
infection. The resulting acute respiratory distress syndrome that is a life-threatening effect of the virus is caused by
an autoimmune-response-mediated inflammation in the lungs. Overall rates of mortality with COVID-19 are
markedly higher for those admitted to the intensive care unit, and those who have gastrointestinal symptoms in
conjunction with their respiratory symptoms are much more likely to need intensive care, making gastrointestinal
issues a determinant of prognosis (Chen et al., 2020; Cleveland Clinic, 2022b; Ye et al., 2020; Ouali et al., 2021).
Long-haul COVID-19 has also become more prevalent. Because clients who have gastrointestinal symptoms with
COVID-19 infection have a longer detoxification time after infection, they are at a higher risk for developing long-
haul COVID than those without gastrointestinal symptoms.
74 4 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· The gastrointestinal system contains the upper                unintentional weight loss or gain, and any medical
   gastrointestinal system (mouth, teeth, tongue,               diagnoses or surgical history for proper
   salivary glands, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and            assessment.
   duodenum), the lower gastrointestinal system              · Digestive organs ingest, digest, and absorb the
   (small intestine, large intestine, rectum, anal              food that is taken into the body to convert it to
   canal, and anus), the accessory digestive organs             usable energy.
   (liver, gallbladder, and pancreas), and the               · The body removes all usable nutrients and water
   accessory systems (nervous and sensory                       from food intake and then eliminates the rest as a
   systems).                                                    waste product, stool.
                                                             · The nurse's role is to educate the client on the
· While physical assessment of the client is                    proper dietary practices that will help maintain gut
   required, the nurse should also obtain a history of          homeostasis and to evaluate steps the client can
   the client's dietary practices, dietary intolerances         take to prevent gut issues when they must take
   or allergies, typical eating and bowel patterns,             medications that can upset that homeostasis.
   changes in normal eating or bowel patterns, recent

Key Terms

absorption the process of cells taking in digested           homeostasis a balanced state in the body that allows
    substances                                                   for proper function

amylase an enzyme that helps to break down                   ingestion the first step of the digestive process that
    carbohydrates                                                involves bringing food and liquids into the body
                                                                 through the mouth
bile a fluid created in the liver that aids in digestion of
    food in the duodenum                                     insulin a hormone that assists in the absorption of
                                                                 glucose into cells for energy usage
carboxypeptidase an enzyme that helps to
    breakdown fats                                           intrinsic factor a glycoprotein required for vitamin
                                                                 B12 absorption in the small intestine
cholecystokinin a hormone produced by the small
    intestine that triggers the pancreas and gallbladder     lipase an enzyme that helps to break down fats
    to contract when fats and proteins enter                 mastication chewing action of the mouth
                                                             meconium the first stool passed by a newborn
chyme a mix of gastric juices and digested food              melena dark, black, or sticky feces
chymotrypsinogen an enzyme that breaks down                  metabolism the part of digestion in which the body

    proteins into smaller particles                              converts absorbed substances into energy
digestion the breakdown of solid food that includes          nucleases an enzyme that breaks down nucleic acid

    both mechanical and chemical actions to form                 chains
    smaller, more absorbable substances in the body's        pepsin an enzyme that begins to break down proteins
    gastrointestinal tract
dysbiosis a disruption to the microbiome resulting in            in the stomach
    an imbalance in the microbiota of the intestines         protease an enzyme that breaks down proteins
elastase an enzyme that helps break down fats,               somatostatin a hormone that regulates stomach acid
    proteins, and carbohydrates
fistula a condition in which two body parts are                  secretion during digestion
    abnormally connected                                     succussion splash a sloshing or splashing sound
frenulum the small tissue beneath the tongue that
    provides support                                             heard on auscultation of the abdomen due to
gastrin a peptide hormone that regulates gastric                 excessive fluid remaining in the stomach
    motility, gastric secretion of stomach acid, and         trypsinogen an enzyme that helps break down fats
    gastric mucosal growth                                       into amino acids
guaiac test a test that confirms the presence of blood       tympany a resonant, hollow sound potentially heard
    in stool                                                     during percussion
                                                             uvula the fleshy extension that hangs at the back of
                                                                 the throat and at the end of the soft palate

Review Questions

1. The nurse is caring for a client with a small bowel obstruction. The client asks why they are experiencing
    vomiting of stool. What response by the nurse is appropriate?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 4 · Review Questions 75

     a. The gastrointestinal tract is one long tube, so a blockage will cause contents to move backward.
     b. The pyloric valve prevents stool from flowing into the stomach when the intestines are blocked.
     c. Peristaltic movement prevents the backflow of contents when the intestines are blocked.
     d. Obstruction of the small bowel will not cause vomiting of stool.

2. The nurse is assessing a client who has flatus. What finding would the nurse expect to assess in this client?
     a. Scaphoid abdomen
     b. Jaundice of the abdomen
     c. Tympany on percussion
     d. Dullness on percussion

3. The nurse is assessing a 3-year-old client who has been brought in by their parents due to refusal to eat and
    seems to choke on fluids easily. The nurse assesses that the client has uncontrolled drooling, is hyperthermic,
    and has a very muffled cry. What precaution should the nurse take when assessing the gastrointestinal
    system of this client?
     a. Avoid use of tongue blade/depressor.
     b. Avoid deep palpation of the abdomen.
     c. Avoid percussion of the abdomen.
     d. Avoid assessment of liver margins.

4. The nurse is educating a client on the normal function of the digestive system. The nurse teaches the client
    that which organ is responsible for the most water absorption?
     a. Esophagus
     b. Stomach
     c. Small intestine
     d. Large intestine

5. The nurse is caring for a client with lower gastrointestinal bleeding. What test would the nurse anticipate
    being ordered for this client?
     a. Comprehensive metabolic panel
     b. Guaiac test
     c. Ovum and parasite stool test
     d. White blood cell count

6. The nurse is assessing the nutritional status of a healthy older client. Which finding would the nurse
    anticipate in this client?
     a. Decreased stomach size
     b. Decreased vitamin B12 absorption
     c. Increased esophageal motility
     d. Increased diarrhea

7. The nurse is educating a client on gut homeostasis. Which instruction would the nurse give the client?
     a. Reduce intake of palm oil.
     b. Increase sodium intake.
     c. Limit fluids.
     d. Reduce fiber intake.

8. The nurse is caring for a client on long-term antibiotic therapy. Which food should the nurse recommend the
    client include in the diet to maintain gut homeostasis?
     a. Fish
     b. Yogurt
     c. Broccoli
     d. Carrots
76 4 · Suggested Reading

    9. The nurse is caring for a client taking multiple medications. Which should the nurse teach as supportive to the
        microbiome of the gut?
         a. Gentamycin
         b. Pantoprazole
         c. Lactobacillus
         d. Lovastatin

  10. The nurse is caring for a client with multiple health problems. Which finding in the client's history supports
        the client's gut homeostasis?
         a. Metformin use for type 2 diabetes
         b. Increased intake of saturated fats
         c. Regular use of laxatives
         d. High intake of whole grains

Suggested Reading

Blonski, W., Slone, S., & Richter, J. (2022). Update on the Diagnosis and Treatment of Achalasia. Dysphagia. Online
    ahead of print, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35585208/. DOI: 10.1007/s00455-02210435-3

Bryce, C., Bucaj, M., & Gazda, R. (2022). Barrett Esophagus: Rapid Evidence Review. American Family Physician,
   106(4), 383-387. https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2022/1000/barrett-esophagus.html

Friedman, A., Chen, A., Wu, R., Coe, N., Halpern, S., Hwang, U., Kelz, R., & Cappola, A. (2022). Evaluation and
   Disposition of Older Adults Presenting to the Emergency Department with Abdominal Pain. Journal of the
   American Geriatrics Society, 70(2), 501-511. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.17503

Katz, P., Dunbar, K., Schnoll-Sussman, F., Greer, K., Yadlapati, R., & Spechler, S. (2022). ACG Clinical Guideline for
   the Diagnosis and Management of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease. The American Journal of Gastroenterology,
   117(1), 27-56. DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000001538

Thapar, N., Benninga, M., Crowell, M., Lorenzo, C., Mack, I., Nurko, S., Saps, M., Shulman, R., Szajewska, H., van
   Tilberg, M., & Enck, P. (2020). Paediatric functional abdominal pain disorders. Nature Reviews Disease Primers
   6(89). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-00222-5

Wolfe, C., Halsey-Nichols, M., Ritter, K., & McCoin, N. (2022). Abdominal Pain in the Emergency Department: How to
   Select the Correct Imaging for Diagnosis. Dove Medical Press, 2022(14), 335-345. https://doi.org/10.2147/
    OAEM.S342724

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 5

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

FIGURE 5.1 Nutrients from foods such as chili peppers impact brain function. (credit: modification of work "Chilli Pepper And Onion Mix
(https://openstax.org/r/wuestenigel)" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System
5.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness
5.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness
5.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness
INTRODUCTION The neurologic system coordinates and manages nearly all activities of the human body in
response to internal and environmental influences by regulating specific cellular and tissue functions. Because of
the unique structure and functions within the brain, consideration of the specific nutrients that dramatically impact
normal operations is an important part of the nursing assessment.
Consider this case: Jamal Powell is a 68-year-old client being seen at the neurology care clinic. The client was
brought in by their spouse for evaluation of recent cognitive status changes. Jamal is concerned and fearful about
these cognitive changes because of the close family history of developing dementia in the middle to late 60s. The
client states that they smoked cigarettes for 3 years in their early 20s but quit and have not resumed smoking. There
is no history of toxic chemicals or other exposures and no history of head trauma, seizures, or stroke.
78  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    5.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 5.1.1 Recognize the normal function of the neurologic system.
      · 5.1.2 Recognize cues of nutritional impact on the neurologic system.
      · 5.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the neurologic system.

    Normal Function of the Neurologic System

    The neurologic system is defined by its two major components: the central nervous system (CNS), consisting of the
    brain and the spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system (PNS), consisting of all neurons outside of the CNS.
    The PNS includes the somatic nervous system, which facilitates movement and muscle control in the body; the
    neuromuscular junctions, which are located at the terminal end of motor nerves and conduct impulses to target
    muscles; and the autonomic nervous system, which regulates involuntary body processes such as blood pressure,
    heart rate, respiration, digestion, and sexual arousal.

    The autonomic nervous system is composed of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The
    sympathetic nervous system identifies impending danger and stimulates motor activity to either stay put and
    defend against the danger or to run away from the danger, known as the fight-or-flight response. The
    parasympathetic nervous system signals the body to rest and recover, as well as to digest food intake, known as
    the "rest-and-digest" response.

    While the CNS is responsible for regulating cardiac, skeletal, and visceral smooth muscle activity, the PNS relays
    sensory input to the CNS for processing and then relays this information via motor responses to various effector
    organs and cells of the body. The PNS has two components: The afferent (sensory) component transmits impulses
    from peripheral organs to the CNS, and the efferent (motor) component transmits impulses from the CNS out to
    peripheral organs to initiate an active response or action.

    The brain requires approximately 20% of the body's total oxygen delivery and about 15% of the cardiac output.
    Because the brain cannot store glucose, it must rely on a constant supply of nutrients from the arterial blood flow, at
    a rate of 50-55 mL/g/min (Norris, 2019).

    Normal Brain Structure and Function
    The brain conducts the most complex functions in the human body and is responsible for a person's intelligence,
    memory, speech, behavioral responses to stress, heart rate regulation, breathing rates, and movement. However, it
    weighs approximately 3 lb (Figure 5.2). Approximately 60% of the brain is composed of fat, and the remaining 40%
    is made up of water, carbohydrates, protein, and various salts. The brain contains nerves (neurons and glial cells) as
    well as blood vessels, which supply the nutrients required for effective brain function. The tissue of the brain is
    composed of cells referred to as white matter, located in the central part of the brain, and gray matter, located on
    the external portion of the brain.

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                                                                   79

FIGURE 5.2 The regions of the brain are shown in lateral and anterior views. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The internal white matter of the brain is composed of axons, the long slender projections of neurons, which conduct
electrical impulses across nerve cells. Axons are wrapped in myelin, a white fatty protein coating that protects and
insulates the axon and increases the speed of impulse conduction to other sensory and motor cells of the nervous
system. The gray matter is composed mainly of the round cell bodies (soma) of the neurons, which give it its grayish
color; it is responsible for interpreting and processing information as it is received. As information is processed, the
gray matter sends and receives chemical and electrical signals to control various processes such as movements and
sensations. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain, weighing 1.5-3 lb or about 2% of the total body weight. It
is responsible for initiating, coordinating, and regulating movement, body temperature, speech, judgment, thinking,
learning, reasoning, and emotions, as well as functions of the senses, such as vision, hearing, and touch. The various
lobes of the cerebrum include the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes, each controlling specific functions.

The protective outer layer of the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex. It facilitates memory, thinking, learning,
reasoning, problem-solving, emotions, consciousness, and sensory functions. It is divided into two hemispheres,
with the corpus callosum providing a pathway for communication between these two sides of the brain.

The brainstem has three components: the midbrain (responsible for hearing, movement, and other responses to the
environment), the pons (responsible for blinking, vision, balance, hearing, facial expression, chewing, and tear
production), and the medulla (responsible for heart rhythm, regulation of oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, blood
flow, and reflexive responses such as coughing, swallowing, sneezing, and vomiting). The spinal cord carries sensory
and motor messages to and from the brain to the effector organs to control bodily functions and environmental
responses.

The cerebellum is responsible for posture, equilibrium, and balance, as well as playing a role in emotions and social
behavior. The cerebellum may also have a role in addiction, autism, and some psychiatric conditions.

Neurotransmitters
The neurons (nerve cells) are the functional cells of the neurologic system and relay all sensory and motor
information via a complex system of chemicals produced by the body called neurotransmitters (Figure 5.3). They
can be categorized into three groups:

  · Amino acids that function in the CNS synapses (gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA], glycine, and glutamic acid)
  · Peptides that perceive pain and various sensations (endorphins and enkephalins)
  · Monoamines that transmit in the autonomic nervous system (epinephrine and norepinephrine)

Neurotransmitters allow neurons to communicate by relaying excitatory or inhibitory messages at the synapse of
the neuron to perform a wide range of functions via action potentials. Neurons have the capability to open the
sodium channels along the cell membranes, allowing sodium to move into the cell, thus creating cellular
depolarization, and subsequently moving potassium out of the cell in a process called the action potential. In turn,
the cell then repolarizes, producing a resting state called the resting membrane potential. These actions enable the
nervous system to rapidly transmit messages to and from the brain and tissues of the body, allowing changes for
80  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    adaptation to the external or internal environment.

    FIGURE 5.3 Neurotransmitters communicate at designated receptors to allow sensory and motor responses. (credit: modification of work
    from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Neurologic System

    A comprehensive nutrition assessment is performed as a routine component of neurologic assessment during the
    intake assessment. All clients require initial and ongoing screenings by nurses to determine any nutritional risk
    factors related to proper functioning of the neurologic system. When performing a general neurologic assessment,
    the nurse should begin by determining the client's level of consciousness, mental status, motor abilities and
    balance, and sensation. The nurse should take a detailed history of medical conditions directly affecting the client or
    the client's biological family. Any history of alcohol intake, medications, and dietary supplements, either prescribed
    or over the counter, should be included. A history of pain, both recent and past, should be explored. Pain related to
    chewing or swallowing, gastrointestinal pain, or pain that interferes with feeding may be pertinent to a nutritional
    problem, and mealtime observations can provide information regarding overall nutritional risk. Any history of visual
    disturbances, disequilibrium, dizziness, vertigo, vomiting, or changes in weight are significant and could be related
    to dehydration or the quantity and quality of caloric and nutritional intake.

    Guidelines for assessing weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) have been published by the National Heart,
    Lung and Blood Institute (2023). A weight loss of more than 10% over the past year or 5% within the previous 6
    months is significant and should be explored. Specifically, the nurse should ask for details of the client's self-
    management practices, including dietary, urinary, and bowel patterns; allergies; exercise and activities; and usual
    sleep cycle. A BMI of 30 or higher is associated with greater risks for neurologic and cardiovascular diseases
    (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022; Held et al., 2022). If the client is not critically ill, anthropometric
    measurements, midarm muscle circumference, and skinfold thickness measurements should be recorded because
    these may be helpful for estimating percentages of body fat and lean body muscle as a measure of nutritional status
    and general health. For clients who are determined to be at nutritional risk, a referral should be established with a
    registered dietitian.

    An evaluation of mental health is an important component of neurologic health and should include an expression of

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                     5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System            81

the client's self-concept and perception, as well as a summary of patterns related to adaptation to daily life
stressors and relationships. This evaluation should also include specific beliefs or cultural norms as they relate to
nutritional health practices. A history of diseases, health conditions, and medications is extremely useful for
determining possible nutritional deficiencies. Given the sensitive nature of dietary habits, it is helpful for the nurse
to maintain a nonthreatening and consistent approach to nutritional screening as it relates to neurologic health.

CLINICAL TIP

Therapeutic Conversation

When performing evaluations, the nurse should conduct conversation using therapeutic conversation, such as
the five As (assess, advise, agree, assist, and arrange). Motivational interviewing is another strategy that is helpful
in engaging clients who may be hesitant.

Small changes are generally advised when considering behavioral changes that can seem overwhelming to the
client. Dietary changes such as reducing or increasing the intake of certain foods slowly can have a dramatic effect
over the long term. It is important to allow small substitutions that allow for individualized treats that satisfy food
cravings while reducing trans fats and ensuring adequate intake of vegetables and healthy foods. A nursing
assessment of nutrition should include a food diary that includes specific questions regarding the client's dietary
habits over the previous few days and months--specifically, the number of meals and snacks consumed each day,
the amount of fruit consumed, fluid intake, and fat and sugar intake (Lee, 2022). Nutrition counseling cannot be
successfully completed in one meeting. The nurse should plan for subsequent meetings when adjusting a client's
diet and should share the counseling efforts with other members of the health care team.

Controlling Nutrition Status Score
The Controlling Nutritional Status (CONUT) score is an instrument to measure nutrition (Ulíbarri, 2005). A CONUT
score is correlated to serum albumin level, the main protein in plasma. Albumin, which is synthesized in the liver,
transports hormones and enzymes throughout the body and maintains equilibrium by stabilizing the capillary
membrane. Albumin levels may be elevated in individuals who are dehydrated, consume a high-protein diet, or have
an acute infection. Albumin levels may also be elevated in clients taking certain medications, such as insulin,
steroids, or hormones. Individuals who are malnourished or have liver, kidney, or inflammatory diseases will have
low albumin levels. Fasting can rapidly diminish albumin levels by up to one-third within 24-48 hours. Low albumin
levels have been linked to increased mortality and longer hospital stay among clients with traumatic brain injury
(TBI) because of increased levels of stress, blood loss, and dysphagia (Wang et al., 2020).

The CONUT score presents albumin, lymphocyte, and cholesterol levels as an overall nutritional score (Table 5.1).
The formula for the CONUT score is a calculated value: 10 multiplied by the serum albumin value in g/dL, plus 0.005
multiplied by the total lymphocyte count in the peripheral blood in cubic milliliters, plus the total cholesterol score
(Wang et al., 2020). The CONUT score may be an indicator of in-hospital mortality and 90-day outcomes in persons
with traumatic brain injury (Wang et al., 2020). However, it is important to remember that among clients with acute
illness, infection or injury, albumin levels may be reduced due to the acute nature of these pathophysiologic events
rather than a nutritional problem. Relying solely on albumin as a marker of nutrition may be inaccurate (Smith,
2017).

Nutritional Levels  Normal        Light Deficiency                                  Moderate           Severe Deficiency
in Adults                                                                           Deficiency
                                                                                                       < 2.5
Serum albumin       3.5-4.5       3.0-3.49                                          2.5-2.99
(g/dL)                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                       < 800
Score               0             2                                                 4                  < 0.800×109/L
                                                                                                       3
Total lymphocytes/  > 1600        1200-1599                                         800-1199
mL                   1.600×109/L  1.200-1.599×109/L                                 0.800-1.199×109/L

Score               0             1                                                 2

TABLE 5.1 Controlling Nutritional Status (CONUT) Score (source: Wang et al., 2020)
82  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    Nutritional Levels  Normal       Light Deficiency                                   Moderate    Severe Deficiency
    in Adults                                                                           Deficiency
                                                                                                    < 100
    Cholesterol (mg/    > 180        140-180                                            100-139
    dL)                                                                                             3
                                                                                                    9-12
    Score               0            1                                                  2

    Total score         0-1          2-4                                                5-8

    TABLE 5.1 Controlling Nutritional Status (CONUT) Score (source: Wang et al., 2020)

    Required Nutrients for Brain Function
    The cells of the brain cannot store glucose or other nutrients; as a result, the brain can function for only
    approximately 10 seconds without depleting the oxygen supply via the cerebral circulation. Glucose is considered a
    macronutrient and is the main fuel for the brain. Because the neurons in the brain have no capability to store
    glucose, a continuous supply is required to ensure adequate brain function. Death to brain cells begins when they
    are deprived of oxygen for only 4-6 minutes. Any disruption in blood flow will lead to a buildup of toxic metabolic
    byproducts that will damage vulnerable cells in the brain. Other macronutrients that supply the brain with fuel
    include proteins and fats, which can also act as energy sources.

    Micronutrients are vitamins and minerals that are critical for optimal brain function in very small amounts. They
    include omega-3 fatty acids (important components of the membranes that surround the cells of the body),
    polyphenols (micronutrients that have health-promoting properties and are found in many fruits and vegetables),
    vitamins (especially certain B vitamins: B1 [thiamine], B6 [pyridoxine], B9 [folate], and B12), and minerals (zinc,
    magnesium, iodine, iron).

    Zinc is a trace metal ion that contributes to brain health by supporting the immune system and the function of the
    pituitary hormones, such as the secretion of growth hormone. Zinc has also been shown to increase insulin-like
    growth factor, which fosters the genesis of neural stem cells, and it has strong antioxidant properties that support
    immune function (Choi et al., 2020). In addition, zinc accelerates the production of cells that provide nonspecific
    immunity protection, such as neutrophils and natural killer cells (Choi et al., 2020).

    Iodine is a vital mineral micronutrient that stimulates the production of thyroid hormones T3 and T4, which are
    responsible for brain development and control of cellular metabolism. Iodine is critical to fetal development, as it
    facilitates neuronal multiplication, migration, and organization; brain development; and nerve cell myelinization.
    This process continues in the first few years of life. The effect of iodine on the brain continues throughout childhood
    and adulthood, fostering the ability to learn and the desire and motivation to improve performance (Khattak et al.,
    2017).

    Vitamin B6 is known to reduce levels of homocysteine (an amino acid that can increase inflammation); it stimulates
    the biosynthesis of certain neurotransmitters such as GABA, dopamine, and serotonin; and it is required for normal
    development of the CNS during the perinatal period (Smith & Refsum, 2021). Ensuring that the body sustains
    adequate blood levels of vitamins B6 and B12 has been shown to reduce feelings of stress and depression, improve
    concentration and memory, and prevent stroke events (Berkins et al., 2021; Smith & Refsum, 2021).

    Iron is another essential mineral micronutrient. It facilitates oxygen transportation, DNA synthesis, mitochondrial
    respiration, myelin production, and the development and metabolism of various neurotransmitters. Iron is received
    in the brain mainly bound to transferrin on endothelial cells. It crosses the blood-brain barrier and is then released
    into the extracellular compartments in the brain (Ward et al., 2014).

    Magnesium is a dietary micromineral with many roles in the body. A strong body of evidence supports its role in
    supporting optimal nerve transmission and neuromuscular coordination (Kirkland et al., 2018). Moreover,
    magnesium has a protective effect against the development of chronic pain, migraine headaches, depression,
    anxiety, and stroke (Kirkland et al., 2018).

    Selenium is a micronutrient that plays an important role as an antioxidant, protecting cells from damage. It is
    involved in the production of immunoglobins that aid in cellular immunity, as it has anti-inflammatory effects (Farag
    et al., 2021). During pregnancy, selenium is crucial to mitigate the stress associated with a growing fetus, and
    selenium deficiency is associated with low birth weight because of restricted intrauterine growth. Clients who are

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                  5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                  83

obese before becoming pregnant may have low levels of selenium during the first trimester of pregnancy. The risk of
hypertension during pregnancy is increased in clients with selenium deficiency.

Although micronutrients are required in smaller amounts than the macronutrients are, they are essential for most
metabolic, biochemical, and regulatory responses of the nervous system (Reddy et al., 2018). See Table 5.2.

Micronutrient  Expected Effect    Defined Level        Significance of                             Recommended Daily
               on Neurologic                           Abnormal Values                             Allowance and
Vitamin B1     System               · Indirect assay                                               Treatment Dosages
(thiamine)                              of the           · Symptoms include
                 · Myelin sheath        transketolase        loss of sensation in                    · 10 mg/day for 7
                     maintenance        enzyme               the hands, feet,                            days, then 3-5
                                        (0-15%)              and toes,                                   mg/day for 6
                                                             combined with                               weeks for mild
                                                             burning pain,                               deficiency
                                                             paresthesia, or
                                                             muscle weakness.                        · 50-100 mg/day
                                                                                                         may be provided
                                                         · Deficiencies may                              in severe
                                                             occur in                                    deficiency among
                                                             individuals with                            adults until
                                                             chronic alcohol                             proper nutrition
                                                             use disorder,                               is delivered
                                                             Wernicke's                                  naturally.
                                                             encephalopathy,
                                                             or Korsakoff's                          · Neurologic
                                                             syndrome.                                   improvement in
                                                                                                         deficient
                                                                                                         individuals may
                                                                                                         not be evident for
                                                                                                         3-6 months.

Vitamin B3     · Carbohydrate     · No reliable        · Deficiency causes                         · 14-16 mg/day
(niacin)          metabolism         measure of           neuropsychiatric
                                     serum B3             symptoms such as
                                                          an apathetic,
                                                          inattentive, ill-
                                                          tempered, or
                                                          depressed affect;
                                                          left untreated,
                                                          coma or stupor
                                                          can result.

                                                       · Pellagra is a B3
                                                          deficiency that
                                                          causes dermatitis,
                                                          dementia, and
                                                          diarrhea.

TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)
84  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    Micronutrient  Expected Effect        Defined Level     Significance of                            Recommended Daily
                   on Neurologic                            Abnormal Values                            Allowance and
    Vitamin B6     System                   · 3.4-65.2                                                 Treatment Dosages
    (pyridoxine)                                mcg/L         · Deficiencies are
                     · Converts                 or                seen with some                         · 1.3-2 mg
                         pyridoxine into                          medications                                (maximum) daily
                         pyridoxal          · 13.76-263.81        (isoniazid,
                         phosphate, a           nmol/L            phenelzine,
                         cofactor in                              hydralazine, and
                         numerous                                 penicillamine) and
                         metabolic                                in pregnancy,
                         reactions                                chronic alcohol
                                                                  use disorder, and
                                                                  clients undergoing
                                                                  hemodialysis.

                                                              · Deficiencies can
                                                                  present as
                                                                  numbness,
                                                                  weakness, loss of
                                                                  sensation,
                                                                  paresthesia, or
                                                                  foot, hand or leg
                                                                  pain. An ataxic gait
                                                                  and loss of or
                                                                  decreased reflexes
                                                                  may be present.
                                                                  Deficiencies in
                                                                  infants may
                                                                  manifest as
                                                                  seizures.

                                                              · Toxicity can occur
                                                                  with excessive
                                                                  supplementation
                                                                  ( 100 mg/day).
                                                                  Symptoms of
                                                                  toxicity include
                                                                  ataxic gait, loss of
                                                                  reflexes, loss of
                                                                  sensation, and
                                                                  tingling or burning
                                                                  sensations.

    TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                  5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                  85

Micronutrient  Expected Effect    Defined Level     Significance of                                Recommended Daily
               on Neurologic                        Abnormal Values                                Allowance and
Vitamin B12    System               · Serum level:                                                 Treatment Dosages
(cobalamin)                             > 200-250     · Deficiencies can
                 · Formation of         pg/mL             manifest as                                · 8-12 mcg/day
                     methionine                           neuropathies                               · Adults older than
                                                          (especially
                 · Formation of                           sensory problems                               50 years may
                     the myelin                           in the feet),                                  need to
                     sheath                               changes in affect                              supplement
                                                          and behavior, or                               dietary
                                                          peripheral and                                 consumption if
                                                          optic neuropathy.                              deficient.
                                                                                                     · If deficient: 1000
                                                      · Deficiencies may                                 mcg orally daily
                                                          be seen in                                 · In severe
                                                          individuals with                               deficiency,
                                                          malabsorption                                  injections may be
                                                          issues, pernicious                             recommended.
                                                          anemia,
                                                          gastrointestinal                           · 15 mg/day
                                                          surgeries, or past                         · Deficiency: 400
                                                          weight-reduction
                                                          surgery.                                       units twice a day,
                                                          Supplementation                                with a gradual
                                                          is recommended                                 dose increase
                                                          for individuals                                until serum
                                                          eating vegan diets.                            vitamin E level is
                                                                                                         as expected.
                                                      · Metformin and
                                                          proton pump
                                                          inhibitors can
                                                          worsen a
                                                          deficiency.

Vitamin E      · Protein          · Serum level:    · Some people with
                  transport via      not routinely     rare lysosomal
                  very low-          assessed          storage disorders
                  density                              will experience a
                  lipoproteins;                        slowly progressing
                  stored in                            (5-10 years)
                  adipose tissue                       degeneration of
                                                       sensation, deep
                                                       tendon reflexes,
                                                       reduced
                                                       proprioception,
                                                       and ataxia.

TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)
86  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    Micronutrient  Expected Effect      Defined Level        Significance of                           Recommended Daily
    Copper         on Neurologic                             Abnormal Values                           Allowance and
                   System                 · Serum level:                                               Treatment Dosages
                                              not routinely    · Deficiencies can
                     · Balances               assessed             manifest as                           · 900 mcg/day
                         hormones that                             neuropathies                          · Deficiency:
                         make nerve                                (upper and lower
                         cells                                     motor neuron                              Intravenous
                                                                   signs).                                   doses of 2-4 mg/
                                                                                                             day
                                                               · Excessive intake
                                                                   can cause
                                                                   headaches,
                                                                   diarrhea, and
                                                                   kidney failure and
                                                                   can prevent
                                                                   copper from
                                                                   accumulating.
                                                                   Chelation therapy
                                                                   (as with the drugs
                                                                   Cupramine,
                                                                   Depen, and
                                                                   Syprine) binds
                                                                   copper into a
                                                                   compound that
                                                                   can effectively be
                                                                   eliminated.

                                                               · Wilson's disease, a
                                                                   rare genetic
                                                                   disorder, prevents
                                                                   the elimination of
                                                                   copper. Copper
                                                                   excess is detected
                                                                   via blood tests and
                                                                   24-hour urine
                                                                   collection.

    TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                   5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System               87

Micronutrient  Expected Effect     Defined Level       Significance of                             Recommended Daily
Iodine         on Neurologic                           Abnormal Values                             Allowance and
               System              Urinary                                                         Treatment Dosages
                                   concentrations:       · A deficiency of
                 · Synthesis of                              iodine is a global                      · 150 mcg/day for
                     thyroid         · Adults and            concern, as it is                           persons ages 14
                     hormones T3         children:           the leading cause                           years and older
                     and T4              100-199             of intellectual
                                         mcg/L               deficits in the                         · Infants receive
                 · Fetal and                                 world. Thyroid                              adequate iodine
                     infant          · During                deficiencies can                            from formula,
                     development,        pregnancy:          result from a                               breast milk and
                     childhood           150-249             deficiency of                               food intake and
                     cognitive           mcg/L               iodine because it is                        do not require
                     function                                required to                                 supplementation.
                                     · During                produce thyroid
                                         lactation: >        hormones. Goiter                        · Acute poisoning
                                         100 mcg/L           and elevations of                           is rare.
                                                             thyroid-
                                                             stimulating
                                                             hormone (TSH)
                                                             may be signs of
                                                             deficit.

                                                         · Deficiency during
                                                             pregnancy and
                                                             infancy can cause
                                                             irreversible
                                                             effects.

                                                         · Excessive intake
                                                             can cause goiter in
                                                             adults, TSH
                                                             elevation,
                                                             thyroiditis, and
                                                             thyroid papillary
                                                             cancer.

                                                         · Iodine
                                                             supplementation
                                                             can interact with
                                                             certain
                                                             medications:
                                                             Concurrent use
                                                                 with antithyroid
                                                                 medications
                                                                 can cause
                                                                 hypothyroidism.
                                                             Concurrent use
                                                                 with
                                                                 angiotensin-
                                                                 converting
                                                                 enzyme (ACE)
                                                                 inhibitors and

TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)
88  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    Micronutrient  Expected Effect   Defined Level   Significance of                                   Recommended Daily
                   on Neurologic                     Abnormal Values                                   Allowance and
                   System                                                                              Treatment Dosages
                                                               potassium-
                                                               sparing                                   · Adult females:
                                                               diuretics                                     310-320 for
                                                               increases the                                 adult females
                                                               risk for                                      (higher amounts
                                                               hyperkalemia.                                 for pregnant/
                                                                                                             lactating
    Magnesium      · Controls        · Serum level:  · Deficiencies are                                      females)
                      oxidative         0.75-0.95       rare but may be
                      stress and        mmol/L          due to certain                                   · Adult males:
                      inflammation                      health conditions,                                   400-420
                                                        medications, or
                   · Supports                           chronic alcohol                                  · Abundant in the
                      adequate                          use disorder.                                        diet: spinach,
                      blood flow                                                                             nuts, seeds,
                                                     · Early signs of                                        whole grains,
                   · Essential role                     deficiency may                                       lean meats,
                      in nerve                          include anorexia,                                    poultry, eggs,
                      transmission                      nausea and                                           seafood, beans,
                      and                               vomiting, fatigue,                                   peas, lentils,
                      neuromuscular                     weakness,                                            other legumes,
                      conduction                        numbness,                                            soy
                                                        tingling, muscle
                                                        contractions,
                                                        cramps, seizures,
                                                        personality
                                                        changes, abnormal
                                                        heart rhythms, and
                                                        coronary spasm.

                                                     · Severe deficiency
                                                        may cause
                                                        hypocalcemia or
                                                        hypokalemia.

                                                     · Medication
                                                        interactions:
                                                        bisphosphonates,
                                                        antibiotics,
                                                        diuretics, and
                                                        proton pump
                                                        inhibitors.

    TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                     5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System              89

Micronutrient  Expected Effect       Defined Level      Significance of                            Recommended Daily
Selenium       on Neurologic                            Abnormal Values                            Allowance and
               System                                                                              Treatment Dosages
                                     · Serum level:     · Serum
                 · Essential role       Plasma or          concentrations                            · 55-70 mcg/day
                     in                 serum              drop with aging                               for persons 14
                     reproduction,      selenium           and are related to                            years and older
                     thyroid            concentrations     a decline in brain                            including
                     hormone            of 8 mcg/dL        function, possibly                            pregnant and
                     metabolism,                           due to decreases                              lactating clients
                     and DNA                               in selenium's
                     synthesis                             antioxidant                               · Supplementation:
                                                           activity.                                     100 mcg
                 · Protection
                     from oxidative                     · Excessive intake                           · Food sources:
                     damage and                            can cause hair and                            Brazil nuts,
                     infection                             nail loss or                                  seafood, organ
                                                           brittleness,                                  meats, muscle
                                                           nausea, diarrhea,                             meats, cereals
                                                           skin rashes,                                  and other grains,
                                                           mottled teeth,                                dairy products
                                                           fatigue, irritability,
                                                           and CNS
                                                           abnormalities.

TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)
90  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    Micronutrient  Expected Effect        Defined Level    Significance of            Recommended Daily
    Zinc           on Neurologic                           Abnormal Values            Allowance and
                   System                   · 80-120 mcg/                             Treatment Dosages
                                                dL           · Deficiency
                     · Cellular                                  interrupts the         · 8-12 mg/day
                         metabolism,                             senses of taste        · Food sources:
                         enhances                                and smell. In older
                         immune                                  adults, deficiency         meat, fish, and
                         function,                               can cause delays           seafood (oysters
                         protein and                             in wound healing           contain the most
                         DNA synthesis,                          and changes in             zinc of all foods);
                         wound                                   cognitive and              other foods such
                         healing, and                            psychological              as eggs, dairy,
                         cell signaling                          function.                  beans, nuts, and
                         and division                                                       whole grains
                                                             · Excessive intake             contain zinc but
                     · Can reduce the                            can cause nausea,          are not fully
                         duration of the                         dizziness,                 metabolized.
                         common cold                             headaches, gastric
                                                                 distress, vomiting,
                     · Can delay age-                            and loss of
                         related                                 appetite.
                         macular
                         degeneration                        · Doses of 50 mg or
                                                                 more from
                                                                 supplements or
                                                                 excessive use of
                                                                 denture adhesive
                                                                 creams containing
                                                                 zinc can interfere
                                                                 with copper
                                                                 absorption, reduce
                                                                 immune function,
                                                                 and lower high-
                                                                 density lipoprotein
                                                                 cholesterol levels.

                                                             · High doses from
                                                                 supplements (142
                                                                 mg/day) interfere
                                                                 with magnesium
                                                                 absorption.

    TABLE 5.2 Micronutrients and Neurologic Function (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023a-j)

    Given that nearly 60% of brain tissue is composed of fat and that the omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids account for
    20% of the overall brain weight, it is important to understand the role of fats in brain function at all stages of human
    life. These fatty acids promote cognition, preservation of neurons, and protection against neurodegeneration. This is
    because omega-3 fatty acids facilitate production of oxyhemoglobin and hemoglobin in the blood, which improve
    cerebral circulation and subsequently improve overall mental performance (Dighriri et al., 2022).

    Another micronutrient group is the polyphenols, which are metabolites of plants. They are potent antioxidants and
    have long been shown to reduce cardiovascular risk by providing antiplatelet and anti-inflammatory functions. In
    addition, they may offer some protection from neurodegenerative diseases; recent evidence supports the theory
    that cognitive decline may be prevented and Alzheimer's disease may be slowed by the consistent intake of
    polyphenols (D'Angelo, 2020; Luo et al., 2021). Most plant-based foods contain polyphenols, which can be found in
    vegetables, fruits, legumes, olive oil, and nuts. Some of the richest sources are colored berries, nuts (especially

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                                                          91

walnuts, almonds, and hazelnuts), seeds, vegetables, black and green tea, and certain spices. A polyphenol that has
received considerable attention over the past decade is curcumin, the root of the turmeric plant (used in many
Indian dishes, such as curry), which has shown a dramatic protective effect on the neurologic system. Red wine and
dark chocolate have also been shown to contain polyphenols and may be consumed in moderation (Fekete et al.,
2023). See Figure 5.4.

FIGURE 5.4 Polyphenols, which can be found in foods like almonds and pepitas (pumpkin seeds), may help prevent cognitive decline.
(credit: "This image is in a set called the 'Daily Picture Parade'" by Dennis Sylvester Hurd/Flickr, Public Domain)

Omega-3 Fatty Acids, Protein, and Cholesterol
Various nutrients are critical for ensuring brain health and cerebral blood flow; among the most important are
protein, omega-3 fatty acids, and cholesterol. The impact of these nutritional requirements on the neurologic
system begins during the prenatal period and extends throughout the lifespan. Omega-3 fatty acids are found in
fish, seafood, nuts, seeds, seaweed, spinach, broccoli, and avocados and other colorful fruits and vegetables, as
well as in fortified cereals and beverages. They are vital for brain function and can counteract some of the
deterioration that can result from brain or spinal cord injury. Recommendations for intake of omega-3 fatty acids
range from 0.5 g/day for infants to 1.1-1.6 g/day for persons 51 years of age and older.

Protein is a combination of linked amino acids and is the building block of skeletal muscle. In the neurologic system,
protein is required for the adequate function of mitochondria within the nerve cells. Protein deficiency results in
leakage of the cell membranes, creating electrolyte disturbances, and has been shown to contribute to
neurodegenerative diseases such as stroke, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease. The current
recommendation for adult protein intake is 1.2-1.5 g/kg/day. In the presence of severe illness or injury, more
protein intake may be recommended. However, with specific regard to cognition, there are no absolute
recommendations for protein intake (Glenn et al., 2019). As mentioned earlier, protein levels in the body are
measured by albumin. Prealbumin is the precursor to albumin in the liver and is used by the body to produce other
proteins as well. With a half-life of 2-4 days, prealbumin is a highly sensitive indicator of nutritional status. Higher
serum levels of albumin have been associated with improved cognitive function in individuals with Parkinson's
disease (Sun et al., 2022). However, stress and inflammation can reduce prealbumin levels and lead to poor
outcomes following various neurologic events such as TBI, especially in the presence of an active infection.

The brain maintains the highest level of cholesterol in the body, requiring approximately 20% of the body's total
cholesterol, but the cholesterol level in the brain is independent of cholesterol levels in the peripheral tissues.
Cholesterol is a key building block for the creation of myelin. It is found in the astrocytes and other glia cells and is
taken up by the neurons as a critical building block to produce hormones (Li et al., 2022). Dietary intake of foods rich
92  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    in omega-3 fatty acids raise the high-density lipoprotein levels above 40 mg/dL and has been shown to be helpful in
    preventing dementia, fatigue, "brain fog," memory loss, depression, and other cognitive problems (Li et al., 2022).
    Because of the independence of cholesterol metabolism in the brain, measurement of the cholesterol level
    specifically inside the brain could be an important marker of neurologic health (Jin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022). For
    optimal brain health, the current general recommendation is to maintain a total cholesterol level of 160-200 mg/dL
    (Lee & Siddiqui, 2023).

    Assessment of Cerebral Perfusion and Nutrition
    Cerebral blood flow is a measured volume of blood flowing per unit of mass over time through the vertebral arteries
    and internal carotid arteries and is measured as an indirect marker of neuronal function. Although the brain requires
    a continuous supply of nutrients, it does not have the ability to store them. Therefore, evaluating how well the brain
    is perfused is an important way to determine brain health. Cerebral perfusion is measured with positron emission
    tomography (PET) technology to determine the adequacy of blood flow (Chugani, 2021).

    Analysis of Nutrition and the Neurologic System

    Neuroplasticity, or "the ability of the nervous system to change its activity in response to intrinsic or extrinsic
    stimuli by reorganizing its structure, functions, or connections" (Mateos-Aparicio & Rodríguez-Moreno, 2019), refers
    to the brain's ability to adapt to threats such as brain injury following traumatic or atraumatic injuries and to repair
    itself. This has led to an increase in studies to explore dietary modifications in neurologic conditions, with a focus on
    whole foods or food-derivative supplements in the diet.

    Although various diet trends--such as paleo, keto, gluten-free, low-carbohydrate, low-cholesterol, pescatarian, low-
    fat, and vegan diets--have shown benefits in reducing the development of neurologic conditions, these options are
    discussed less than 12% of the time with health care professionals (Bhat et al., 2019; Roser et al., 2022). Also,
    because obesity is not considered a disease, many insurance plans do not cover charges for obesity medications or
    counseling for clients with a BMI of 30 or greater (Dowis & Banga, 2021; Roser et al., 2022).

    The adequacy and frequency of dietary nutrition can also affect the blood supply to the brain. For example, the
    sensation of hunger has been shown to increase cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the hypothalamus, thalamus,
    amygdala, cerebellum, and other key areas of the brain (Wierenga et al., 2017). Conversely, food intake produces a
    decrease in CBF in the thalamus, insula, temporal cortex, and cerebellum, but eating causes an increased CBF in the
    prefrontal cortex, the area that signals satiety of hunger (Wierenga et al., 2017). Some foods have been shown to
    increase cerebral blood flow in this region, as well as athletic performance, such as beets, red spinach, tart cherries,
    pomegranate, citrus fruits, walnuts, berries, cinnamon, leafy green vegetables, and other nitrate-rich vegetables
    (Morris et al., 2018).

    Deficiencies of certain fats or toxic levels of some nutrients have been shown to have negative effects on brain
    health, and dietary intake of trans fats--found in foods such as margarine, fried foods, and commercially prepared
    cakes, pies, and cookies--has been shown to lead to hypertension and, ultimately, to negatively affect brain health
    (Harlyjoy et al., 2019).

    Nutritional Deficits of Protein, Albumin, and Prealbumin
    Malnutrition results from an inadequacy of certain macronutrients and micronutrients and can delay neurologic
    rehabilitation, leading to increased morbidity and mortality. The deleterious effect of malnutrition is inflammation,
    which is a precursor to many diseases and conditions. Therefore, an important consideration in the nutritional
    assessment of neurologic clients is the etiology of any inflammatory process due to any acute or chronic diseases.

    An assessment of nutritional status of the neurologic system often includes anthropometric measurements, a
    nutritional risk assessment, and biomarkers. Specific indicators of malnutrition, such as changes in weight, food
    intake, loss of body fat or muscle, accumulation of body water, and strength are assessed. Malnutrition is likely if any
    of these indicators is present. Although no specific nutritional screening tool has been recommended for clients with
    neurologic disorders, several screening tools that have been successfully used for older clients are suggested for
    use in persons with neurodegenerative conditions such as dementia, stroke, and Parkinson's disease (Lee, 2022).
    Among these tools, the Mini Nutritional Assessment-Short Form (MNA-SF) and the Controlling Nutritional Status
    (CONUT) tool have been used to assess nutrition in clients with neurologic conditions (Power et al., 2018).

    It is estimated that up to 60% of individuals who experience stroke show evidence of malnutrition (Yuan et al.,

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                                               93

2021), which contributes to challenges in rehabilitation and readmissions, as well as to overall morbidity and
mortality risk. Among clients with neurologic conditions, movement disorders, dysphagia, gastroparesis, cognitive
impairment, and depression can all contribute to malnutrition because of decreased oral intake despite an increase
in the body's metabolic needs. Following a stroke or other neurologic event, dysphagia (swallowing difficulty) is
common and often results in a delay in resuming nutritional support as the client's ability to protect their airway
during feedings is evaluated. In some cases, enteral feedings are provided via a nasogastric tube or an implanted
gastric tube 48-72 hours after the stroke. However, metabolic needs are often accelerated during this period, and
early identification of malnutrition can result in improved outcomes (Joundi et al., 2019).

The role of protein in the body is critical in the evaluation of neurologic disorders. The most abundant plasma
protein in the body is albumin, which has various antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective effects.
Specifically, albumin has been shown to suppress amyloid formation. Amyloids are proteins that tend to
accumulate as tangles and clusters and are associated with a number of conditions, including Alzheimer's disease.
As previously discussed, traditional laboratory markers of malnutrition include the measurement of visceral
proteins, namely prealbumin. Prealbumin is protein in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid that is mainly
manufactured in the liver. Prealbumin is considered a transport protein because it carries thyroid hormone and
retinol to the liver. It is the precursor of albumin, a transport protein found in the serum, which helps remove small
molecules such as bilirubin, calcium, and progesterone in the blood and has a half-life of 20-22 days. Decreased
prealbumin levels are linked to protein-calorie malnutrition. Decreased prealbumin levels are often discovered in
association with infections and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Low serum albumin levels in individuals experiencing
TBI and other neurologic conditions have been shown to be indicators of poor long-term outcomes, especially
among older adults (Liu et al., 2021).

Abnormal Findings Related to Nutrition
The deleterious effects of poor dietary patterns on human cognition continue to plague humans. Neurodegenerative
conditions are causing health care costs to soar; for instance, 6.5 million Americans are living with Alzheimer's
disease, and the prevalence is expected to double over the next 30 years (Borshchev et al., 2019). Cognitive
deterioration is a concern in many diseases and conditions, and nutrition options, combined with exercise, have
been explored as noninvasive strategies to reduce the consequences of neuronal damage. Modifiable risk factors
account for 40% of risk factors for Alzheimer's disease, and diet has been shown to be one of the predominant
factors in the development of cognitive decline (Borshchev et al., 2019). Avoidance of some foods, specifically those
rich in saturated fats and sugar (often referred to as junk foods), is recommended because they have been shown to
contribute to cognitive decline (Borshchev et al., 2019). Other nutritional factors, such as the number of calories
consumed per meal and the frequency of food consumption, have been shown to affect cognitive health.

Metabolic syndrome presents a major risk factor for neurologic compromise and is defined as the presence of
obesity, dyslipidemia, arterial hypertension, and diabetes. A person is considered obese if their BMI is greater than
30. Dyslipidemia is diagnosed if the total cholesterol level is greater than 200 mg/dL. A total cholesterol level
between 200 and 239 is considered borderline high, and a level greater than 240 mg/dL is considered high (CDC,
2022). Arterial hypertension (blood pressure greater than 130/80 mm Hg) has been shown to cause abnormal shifts
in cerebral autoregulation, which is the ability of the cerebral vessels to maintain stable blood flow to the brain
despite changes in arterial blood pressure (Borshchev, 2019). These shifting patterns seen in persons with
metabolic syndrome lead to hypoperfusion and reduced blood flow in the brain and can damage the brain's white
matter (Borshchev, 2019). Although metabolic syndrome is well established as a precursor for diabetes and various
cardiovascular ischemic conditions, poor diet combined with obesity has also been associated with cognitive
impairment and increased risk for dementia as the individual ages.

Recent evidence has shown that even without metabolic dysfunction, adiposity alone has been shown to potentially
accelerate a decline in thought processes, such as attention, intelligence, memory, cognitive flexibility, processing
speed, and executive function (Farruggia & Small, 2019; Leigh et al., 2020). Adiposity may also result in reduced
brain volume and reduced white matter connectivity, especially in the temporal lobe structures (Leigh et al., 2020).
High intake of red meat, processed meat, and fried food and low intake of whole grains have been associated with a
reduced level of function in the temporal and frontal lobes, such as memory and executive functions (Leigh et al.,
2020). The traditional high-fat Western diet can trigger the advent of Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia by
triggering inflammation, the development of cerebral vascular atherosclerotic lesions, and a dismantling of the
94  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    blood-brain barrier (Borshchev et al., 2019; Wickowska-Gacek et al., 2021).

    When abnormal cerebral blood flow (the volume of blood that moves through the blood vessels in the brain over a
    given unit of time) is seen on PET scanning, this can signal overactive or underactive metabolism and can indicate
    seizure activity, or it can be a marker of ischemic brain injury or degenerative conditions. Food supplementation with
    polyphenols and omega-3 fatty acids in concert with a supervised nutrition program has been shown to improve
    cerebral perfusion (Roberts et al., 2020).

    Dietary patterns and stress can affect the immune system. As a result, the body may initiate an autoimmune process
    in which the body perceives normal cells as foreign and attempts to rid the body of a perceived invading substance.
    In the neurologic system, myelin-producing cells can become affected by this autoimmune process. Myelin can be
    damaged when the body's immune cells perceive myelin as a foreign substance and kill the cells that make myelin.
    The most well-known condition in which myelin is destroyed is multiple sclerosis. Other conditions in which myelin
    is attacked are optic neuritis and transverse myelitis. Myelin is attacked in the PNS of individuals with Guillain-Barré
    syndrome, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorder type 1 or type X, or copper or vitamin B12 deficiency, as well as individuals
    with infectious processes, excessive alcohol consumption, or intake of certain drugs.

    A diet high in saturated fat and sugar is known to produce changes in the gut microbiome, triggering inflammatory
    processes that alter the immune system, and can lead to cognitive impairment (Leigh et al., 2020). These alterations
    in the microbiome increase the permeability of the gut and lead to formation of bacterial amyloids (abnormal
    proteins) and tangles of tau proteins. Tau proteins normally stabilize the tubelike internal skeleton of nerve cells,
    but when the inflammatory process ignites in the gut, the tau proteins instead become tangled due to
    phosphorylation in the gut. This phosphorylation then blocks the neuronal transport system and damages vital
    communication between the neurons, eventually resulting in cell death (Wickowska-Gacek et al., 2021). The most
    typical neuropathologic changes in the brains of persons with Alzheimer's disease are these amyloid and tau protein
    tangles.

    UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

    Part A

    Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
    throughout the chapter.

    The nurse completes a nutritional assessment of Jamal Powell. The client's past medical history is positive for
    hypertension, high cholesterol, and obesity.

    Vital Signs                                                                    Laboratory Values

      Temperature:        98.5°F (36.94°C)      Jamal had blood work drawn the week prior to this visit:
      Blood pressure:     148/90 mm Hg            · Total cholesterol: 240 mg/dL
      Heart rate:         97 beats/min            · Low-density lipoprotein (LDL): 160 mg/dL
      Respiratory rate:   14 breaths/min          · High-density lipoprotein (HDL): 30 mg/dL
      Oxygen saturation:  97% on room air         · Triglycerides: 250 mg/dL
      Height:             5'9"
      Weight:             230 lb (104.33 kg)
      BMI:                34 (Class 1 obesity)

    TABLE 5.3

    1. The nurse is evaluating Jamal's nutritional intake and symptoms. Which aspect of the client's dietary intake
        could be associated with these cognitive changes?
         a. Increased vegetable intake
         b. Increased whole grain intake
         c. Increased dairy product intake

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Neurologic System                                                95

         d. Increased intake of processed foods

    2. When assessing the nutritional impact on cognitive function, what should the nurse anticipate the health care
        provider to prescribe to evaluate the client further?
         a. Spiral computed tomography
         b. Positron emission tomography
         c. Computed tomography of the head with contrast
         d. Cerebral angiography

Alterations in Micronutrients and Neurologic Health

Deficiencies in micronutrients can contribute to neurologic deterioration. For example, deficiencies in ferrous sulfate
and zinc have been associated with ineffective sleep and neurobehavioral problems in young adolescents (Ji et al.,
2021). Zinc deficiencies have also been associated with epilepsy, seizures, and deficiency of growth hormone.

Alterations in other micronutrient levels can result in specific neurologic changes. For example, although
magnesium serves to promote optimal nerve transmission, low magnesium levels can lead to the death of neurons
and contribute to the development of psychiatric problems and other conditions, including depression, anxiety,
chronic pain, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and stroke.

Selenium improves immunity because of its antioxidant properties, and low levels are associated with tumors, skin
conditions, and cardiovascular, neuropsychiatric, and age-related diseases. Iodine deficiency can lead to
hypothyroidism, goiter, and mental developmental delays. An iron deficiency can result in worsening heart failure
symptoms because iron is key to erythropoietin production. A deficit of iron often results in fatigue and activity
intolerance. Copper is essential for maintaining the health of neurons, and an imbalance is associated with
neurodegeneration and a variety of neurologic disorders.

Toxic exposure to various substances can also lead to neurologic decline. In someone with a TBI, excessive zinc
accumulation can present in the postsynaptic neurons, and this can result in brain damage due to the death of
neurons. Therefore, modulation of zinc accumulation may be an important aspect of TBI treatment (Choi et al.,
2020).

Heavy metals are minerals with a high molecular weight and are natural elements found in the earth. Due to the
nature of these molecules, they cannot be destroyed or degraded. Some of these minerals (including mercury,
cadmium, arsenic, chromium, thallium, and lead) can enter the air and the human food and drinking water supply.
Heavy metals can accumulate in the body, causing deleterious neurologic effects over time (Choi et al., 2020). The
long-term effects of this accumulation can lead to Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, accelerated
cognitive decline, and behavioral problems. Mercury exposure can result from eating fish or shellfish that is
contaminated or from breathing air contaminated by toxic chemical spills, coal plants, industrial incinerators that
burn materials containing mercury, or natural sources such as volcanic eruptions. Exposure to toxic levels of
mercury can result in mood swings, tremors, headaches, motor dysfunction, and insomnia.

Cadmium is another heavy metal that may stay in the body for years, although it is eventually excreted. Cadmium
may be ingested by inhaling smoke from the burning of industrial metals, but cigarette smoke is also a main source
of cadmium inhalation and is the most harmful method of ingestion. Cadmium may also be found in coffee, tea, and
crop fertilizers. Neurologic effects of cadmium toxicity include the loss of smell, but a more significant effect is
anemia, which can contribute to cerebral hypoperfusion.

Aluminum can be harmful to the neurologic system because it accumulates in the body and can contribute to
cognitive impairment and memory loss. Aluminum can be found in food emulsifiers, antiperspirant deodorants, hair
spray, baking powder, toothpaste, and drinking water, as well as on cookware surfaces. Moreover, fluoride in
drinking water can make aluminum more bioavailable (Russ et al., 2020).
96  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    5.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness

    LEARNING OUTCOMES
    By the end of this section, you should be able to:

      · 5.2.1 Prioritize hypotheses of nutritional habits that optimize neurologic wellness.
      · 5.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize neurologic wellness using nutritional habits.

    Planning Nutritional Goals

    For individuals with neurologic conditions, management of blood glucose, sodium, and protein is critical to promote
    healing and cognitive performance. The brain requires a consistent supply of nutrients to function optimally, and any
    deficiencies can affect the brain negatively as well as other parts of the neurologic system and cause illness. Illness
    can also occur when these nutrients are at levels that are too high, so maintaining a healthy balance is important for
    preventing neurologic illness.

    Blood Glucose
    Control of blood glucose is a key aspect of brain health. High blood glucose levels are associated with accelerated
    cognitive decline compared with individuals who maintain normal blood glucose levels, independent of a diagnosis
    of diabetes. High blood glucose is more common among individuals with excessive body fat because fat releases
    hormones, proteins, and cytokines that ignite inflammation in the body, worsening brain function. Refined sugars
    are highly processed, often derived from white sugar, brown sugar, coconut sugar, palm sugar, or high-fructose corn
    syrup, and most Americans consume about 163 g (652 calories) of refined sugars each day. Refined sugars
    contained in candies, baked goods, pastries, white bread, crackers, pasta, and white rice contain no nutrients and
    can dramatically raise blood glucose. Therefore, foods containing processed sugar and other processed ingredients
    should be limited or eliminated from the diet to ensure optimal long-term cognitive performance.

    The dietary recommendations for neurologic health largely mirror those of the American Heart Association for heart
    health. A normal blood glucose level after a period of fasting is generally between 70-100 mg/dL. An elevated level
    (100-125 mg/dL) can indicate prediabetes, with higher levels (greater than 125 mg/dL) signaling a possible
    diagnosis of diabetes. Blood glucose trends over a period of 2-3 months can be evaluated using the hemoglobin
    A1c (HbA1c) test. The normal range for HbA1c is less than 6%, and 6.0-6.4% is considered prediabetes. A person is
    considered to have diabetes if the HbA1c is 6.5% or greater.

    A ketogenic diet has been shown to be beneficial for people with epilepsy (Kossoff, 2017). A ketogenic diet contains
    a high percentage of fat and few carbohydrates and has been successfully used in children with seizures that are
    intractable with medications alone. In this diet, ketones are formed as the body uses fat for energy rather than
    carbohydrates. Although there are many theories regarding why this type of diet is beneficial for individuals with
    seizures, the high levels of ketones in conjunction with antiseizure medications appear to increase the seizure
    threshold, resulting in fewer seizures (Kossoff, 2017).

    Complex carbohydrates contain more nutrients than simple refined sugars do. They are found in brown rice, oats,
    quinoa, farro, barley, fruits, and vegetables, and they also contain more fiber, which slows the rise in blood glucose.
    However, in the absence of a diabetes diagnosis, small doses of natural sugars (honey, maple syrup, or stevia) are
    generally well tolerated and do not have a significant effect on brain function. Artificial sugars (such as aspartame,
    saccharin, and sucralose) are not recommended for brain health because they affect the gut microbiome, leading to
    insulin resistance and diabetes, and subsequently have been shown to contribute to decline in cognitive function
    (Pase et al., 2017).

    Sodium
    Disruptions in sodium balance are a concern for clients with neurologic conditions, especially when they are
    critically ill. The balance of water in the body is monitored by the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, as well as by
    baroreceptors in the right atrium, great veins, and carotid sinus. The total water volume in the body is controlled by
    regulation of sodium by the kidneys. Any change in sodium and water balance can dramatically affect the cells of the
    brain. Sodium levels may be disrupted due to various conditions such as renal dysfunction, cirrhosis, lung disease,
    certain cancers, congestive heart failure, diarrhea, vomiting, blood loss, or excessive sweating or can be the result of
    diuretic medications. Neurospecific conditions, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, TBI, meningitis, encephalitis,
    and brain tumors, can disrupt sodium balance and result in hyponatremia, a serum sodium level less than 135

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness                                                           97

mEq/L, which can cause various neurologic symptoms. Such disruptions are sometimes caused by failure in the
brain to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH), as is the case in central diabetes insipidus, or by urinary sodium loss
without water loss, as is the case in syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). SIADH is
caused by an unsuppressed release of ADH from the pituitary gland or other nonpituitary sources that signals the
body to retain fluid (Yasir & Mechanic, 2023). Therefore, nurses should evaluate the sodium and water balance of all
clients with neurologic conditions as a routine part of the nutritional assessment.

Omega-3 Fatty Acids
Omega-3 fatty acids are specific unsaturated fatty acids that are often referred to as "good fats" because they have
a significant positive impact on brain function. However, many Americans consume a disproportionate quantity of
omega-6 fatty acids, found in corn and vegetable oils in processed foods. Although not routinely tested for, the
omega-3 index is a measure of the percentage of certain fatty acids in the red blood cell membranes:
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The omega-3 index is an assessment of the
percentage of total fatty acids in the body and is a marker that identifies cardiovascular and cerebrovascular risk for
death (Swanson et al., 2012). An omega-3 index of less than 4% indicates a high risk for death, whereas a level
greater than 8% represents a low risk for stroke or other cardioembolic events in the future (Swanson et al., 2012;
von Schacky, 2020). Fatty fish, such as salmon, mackerel, and sardines, and wild meat, such as venison, buffalo, and
other hunted game animals, contain omega-3 fatty acids. They are abundant in many plant sources as well, such as
nuts, seeds (chia, pumpkin, sunflower), and flaxseed, olive, and canola oils.

Dietary Percentages of Carbohydrates, Fats, and Protein
The macronutrients (carbohydrates, fat, and protein) are the building blocks for optimal neurologic health. The
recommended dietary allowance for carbohydrates is approximately 45-65% of a person's daily calories, whereas
protein should account for 10-35% of daily caloric intake, and fats should make up the remaining 20-35% of daily
food intake (U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020).

For optimal brain health, current recommendations include daily intake of fresh vegetables, leafy green vegetables,
berries, fish and other seafood, healthy fats (virgin olive oil, whole eggs, avocados), as well as nuts and seeds. Other
foods that are recommended in moderate amounts are beans; legumes; whole fruits (in addition to berries); low-
sugar, low-fat dairy products (plain yogurt and cottage cheese); poultry; and whole grains.

To prevent cognitive decline, fried foods, pastries, sugary and processed foods, red meats and meat products, and
whole-fat dairy products (such as butter and full-fat cheese) should be limited or eliminated from the diet. Although
margarine was once touted as a healthy alternative to butter because it contains no cholesterol, it may contain
saturated fats, which have been shown to contribute to a decline in brain health. In one publication from the Nurses'
Health Study, replacing margarine or butter with the same quantity of olive oil resulted in a 5-7% lower risk for
cardiovascular and coronary heart disease, both of which are risk factors for stroke (Guasch-Ferré et al., 2020).

The Mediterranean diet is well established to prevent or reduce cardiovascular- and age-related cognitive decline
(Leight & Morris, 2020). It is low in saturated fat and plentiful in olive oil, legumes, broccoli, squash, whole grain
cereals, fruits, vegetables, and fish. It includes moderate consumption of dairy products and wine and low
consumption of nonfish meat products. The Mediterranean diet is recommended for neurologic health more than
any other diet strategy and is particularly recommended for neurologic conditions, including multiple sclerosis,
Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease (Leight & Morris, 2020).

An emphasis on fresh whole foods can also provide an effective path toward steady weight loss, as healthy eating
habits are formed over time. Because the plan focuses on choosing fruits, vegetables, legumes, and snacks such as
low-fat popcorn over potato chips, calorie-rich desserts, and other less healthy foods, and on choosing water over
sugary drinks, this diet generally reduces the caloric intake.

The foods included in the Mediterranean diet are largely plant based and include healthy fats. Because the foods are
filling, overall caloric intake generally decreases, although portion size remains a consideration if weight loss is
desired. The fiber in the foods results in a diversity of gut bacteria, which is beneficial because a healthy gut
microbiome has been shown to positively impact nutrient metabolism and energy expenditure. In some people,
especially those with irritable bowel syndrome, bowel discomfort may result from the high fiber content in this diet.
It is important to monitor potassium levels of clients with comorbid kidney disease because the Mediterranean diet
is often rich in potassium.
98  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

    For reasons still unknown, maintaining low glucose levels can help reduce the number of seizures in people with
    epilepsy. A ketogenic diet is sometimes recommended for these clients because it consists primarily of high-fat and
    high-protein foods and includes few carbohydrates. This causes a breakdown of fats, rather than glucose, for energy,
    which mimics a fasting state and has been shown to decrease seizure episodes. The ketogenic diet is commonly
    recommended for children with epilepsy and some adults. The diet is rich in butter, mayonnaise, and heavy cream; it
    includes small portions of fruit, cheese, and bacon, and other meats, fish, and poultry are allowed (Figure 5.5).

    FIGURE 5.5 The macronutrients in the typical American diet compared with those in the Atkins diet, a classic ketogenic diet, and a
    therapeutic medium-chain triacylglycerides (MCT) ketogenic diet. The therapeutic ketogenic diet is typically prescribed for clients with
    epilepsy. (credit: "A series of pie charts depicting the calorific contributions from carbohydrate, protein and fat in four diets" by Colin,
    vectorized by Fvasconcellos (talk contribs)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

         SAFETY ALERT

     Sugar and the Ketogenic Diet

      Because even small amounts of sugar can reverse the effects of the ketogenic diet and lead to a seizure, sugar is
      prohibited on this diet. When on this diet, clients must be aware of the potential addition of sugar or sugar
      substitutes in some medications and supplements, such as gummy vitamins.

    A modified Atkins diet is sometimes recommended for clients with epilepsy instead of a ketogenic diet. As with the
    ketogenic diet, the Atkins diet contains foods that are high in fat (bacon, eggs, beef, mayonnaise, butter, heavy
    cream, oil). Although some carbohydrates are allowed, the total amount of carbohydrates allowed is low (20-25 g/
    day).

    Daily Eating Patterns
    Many Americans do not follow a healthy diet, and studies show that adherence to healthy eating guidelines occurs
    only about 50-60% of the time across the lifespan (Wambogo et al., 2022). The appropriate amount of food to
    consume each day is based on a person's age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. A calculator is
    available on the MyPlate website to assist in determining the appropriate number of calories that should be
    consumed to maintain normal weight, based on activity level. One successful strategy to reduce overall caloric
    intake among persons desiring to shed pounds is to use smaller plates.

    Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness                                                        99

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

To maintain a brain-healthy diet, planning is required. Generally, the healthiest meals are those prepared at home
because they allow for control of portions and ingredients. In addition, using a cooking style that does not require
additional fat is preferred (e.g., slow cooking or sautéing is preferred over deep-frying foods). The process involved
in frying food generates chemicals that may create inflammation in the gut and facilitate limited cognitive function.
Unfortunately, many commercially made fast foods incorporate highly processed, high-calorie foods with artificial
ingredients and fried foods that are not in concert with brain health. The wide availability and low cost of these foods
can make it challenging to change eating habits. Supplements of fish oil have come under recent scrutiny, as some
studies show that these supplements may increase the risk for bleeding, diarrhea, and acid reflux and provide no
significant protective effect against cardiovascular disease or stroke (Manson et al., 2019).

The Difference Between Food and Supplements
Although many supplements are available over the counter, they are not meant to replace a healthy diet. Both the
macronutrients and micronutrients that are found in food are easier for the body to absorb than supplements.
Moreover, the variety of nutrients available in fresh foods has been shown to provide a higher nutritional value than
consuming an unhealthy diet and taking supplements.

The Difference Between Thirst and Hunger
There is a strong link between hydration status and cognitive ability and mood. Water is the body's principal
component, making up 50-70% of total body weight (Tobias et al., 2022). The amount of daily water intake that the
body requires varies by age, body size, activity level, and environmental temperature. It is recommended that most
adults drink 6-8 8-oz glasses of water daily. The body loses water through urination, breathing, and sweating.
However, as a person ages, the ability to distinguish thirst from hunger diminishes. Because of this, dehydration
among older adults is a common problem. In many cases, by the time a person perceives thirst, moderate
dehydration has already occurred, and cognitive abilities may be slowed. Moderate dehydration has been shown to
cause headaches and can have a deleterious impact on mood, short-term memory, attention, focus, and numeric
and psychomotor function.

Because many older adults are chronically dehydrated, moderate intake of coffee and tea, in addition to hydration
from other liquids, can reduce cognitive decline and dementia because of the antioxidant effect of caffeine.
However, caffeine intake should be limited because it can impact sleep, especially if consumed late in the day.
Water is the best liquid to maintain hydration, and caffeinated liquids such as coffee and tea have a mild diuretic
effect. Although caffeine increases diuresis, the amount of fluid in the drink is thought to balance this diuretic effect.
Many people rely on drinking coffee or tea containing caffeine to increase alertness, as well as cognitive and athletic
performance. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), adults should consume no more than 400
mg of caffeine per day, and no intake of caffeine is recommended for children. Very high daily doses of caffeine (750
mg) have been linked to serious health conditions such as chest pain, irregular heartbeat, and stroke, as well as
problems with sleep, loose stools, and gastrointestinal upset. The long-term effect of caffeine intake is not well
understood.

Alcohol is not a source of hydration but can have both positive and negative impact on brain function; however,
deleterious effects on brain function are more commonly reported for individuals consuming excessive amounts of
alcohol (Grant et al., 2017). Moderation in alcohol intake may be the key to optimal brain health. Current
recommendations cite safe alcohol use as only 1 drink/day for men and women. The type of alcohol intake may also
be considered. Red wine contains polyphenols, micronutrients that can positively impact blood pressure, and 1
glass/day may reduce stroke risk (Grant et al., 2017).

5.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 5.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
  · 5.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize neurologic wellness.
100  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

     Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

     When the nurse is considering changes to a client's diet to facilitate adequate functioning of the neurologic system,
     it is critical to evaluate how these changes will be affected by the client's lifestyle and relevant socioeconomic
     factors. The nurse must also consider the client's culture, beliefs, attitudes, daily eating patterns, and health
     conditions that may impact their approach to eating.

     Daily Pattern of Food Intake and Sleep
     The time of day that meals are taken can improve neurologic health. For example, recent studies suggest that
     narrowing the window of time during which food is consumed during the day may positively impact cognitive
     function (Gudden et al., 2021). Intermittent fasting, defined as either eating only between certain hours of the day
     (e.g., between 11 a.m. and 5 p.m.) or consuming few calories on certain days and eating normally on other days, has
     been shown to improve neurologic health among persons with Parkinson's disease, ischemic stroke, mood and
     anxiety disorders, and epilepsy (Gudden et al., 2021). Maintaining regular hours for meals and sleep has also been
     associated with positive cognitive performance, and avoiding food intake in the hours before bedtime has been
     shown to improve cognitive performance and sleep quality (Gudden et al., 2021).

     Challenges in Healthy Nutrition
     For many Americans, the availability and cost of healthy foods are major concerns. Soaring prices of weekly
     groceries are concerning, and many Americans rely on food banks or other forms of public assistance to feed their
     families than ever before. In addition, food preferences and dietary patterns are often influenced by cultural norms,
     beliefs, family traditions, and long-term habits; therefore, changing one's dietary intake is often challenging. Dietary
     preferences are very personal for many people, so making changes may be fraught with high levels of resistance. It
     is thus important for the nurse to ensure that changes in a client's diet are feasible and in synergy with the client and
     their family.

     Client Teaching

     Given the complexities of dietary habits, it is critical to first understand the client and family's health state (cognitive
     state and motivation, swallowing difficulties, mobility concerns), dietary history, allergies, or sensitivities to certain
     foods, as well as food availability and financial concerns when planning a dietary lifestyle. Client teaching should be
     part of an interprofessional plan of care involving the nurse, a registered dietitian, and the health care provider. The
     health care team will be best able to create dietary adaptations that will meet specific criteria that will allow the
     client to adhere to the plan of care.

     Recommended Diet Plans for Comorbid Conditions
     For many clients, comorbid conditions can complicate the ability to manifest a comprehensive diet plan. For
     example, although the Mediterranean diet and ample fluid intake may improve cognitive status, for clients in heart
     or kidney failure, specific modifications will be required to consider the effect of excess fluid or the correct
     percentage of protein intake.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Jamal Powell has a normal PET scan result and is advised to follow up with the clinic regularly. The client is referred
     to a dietician but misses 6 separate appointments over 2 years.

     Jamal is visiting the clinic today for a routine follow-up 2 years after the initial clinic visit. During this time, Jamal's
     memory has progressively worsened. Jamal believes these deficits have not been obvious to friends.

     The client describes a recent problem of forgetting where they put things and confusing things in their memory.
     However, the client's relationship to time, as well as their skills in math and literacy, have not changed. Jamal is
     independent with regard to basic activities of daily living, but complex tasks are becoming more challenging.

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness                                                        101

The client states that they have started to feel less confident about driving over the past few months. Jamal appears
to be irritable and becomes distressed when discussing the symptoms and recent events they have been dealing
with. The client discusses their fears and frustrations surrounding these changes and feels they are becoming
depressed about the situation.

The nurse discusses Jamal's diet and activity and plans to work with the client to improve their nutritional state.
Jamal's diet is high in saturated fats and low in fresh vegetables and fruits. The client's spouse mentions that they
read that polyphenols are good for brain health and asks which foods would be best to include in their diets.

Jamal also asks why everyone keeps saying that sugar in the diet is bad, stating that they have enjoyed sweets their
whole life. This is apparent with the recent HbA1c test result, which is 6.3%. (The expected range for nondiabetic
clients, such as Jamal, is less than 5.7%.)

The nurse explains that the combination of Jamal's high BMI of 40, HbA1c of 6.3%, total cholesterol level of 250
mg/dL, and diagnosis of chronic hypertension (today's blood pressure was 156/98 mm Hg) classifies them as having
a condition called metabolic syndrome. The nurse sets up another appointment with the dietitian to help Jamal
correct the nutritional issues identified. Because the dietitian's earliest appointment is 2 months away, the nurse
teaches Jamal and their spouse about some basic nutritional changes they can make before the next appointment.

    3. How much omega-3 fatty acid content should the nurse instruct Jamal to include in his diet each day?
         a. 1.1-1.6 g
         b. 3.5-6.6 g
         c. 0.1-0.16 g
         d. 11-16 g

    4. The nurse is teaching Jamal and their spouse how to choose foods high in omega-3 fatty acids. Which food
        choices would indicate understanding by the client?
         a. Dairy and eggs
         b. Fatty fish and oils
         c. Colorful fruits and vegetables
         d. Peanut butter and almond butter

5.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 5.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on neurologic wellness.
  · 5.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote neurologic wellness.

Evaluating the Client's Adherence to the Nutritional Plan

Changing nutritional intake can be extremely challenging for clients because it often involves factors such as culture,
habits, and preferences that are formed over time. To ensure optimal health, the nurse should evaluate the
effectiveness of the plan. The nurse should not only review subjective data provided by the client but also
incorporate it with objective data to gain the entire picture. Data such as laboratory test results, weight loss or gain,
and vital signs can aid in evaluating the effectiveness of the plan and the client's adherence to it.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Jamal and their spouse attended the appointment with the dietitian. Jamal is now back in the clinic 6 months after
the last visit. The nurse is evaluating the client's adherence to the new nutritional plan (meal plan) that was
formulated with Jamal, their spouse, and the dietitian 3 months previously. The client has gained 10 lb (4.54 kg)
102  5 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness

     over this time.

                        Vital Signs                                               Laboratory Values

     Temperature:                     98.6°F (37.0°C)  Jamal had blood work drawn the previous week:
                                                         · Total cholesterol: 254 mg/dL
     Blood pressure:                  187/86 mm Hg       · LDL cholesterol: 170 mg/dL
                                                         · HDL cholesterol: 30 mg/dL
     Heart rate:                      99 beats/min       · Triglycerides: 270 mg/dL

     Respiratory rate:                14 breaths/min

       Oxygen saturation:             97% on room air

     TABLE 5.4

     Jamal's spouse assisted the client in completing a 3-day diet history, which revealed an absence of fruits and
     vegetables, a high intake of foods containing processed sugar, and a minimal amount of fiber. Even though the client
     did not have an issue in any other prior visits, Jamal had become more depressed and started to drink alcohol. The
     client's alcohol intake for the 3-day diet history was approximately a 6-pack of beer daily and a couple of bottles of
     wine over the 3 days.

     As a follow-up study, the health care provider ordered an amyloid PET scan. The results revealed tau proteins
     consistent with early Alzheimer's disease.

     To optimize all aspects of possible treatments for this diagnosis, the health care provider recommends a
     Mediterranean diet and a weight loss regimen and prescribes donepezil 5 mg once by mouth daily at bedtime. The
     nurse provides Jamal and their spouse educational materials about the medication, the Mediterranean diet, and
     MyPlate recommendations. The nurse also advises the client to engage in a moderate exercise routine by walking
     for 30 minutes at least 3 times a week.

     5. Based on the assessment findings, which of the following clinical findings indicates compliance with the
         prescribed nutritional plan?
          a. Alcohol intake of 3 glasses wine per day
          b. Total cholesterol level remains 240
          c. Dietitian appointment scheduled
          d. Body mass index > 35

     6. The client's spouse asks the nurse to explain a little more about tau proteins and why they are an issue. What
         should the nurse say?
          a. "Jamal has too many tau proteins in his brain."
          b. "Tau proteins are genetic mutations that are causing dysfunction."
          c. "The tau proteins are tangled and accumulate in the brain, causing dysfunction."
          d. "There is no relationship between the tau proteins and Jamal's symptoms."

     Evaluating the Effectiveness of the Nutritional Plan

     When evaluating the effectiveness of a nutritional plan (meal plan), there are several considerations to evaluate
     once the client is shown as being adherent. The ability to change dietary habits is gradual, and as such, subsequent
     appointments with the health care provider, nurse, and dietitian will help the client continue adjusting strategies to
     improve their health and change any negative habits. Setting goals for weight loss and for blood pressure and HBA1c
     reduction as needed can provide later evidence as to the effectiveness of the nutritional plan. Discussing these
     changes with the client and any appropriate family members will help ignite diet changes that can be permanently
     employed and can help improve blood flow in the brain, which will slow cognitive decline.

     Nutritional History
     When obtaining a neurologic nutritional history, the nurse should evaluate specific considerations such as
     availability, budget, cultural aspects of nutrition, and specific dietary practices. The nurse needs to identify which
     resources are available to the client in terms of food availability and any limitations in food preparation practices, as
     well as identify any food intolerances or preferences. A 3-day diet history is helpful to determine the adequacy of
     the client's current diet. The nurse should also determine any recent weight gain or loss, as well as the client's

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Neurologic Wellness                                                      103

typical bowel and urinary elimination patterns and any history of problems in the intestinal tract.

Physical Assessment
During the physical assessment of nutritional status, the nurse should identify the client's hydration status and any
aspects of overnutrition or undernutrition. Skin tone and color should be evaluated, the mucosal membranes should
be assessed for hydration status, and the client should be weighed. An oral examination will identify any loose
teeth, oral pain, swallowing difficulty, or any other barriers to food intake. The nurse should assess the abdomen for
any pain, auscultate for bowel sounds, and complete a focused assessment based on information gleaned during
the history.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part D

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A, B, and C.

Jamal returns for a follow-up appointment 2 months later so the nutritional plan can be evaluated and changed if
necessary. The check-in revealed a weight loss of 4 lb over the previous 2 months. Jamal states that they like and
are following the currently prescribed diet because it is easier than eating separate meals. However, Jamal and their
spouse still have some questions regarding food preparation and meal planning. Jamal has been very adherent but
is having a hard time giving up fried foods.

Jamal's spouse reveals that the expense of groceries has risen recently, and they were trying to adjust their monthly
budget to accommodate this change. The client states that they have even decreased their alcohol intake to 1 glass
of red wine a day, not only for health reasons but also due to increases in grocery prices.

The nurse discusses the situation more with the client and their spouse to get all the data in order to best help them.
The nurse discovers that the client retired and is living on retirement income and Social Security. The client's spouse
has not worked in 10 years and receives disability and Social Security checks each month as income.

The client has stopped driving because they felt it was unsafe, and the couple continues to live at home. Jamal's
neurologist has ordered additional diagnostic exams to further evaluate the Alzheimer's diagnosis, as well as
cognitive tests to evaluate the client's safety.

    7. When evaluating ways to help improve Jamal's nutritional intake based on the information obtained, what is
        the best suggestion to cost-effectively improve the nutritional plan?
         a. Buy more fresh fruits and vegetables.
         b. Use an air fryer to cook foods without breading.
         c. Eat more microwaved meals to make meal preparation easier.
         d. Increase the number of daily servings of fruit juice.

    8. The nurse educates Jamal about abstaining from alcohol and suggests a few other nutritional modifications.
        Based on the client's case, what studies or tests should the nurse expect the health care provider to prescribe
        to investigate other potential changes needed in treatment?
         a. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head
         b. PET scan
         c. Computed tomography scan of the head with contrast
         d. Cerebral angiogram
104 5 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary                                              · Micronutrients are essential for adequate
                                                                 neurotransmission.
  · The nurse plays a critical role across the spectrum
      of care by assessing clients' dietary habits to        · Diet modifications can support brain health in
      improve neurologic health.                                 individuals of all ages.

  · The brain is composed of 60% fat, and the                · Metabolic syndrome can lead to cognitive decline.
      remaining 40% is made up of water,                     · Diet modifications can slow the decline of some
      carbohydrates, protein, and various salts.
                                                                 neurodegenerative conditions, including
  · The brain is responsible for all essential activities        Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and
      of the body but cannot store energy.                       multiple sclerosis.
                                                             · Long-term effective diet modifications cannot be
  · The traditional Western diet can promote gut                 made in a single health care encounter.
      inflammation, which can lead to cognitive decline.
                                                               end of motor nerves, where action potential
  · Adequate hydration is a key element of neurologic          impulses are conducted to various muscles
      health.                                              neuroplasticity the ability of the nervous system to
                                                               change its activity in response to intrinsic or
Key Terms                                                      extrinsic stimuli by reorganizing its structure,
                                                               functions, or connections
afferent transmits impulses from peripheral organs         neurotransmitters chemicals within the body that
    to the central nervous system                              allow neurons to communicate with each other to
                                                               enable the brain to execute a wide range of
albumin a common protein in plasma that carries                functions through the process of chemical synaptic
    hormones and helps maintain the integrity of the           transmission
    blood vessels.                                         omega-3 fatty acids a group of polyunsaturated fatty
                                                               acids that the human body requires but does not
amyloids proteins that tend to accumulate in clusters          synthesize
    that are insoluble; amyloid proteins are associated    parasympathetic nervous system the part of the
    with a number of conditions, including Alzheimer's         nervous system that relaxes the body after stress
    disease                                                    and danger and facilitates the body's "rest-and-
                                                               digest" response
autonomic nervous system regulates involuntary             polyphenols micronutrients that have health-
    body processes such as blood pressure, heart rate,         promoting properties and are present in many fruits
    respiration, digestion, and sexual arousal                 and vegetables
                                                           prealbumin a protein synthesized by the liver that
axons the long slender projections of neurons that             transports various thyroid hormones in the blood
    efficiently and rapidly conduct electrical             soma the body of a neuron
    impulses across nerve cells                            somatic nervous system facilitates movement and
                                                               muscle control in the body
cerebral autoregulation the inherent ability of blood      sympathetic nervous system a division of the
    vessels in the cerebrum to maintain homeostatic            autonomic nervous sytem that is reponsible for the
    cerebral blood flow despite a wide range of changes        body's "fight or flight" response
    in mean arterial pressure                              syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
                                                               release (SIADH) an unsuppressed release of
cerebral blood flow the volume of blood that moves             antidiuretic hormone from the pituitary gland or
    through the vessels in the brain                           other nonpituitary sources that signals the body to
                                                               retain fluid
cerebral cortex the protective outer layer of the          tau proteins present in nerve cells, proteins that
    cerebrum                                                   stabilize microtubules

dysphagia difficulty swallowing
efferent carrying outward or away; in reference to the

    nervous system, transmitting impulses from the
    central nervous system outward to peripheral
    organs to initiate an active response or action
hyponatremia a serum sodium level less than 135
    mEq/L
Mediterranean diet a diet low in saturated fat and
    rich in other nutrients, commonly consumed Greece
    and Southern Italy
myelin the fatty protein membrane that provides a
    protective coating for nerve cells
neuromuscular junctions locations at the terminal

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    5 · Review Questions 105

Review Questions

    1. The nurse is caring for a client who had a stroke 2 days ago and is experiencing continued dysphagia. Which
        of the following nutritional therapies will likely be prescribed?
         a. Nothing by mouth until the dysphagia subsides
         b. Supplements given via a nasogastric tube
         c. Initiation of total parenteral nutrition
         d. Initiation of a soft diet

    2. A client admitted with traumatic brain injury develops syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
        (SIADH). The nurse should prioritize which intervention to improve the client's nutritional status?
         a. Infuse intravenous fluids rapidly.
         b. Perform a dysphagia screen.
         c. Restrict fluids.
         d. Check the client's blood glucose level.

    3. The nurse is caring for a client who is in the early stage of Alzheimer's disease. The client and family inquire
        about meal choices. Which food choice would be most appropriate for the nurse to discuss with the client?
         a. Colored berries
         b. Fried fish
         c. Margarine
         d. Zero-calorie sweeteners

    4. A client with multiple sclerosis asks the nurse about the best foods to fight fatigue and enhance nerve cell
        conduction. Which food choices would be appropriate for this client?
         a. Nuts, seeds, and salmon
         b. Cheese, milk, and margarine
         c. Lean red meats, potatoes, and white bread
         d. Eggs, lamb, and zero-calorie beverages

    5. A child is diagnosed with epilepsy and is being seen for intractable seizures. Which diet(s) would the
        interprofessional team potentially recommend?
         a. Mediterranean diet
         b. Ketogenic diet
         c. DASH diet
         d. Vegan diet

    6. A 67-year-old woman presents to the urgent care center with a headache and dizziness following a 5-mile
        running event for charity. Which of the following findings would be most concerning?
         a. Seizure history
         b. Limited fluid intake
         c. History of kidney stones
         d. Recent vaccination for influenza

    7. A client asks the nurse about taking supplements for improving memory. Which would be the nurse's best
        response?
         a. "You should start taking fish oil immediately to improve blood flow to your brain."
         b. "You should start taking a potassium supplement because this will help with nerve conduction."
         c. "You should start taking zinc because this will help regenerate myelin to help your nervous system."
         d. "You should review the content of your current diet with the nutritionist."

    8. A client with Parkinson's disease asks the nurse about possible benefits of intermittent fasting. Which reply
        would be appropriate?
106 5 · Suggested Reading

         a. "There is no clear evidence of a benefit of intermittent fasting with your condition."
         b. "Although evidence supports a benefit in people with epilepsy, there is no clear evidence of a benefit with

              Parkinson disorder."
         c. "Yes, there is. Let's talk with your health care provider to see if this is right for you."
         d. "You will need to discuss this issue with your health care provider."
    9. What is the recommendation for daily omega-3 fatty acid intake for a 52-year-old adult?
         a. 0.5-1 mg
         b. 1.1-1.6 mcg
         c. 1.1-1.6 g
         d. The daily recommendation is not yet established.
  10. Nutrition can impact the development of neurofibrillary tangles that are found in individuals with Alzheimer's
        disease. Which of the following provides structural strength to microtubules in the neuron?
         a. Beta-amyloid
         b. Amyloid precursor protein
         c. Tau protein
         d. Microglia

Suggested Reading

Kahan, S., & Manson, J. E. (2017). Nutrition counseling in clinical practice: How clinicians can do better. Journal of
   the American Medical Association, 318(12):1101-1102. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.10434

Yu, Y., Borshchev, Y., Uspensky, P, & Galagudza, M. (2019). Pathogenetic pathways of cognitive dysfunction and
   dementia in metabolic syndrome. Life Sciences, 237, 116932. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2019.116932

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 6

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Neurological Health

FIGURE 6.1 Specific nutrients from healthy food, like green beans with almonds, support neurological health in a variety of special
conditions. (credit: modification of work "Yummy Green Beans with almonds" by Colorado State University Extension/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan
6.2 Nutrition and Chronic Neurological Illnesses
6.3 Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION There are many specific nutritional requirements to consider across a client's lifespan that affect
their neurologic health. This chapter highlights many of the nutritional considerations that promote optimal
neurologic function at various ages and developmental stages, as well as important nutritional considerations in
special situations, such as pregnancy, or among clients being treated with certain medications or receiving other
medical treatments. For clients being treated for a neurological disease or condition, nutritional considerations
should be included in the plan of care.
Consider this case: A nurse working at an internal medicine clinic is caring for a client suspected of having dementia.
In this chapter, key elements of neurological nutrition across the lifespan will be provided, as well as specific
recommendations for clients with neurologic conditions. These key elements will be utilized in the case study to
apply evidence-based practice care to the clients presented.
108  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     6.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 6.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during pregnancy.
       · 6.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during infancy.
       · 6.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during childhood.
       · 6.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during adolescence.
       · 6.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during adulthood.
       · 6.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the neurological system during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     Diet during pregnancy has been shown to have a significant impact on fetal neurodevelopment in a number of ways.
     Several nutrients and micronutrients have been shown to impact neural tube formation and other aspects of
     neurological development (Cortés-Albornoz et al., 2021). The developing brain of the fetus consumes more than
     half of the available nutrition delivered via the placenta, mainly in the form of glucose. The developing fetal brain is
     vulnerable to insufficient macronutrients and micronutrients, especially in the first stages of pregnancy. Nutrition
     during pregnancy is of critical importance to both the developing fetus and the mother. This section will discuss the
     effect of specific nutrients on healthy brain function for both the mother and the developing fetus. Specific vitamins
     and minerals, such as vitamins A, B9 (folate), B12 (cobalamin), D, E, and K, as well as certain minerals, such as
     copper, iron, creatine, choline, zinc, and iodine, are required to prevent a host of neurological conditions in the fetus.
     They can also impact rates of maternal preeclampsia and postpartum depression.

     Table 6.1 outlines the recommended daily allowances for micronutrients for women and men.

     Vitamin          Recommended Daily  Food Sources
                      Allowance (RDA)
     Vitamin A        700-900 µg/day     Sweet potato, cantaloupe, carrots, liver, eggs, mango, spinach,
                                         pumpkin, butternut squash
     Vitamin C        Adult females:     Citrus fruits, kiwi, broccoli, strawberries, Brussels sprouts,
     (ascorbic acid)  75 mg/day          cantaloupe, tomatoes, tomato juice

     Vitamin D        Adult males:       Fish liver oil, salmon, swordfish, tuna, fortified foods, sardines, beef
     (calciferol)     90 mg/day          liver
                      600 IU/day         Red bell pepper, pumpkin, beets, collard greens, spinach, sunflower
     Vitamin E                           seeds and oil, almonds, peanut butter, peanuts
     (d-alpha-        15 mg/day
     tocopherol)                         Canola and soybean oils, leafy green vegetables
                      90-120 mg/day
     Vitamin K                           Eggs, peanut butter, mushrooms, avocados, almonds
     (phylloquinone)  30 mcg/day
                                         Dairy (cheese, yogurt), winter squash, edamame, sardines, salmon,
     Biotin (vitamin  Adult females:     almonds
     B7)              1000-1200 mg/day
     Calcium

                      Adult males:
                      1000-1200 mg/day

     Chromium         10 µg/day          Grape juice, meat, Brazil nuts, whole wheat, mussels, broccoli

     TABLE 6.1 Micronutrient Daily Allowances and Sources for Adult Females and Males (sources: CDC 2020, CDC, 2021; CDC, 2022; NIH,
     2021; NIH, 2022a; NIH, 2022b; USDA, 2019)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                    6.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan                   109

Vitamin          Recommended Daily  Food Sources
                 Allowance (RDA)
Cobalamin        2.4 mg/day         Dairy products, eggs, poultry, fish, meat, fortified cereals,
(vitamin B12)                       nutritional yeast
Copper           0.9 mg/day         Organ meats, shellfish, fish, nuts, seeds, whole grains, chocolate
Folate           400 µg/day         Fresh fruits, whole grain, peanuts, beans, dark green leafy
(vitamin B9)                        vegetables
Fluoride         3 mg/day           Brewed tea, coffee, fluoridated water, shellfish, potatoes, oatmeal,
                                    raisins
Iodine           220 µg/day         Fish, dairy (milk, yogurt, cheese), iodized salt
Iron             18-8 mg/day        Nuts, dried fruit, whole grain pasta, bread, legumes, tofu, oats,
                                    various meat sources
Magnesium        Adult females:     Whole grains, dark green leafy vegetables, dried beans, legumes
                 310-320 mg/day

Niacin (vitamin  Adult males:       Red meat, poultry, bananas, legumes, nuts, seeds, brown rice,
B3)              400-420 mg/day     fortified cereals, breads
Phosphorus       14-16 mg/day
                                    Dairy (milk, cheese, yogurt), fish, eggs, nuts legumes, vegetables,
                 700 mg/day         grains

Pyridoxine       1.3 mg/day         Salmon, avocado, chickpeas, dairy, milk, sunflower seeds, spinach,
(vitamin B6)                        beef, bananas
Riboflavin       1.1-1.3 mg/day
(vitamin B2)                        Salmon, chicken breast, organ meats, lean beef, eggs, cheese,
Thiamin          Adult females:     yogurt, dairy, milk
(vitamin B1)     1.1 mg/day
                                    Salmon, eggs, pork, fish, liver, sunflower seeds, beans, nutritional
                                    yeast

                 Adult males:
                 1.2 mg/day

Selenium         55 mg/day          Brazil nuts, bananas, eggs

Zinc             8-11 mg/day        Meat, seafood

TABLE 6.1 Micronutrient Daily Allowances and Sources for Adult Females and Males (sources: CDC 2020, CDC, 2021; CDC, 2022; NIH,
2021; NIH, 2022a; NIH, 2022b; USDA, 2019)

Nutrition and Fetal Neurologic Development
Undernutrition during pregnancy, especially too little protein (46-71 g of protein per day generally recommended
during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy), can result in miscarriage, poor fetal neuronal growth (Murphy
et al., 2021; Stean et al., 2023), and improper development of the hypothalamus (Sun, et al., 2020). Altered
nutritional states such as maternal obesity, high-fat diet, and undernutrition, as well as caffeine intake (less than
200 mg/day recommended) can have a substantial impact on the developing fetal neurological system and can
predispose the child to a variety of disorders not only in the early postpartum period, but also in adulthood. A
pregnant person's intake of approximately 650 mg of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids is essential for the
development of the fetal brain and retina, and an absence of these essential nutrients can lead to pregnancy
complications and compromised fetal outcomes (Duttaroy & Basak, 2020: Murphy et al., 2021).

Altered nutritional states among pregnant clients in low- and middle-income countries has been shown to increase
the risk for preterm and low-birth weight infants, perinatal infant death, and an increase in both mental and physical
developmental problems throughout the lifespan (Chea, et al., 2023). Undernutrition may result in impaired brain
growth, visual memory problems, and delayed speech, and possibly a lower IQ in the child (Georgieff, et al., 2018).
The health of the male parent can also impact fertility and fetal health. The quality and quantity of sperm produced,
110  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     as well as sperm mobility, can be related to the male parent's general health, weight, and volume of alcohol
     consumed.

     Micronutrients
     Several requirements for micronutrients increase during pregnancy, especially iron. The development of gray matter
     in the brain, as well as the structure of dendrites, motor functioning, language ability, and academic performance,
     are correlated to adequate iron intake (30-40 mg/day). Iron is available in meats (including organ meats such as
     heart, liver, kidney, and tongue), poultry, fish, and eggs and generally requires maternal supplementation to reach
     the recommended daily intake (Georgieff, et al., 2020). Choline, another micronutrient (450 mg/day is
     recommended), plays an important role in cognitive function, especially neural tube development, intelligence, and
     sensory gating ability. Choline is available in chicken, beef, eggs, and dairy (Steane, et al., 2023). Zinc (11 mg/day
     recommended) is associated with appropriate movement, normal heart rate variability, and stability of autonomic
     nervous system. It is available in red meat, shellfish, poultry, pork, and dairy, as well as in fortified cereal, beans,
     and nuts. Because zinc is essential to carbohydrate and protein metabolism, a deficiency of zinc can be associated
     with brain degeneration and a decrease in memory and learning, and can lead to a host of neurological disorders
     (Choi, et al., 2020).

     Vitamin A facilitates the patterning of neurons, the development of axons, and the development of the body's main
     organs. The pregnant client requires approximately 600 mg/day of vitamin A. Milk and yogurt are rich in vitamin A
     (Figure 6.2), which is also found in eggs; oily fish; many orange and yellow fruits and vegetables, such sweet
     potatoes; and leafy green vegetables, such as spinach (Carazo et al., 2021). Given the abundance of vitamin A in the
     diet, and storage supply of about 4 months in the tissues, supplementation is generally not recommended, because
     high doses of vitamin A can cause liver toxicity and increase the risk for birth abnormalities.

     FIGURE 6.2 Yogurt is not only rich in vitamin A, but also is a source of calcium, iodine, phosphorus, and riboflavin. (credit: "Yogurt with
     Blueberries and Granola" by Alabama Extension; ACES | Margaret Barse & Aimee Lewis/Flickr, Public Domain)

     Several B vitamins are critical to the normal development of the fetal neural tube. For example, vitamin B12
     (cobalamin) and vitamin B9 (folate) support the development of neurons and myelination of the axons, which carry
     neurologic messages throughout the body. Folate is integral in fetal brain development, especially during periods of
     rapid growth and development (Li et al., 2019). Requirements for the B vitamins increase by 50% during pregnancy.
     For pregnant clients, the requirement is approximately 400 mcg/day of B vitamins.

     Vitamin D has a role in regulating gene expression and brain development as well as several other functions, such as
     the regulation of calcium, the development of dopamine, skeletal regulation, and language development (Larqué,
     2018). The maternal requirement of vitamin D during pregnancy is approximately 1500-2000 UL and may be

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                 111

consumed in the diet by eating fatty fish, eggs, beef, and fish liver oil (Chauhan et al., 2023). A deficiency of vitamin
D may result in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and poor language development (Tous, et al., 2020).

Iodine plays an important role in thyroid hormone synthesis and is therefore essential for neurologic development of
the fetus. During the first half of pregnancy, a deficiency of thyroid hormone (specifically T4) can disrupt the
development of neurons, synapses, and myelin formation. A client with severe iodine deficiency is more likely give
birth to a baby with decreased IQ scores or possibly cretinism (altered intellectual disability, small stature, and
thickening of the facial features). Supplementing a normal diet with 250 mg/day of iodine is recommended for
pregnant clients. Clients contemplating pregnancy may be encouraged to begin iodine supplementation prior to
conception. Iodine is available in the diet in most sea fish, especially shellfish, and is fortified in many cereals and
grains, in addition to iodized salt. Prenatal supplementation with each of these micronutrients (except vitamin A) is
generally recommended. The requirements for each of these are met in daily intake of a prenatal vitamin, so
additional supplementation is not recommended.

The phospholipids (fats that contain phosphorus) in the plasma membrane, called gangliosides (lipids that carry
sialic acid residues), are essential for fetal brain maturation and can determine normal neural repair and apoptosis,
neurotransmitter release, and transmission of signals across cells (Sipione et al., 2023). Severe
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative problems can result from decreased levels of gangliosides. Clients who
carry a rare autosomal recessive gene mutation, such as Tay-Sachs disease (a rare disease that destroys nerve cells
in the brain and spinal cord), cannot synthesize gangliosides due to the deficiency of an enzyme (hexosaminidase A).
These clients will develop an accumulation of these fatty substances, primarily in the brain and spinal cord.
Symptoms include slowed development in the infant, and stiff muscles and seizures may manifest. A similar gene
mutation affecting gangliosides can result in spastic paraplegia and intellectual disabilities, due to a deficit of
gangliosides in the hippocampus (Okuda, 2019). Egg yolks, meat, and milk are the dietary sources of gangliosides
(Okuda, 2019).

While a deficiency of nutrients has been shown to have a negative impact on fetal brain development, a high-fat
maternal diet and obesity during pregnancy have been correlated to autism and attention deficit disorder among
newborns, behavioral disorders in children, and a propensity for obesity in adulthood (Cortés-Albornoz, et al.,
2021). Also, high consumption of sugar during pregnancy, especially fructose, has been associated with altered
development of the prefrontal cortex and subsequent autism spectrum disorder (Rivell, et al., 2019). Obesity among
pregnant clients has been associated with infants exhibiting altered immunity, higher rates of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, and autism or intellectual developmental delays than children born to mothers with a normal
weight (Sanchez et al., 2018). The nature of the maternal diet has been shown to impact the bacterial colonization
in the infant's gut in the early postpartum period, which can impact subsequent neurodevelopment across the
lifespan (Al Rubaye, et al., 2020).

As shown in Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness, omega-3 fatty acids are
required for healthy brain function. A deficiency of these essential brain-building blocks results in brain
inflammation and possibly brain injury and stroke. Approximately 1 in every 3,500 full-term infants in the United
States will develop an ischemic stroke when expecting mothers do not consume adequate amounts, especially in
the first trimester of pregnancy (Dunbar & Kirton, 2018).

Prenatal alcohol intake in any amount has been shown to have a detrimental effect on congenital cognitive
impairment, including fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and, if severe, fetal alcohol syndrome (Oei, 2020). Maternal
caffeine intake crosses over to the placenta and is associated with altered sleep and movement as well as the ability
to learn, because the developing fetus does not possess the enzymes to metabolize caffeine. Maternal caffeine
intake of more than 200 mg/day has been associated with shorter stature in early childhood (Gleason et al., 2022).

Impact on the Client's Health During Pregnancy

The impact of pregnancy on the neurological health of the client is of great concern. Pregnant people's rates of
morbidity and mortality have risen dramatically in recent years, especially in non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic
individuals (Hoyert, 2023). Hormones change during pregnancy, and particularly the rise in progesterone can affect
maternal health. Current nutritional recommendations for neurologic health during pregnancy include a diet rich in
fresh fruits and vegetables, whole-grain cereals, milk, and dairy products, as well as meat, fish, and eggs as they are
rich in vitamins A, C, and D as well as calcium and phosphorus.
112  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     During the antepartum period, many people have an increased interest in eating carbohydrates, and if toothbrushing
     does not occur as often, dental caries and plaque are more likely. Dental infections and caries have long been
     associated with the development of a stroke, but dental inflammation has also been associated with premature
     contractions, placing the fetus at risk for premature birth, low birth weight babies (Alrumayh et al., 2021). While
     regular oral care during pregnancy (toothbrushing and flossing at least twice a day) require diligence during
     pregnancy, dental procedures such as extractions and root canals, if required, are performed with caution during
     pregnancy, and may be delayed until after the first trimester.

     Sugars, dried fruits, and chewy candy should be avoided to promote optimal dental health, as this can also impact
     the neurologic health of the pregnant client. Gingivitis and tooth decay are more likely during pregnancy, and this is
     thought to be associated with hormonal changes, especially estrogen and progesterone. Those who develop
     morning sickness with vomiting during pregnancy are more likely to have gingivitis, which can lead to an acidic
     environment in the mouth and, consequently, tenderness and minor bleeding can occur, making toothbrushing
     uncomfortable.

     High levels of fat in the maternal diet and an inactive lifestyle are associated with high cholesterol and high blood
     pressure. A significant portion of people who consume a high-fat diet and are inactive during pregnancy develop
     preeclampsia, placing them at a five-times higher-than-average risk for stroke, not only in the peripartum period,
     but also in later life (de Havenon et al., 2021). Pregnant clients who develop frequent migraine headaches are more
     likely to develop preeclampsia during pregnancy (Zambrano & Miller, 2019). Clients who develop an infection such
     as a urinary tract infection or sepsis during their pregnancy are more likely to be readmitted to the hospital for a
     stroke after the delivery (Zambrano & Miller, 2019). Approximately 7.4% of maternal deaths are a result of stroke.
     Stroke is now the second-leading cause of maternal death in Japan among women older than 40 years, and many of
     these are considered preventable (Zambrano & Miller, 2019). A large percentage of maternal deaths in the United
     States are associated with inadequate prenatal care and preeclampsia (Elgendy et al., 2021). In addition to
     preeclampsia and stroke during pregnancy, Bell's palsy can develop during delivery, and a temporary paralysis of
     one side of the face can last up to 6 months postpartum.

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       Risk for Stroke During Pregnancy or Delivery
       Black clients with a history of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDOP) are at a 66% higher risk for
       experiencing a stroke (Sheehy et al., 2023). Their risk for stroke during pregnancy or delivery is doubled due to
       the possibility of a hypercoagulable state, eclampsia, or preeclampsia (Richardt et al., 2023), and this may be in
       part related to poor prenatal nutrition.

     The Client Without Neurological Illness
     The consequences of chronic conditions may undermine pregnancy or aggravate the maternal condition, and
     nutritional requirements may exceed the recommendations of a normal pregnancy. Demyelinating
     polyneuropathies, inflammatory muscle disease, and myasthenia gravis may become more extreme during
     pregnancy. Although there are no specific nutritional recommendations for these conditions during pregnancy, an
     interprofessional approach of physicians, scientists, nurses, dieticians, and other specialists are often required to
     best manage symptoms and to optimize nutritional support.

     Although a variety of chronic conditions can impact maternal nutrition in pregnancy and lactation, type 1 diabetes,
     type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) can have a profound effect on
     maternal and fetal health. These conditions are discussed next.

     Type 1 Diabetes, Type 2 Diabetes, and Gestational Diabetes
     Recent improvements in the monitoring of blood glucose have dramatically increased a pregnant client's ability to
     maintain normal blood glucose levels. Glucose is an osmotic diuretic and because of this effect, diabetic clients may
     be subject to dehydration. Diabetic ketoacidosis is more common in type 1 diabetes than in other types of diabetes.
     The dietary requirements for a pregnant or lactating client with type 1 diabetes are essentially the same as those for
     a client without a chronic disease or condition, with a few recommendations. Normal blood sugar should always be
     maintained. This can be managed using continuous blood glucose monitoring, and an insulin pump for type 1

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                113

diabetes may be recommended for type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes as well. In some cases, metformin may
be used for gestational diabetes and type 2 diabetes. The effect of insulin type 1 diabetes and metformin type 2
diabetes are similar in that they both produce normoglycemia and optimize fetal neurologic outcomes. Although
metformin crosses the placental barrier, it was shown to be slightly superior in preventing maternal weight gain and
hypertension (Newman et al., 2023). Maternal weight gains of 11-18 kg (24.25-39.68 lb) are generally
recommended. Diet should consist of 50% unprocessed carbohydrates (no concentrated sweets), 20% protein, and
30% polyunsaturated fats (Newman et al., 2023). Although a short-term drop in blood glucose is generally well
tolerated by a developing fetus, long-term hypoglycemia can have devastating effects on fetal brain development.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is associated with several pregnancy-related complications, especially during
delivery. Although diet alone is insufficient to manage SLE, the gut is affected by SLE. A diet that maintains a healthy
gut microbiome should include each of the food groups and food from all the colors of the rainbow, such as
blueberries, strawberries, corn, oranges, eggplant, broccoli, and tomatoes, to increase phytonutrients. The presence
of any allergies must be carefully considered when selecting foods. Antepartum clients are often advised to avoid
fatty red meats, refined sugar and flour, fried foods, alcohol, gluten, and processed foods. Bananas are
recommended because they are high in magnesium, which helps to protect the fetal brain, promotes normal fetal
growth, and helps prevent preeclampsia. Dark green vegetables, such as kale and spinach, are rich in iron and can
mitigate the side effect of anemia resulting from some anti-inflammatory medications that may be used for
maternal treatment of SLE.

Clients with Chronic Neurological Illness
Clients with neurologic conditions can generally experience a healthy pregnancy. However, research is ongoing to
study the impact of multiple sclerosis, migraines, aneurysms, myasthenia gravis, and epilepsy during pregnancy (Xu,
2019). Some medications to treat seizures can be successfully administered during pregnancy. Caution should be
employed when considering the effect of medications to treat the neurologic condition of the mother. Headaches
can be sign of preeclampsia, so the pregnant client with a history of migraines should be closely monitored.
Medications to treat headaches or other neurologic conditions must be carefully planned to avoid those that cross
the placental barrier. The risk for stroke is highest in clients with preeclampsia, so blood pressure must be carefully
monitored and treated.

Conditions such as Guillain-Barré syndrome can be potentially lethal. This nervous system condition presents with
acute ascending weakness and may progress to acute respiratory failure if left untreated with respiratory support.
Treatment of Guillain Barré syndrome is the same for pregnant and nonpregnant clients (Leonhard et al., 2019).

In terms of nutritional support, diets that are rich in macronutrients and micronutrients for a client without a
neurologic condition are considered safe for the pregnant client with a chronic neurologic condition.

Infancy

The development of the brain and nervous system is the most rapid in the first two years of life. Given the known
benefits of breastfeeding over infant formula, nutritional support with human breast milk is critical to neurological
development during infancy. Specifically, the development of visual function and other cognitive domains are
improved when babies are breastfed throughout infancy (Nieto-Ruiz, 2019). A deficiency of a host of macronutrients
and micronutrients, such as protein, carbohydrates, certain fats, iron, zinc, copper, iodine, selenium, vitamin A,
choline, folate, and vitamin B12 (cobalamin), have been shown to be essential in preventing certain neurologic
disorders, such as anorexia, irritability, growth retardation, and developmental regression (Nawaz, et al., 2020). Iron
deficiency alters myelin formation in infancy as well as the development of the hippocampus (brain structure
responsible for emotion, memory, and autonomic nervous system) and neurotransmitters. The impact of maternal
iron deficiency includes a reduction in memory, motor, and behavioral affect in the infant. A zinc deficiency
interferes with both hippocampal and cerebellar development. Polyunsaturated fatty acids also affect membrane
function and the development of appropriate synapses.

Lactating Clients
To ensure the adequacy of breast milk for infant nutrition, lactating clients should include protein-rich foods, such as
meat, poultry, fish, eggs, dairy, beans, nuts, and seeds, 2-3 times a day (CDC, 2023a). Three servings of vegetables
114  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     that include dark greens should also be consumed, as well as 2 servings of fruit. Whole-grain foods such as cereals,
     breads, pastas, and oatmeal are also recommended. Seafood is recommended if it is low in mercury. A healthy diet
     should include most of the macronutrients and micronutrients that are required for lactating clients, but a
     multivitamin and mineral supplement may also be recommended to ensure adequate nutrition for both the mother
     and infant. Caloric intake should increase by approximately 330-400 calories per day to produce high-quality breast
     milk (CDC, 2023).

     Childhood

     The brain reaches 80% of its adult weight by age 3 (Bethlehem et al., 2022) and is exceptionally sensitive to any
     nutritional deficiencies. Glucose metabolism in the brain continues to accelerate from birth to 4 years. At age 4
     years, glucose metabolism occurs at approximately twice the rate as that of an adult. This accelerated metabolic
     rate continues until age 9 or 10 years and then begins to slow to the adult level during late adolescence. Because
     the brain cannot store glucose, a continuous supply of glucose by eating frequent meals is paramount. The effect of
     overnight fasting can have an adverse effect on children; therefore, breakfast is an extremely important meal to
     nourish the brain and improve cognitive function.

     A breakfast that is rich in low glycemic carbohydrates is known to result in optimal cognitive performance. Different
     types of breakfast may impact the development and performance of various gray and white matter in the brain
     (Arora, 2022). The effect of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) is essential for brain function,
     especially in the brain's gray matter. Given the rapid brain development, especially in early childhood, it is critical to
     ensure adequate micronutrients intake, which can be challenging. Deficiencies of micronutrients such as iron, folate,
     and vitamin B12 may become evident around age 5-6 years, as deficiencies are associated with poor cognitive
     performance, especially in the school setting (Arora, 2022).

     Micronutrient deficiency may be more apparent among children whose mothers had experienced inflammatory
     bowel diseases, celiac disease, or ulcerative colitis, as these vitamins are poorly absorbed in the intestines in these
     conditions. For children who are deficient, dietary supplementation with micronutrients can improve cognitive
     performance, especially if the breakfast is low in sugar (Arora, 2022).

     The prevalence of pediatric obesity climbed to 19.7% between 2017 and 2020 in the U.S. (CDC, 2023b). Some
     studies suggest that there is a biological link between childhood obesity and lower cognitive function and that this
     effect is related to insulin resistance. However, these studies are inconclusive, especially when sociodemographic
     factors are considered. For healthy children, the Mediterranean diet is an example of a diet that can provide the
     essential nutrients required for the development of a healthy neurologic system.

     Adolescence

     Multiple studies of the diets of adolescents have shown that there is a direct relationship between diet and brain
     development (Arora, 2022). Diet is associated with various aspects of mood, anxiety, depression, and other mental
     health disorders. A disproportionate percentage of teens are known to have an eating disorder (i.e., anorexia
     nervosa or bulimia), and this has a direct result on neurotransmission within the brain (Aurora, 2022). A poor diet
     during adolescence can result in structural changes in the brain, causing poor cognitive function, mood changes, and
     emotional imbalances. These structural changes may become permanent, as the brain is still developing in
     adolescence, and the processes of neurotransmission in the brain is still evolving during this period. For example,
     dopamine is a neurotransmitter in the brain that is responsible for pleasure and reward responses, and if the brain
     interprets a message that a cheeseburger or ice cream is a reward, dopamine is released. This dopamine effect is
     much more pronounced in an adolescent brain than in an adult, because adolescents have more dopamine
     receptors than adults. When the adolescent brain is rewarded with poor diet choices, this impact carries over into
     adulthood.

     Healthy food choices, including a moderate intake of low-fat dairy and meats with low levels of refined sugars,
     promote the development of healthy bacteria, acting as natural probiotics. Bacteria in the stomach influence the
     production of serotonin and create a lining of the stomach that protects against harmful bacteria, limiting
     inflammation and improving the absorption of nutrients. Serotonin is produced in the intestine and regulates sleep,
     appetite, mood, and pain inhibition. The creation of healthy bacteria in the gut is critical, because bacteria activate
     the pathway between the brain and GI tract.

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Neurological Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                               115

A poor diet during adolescence creates a disruption in healthy gut bacteria, resulting in an inability to absorb
nutrients or produce serotonin. The neurologic impact of a poor diet during adolescence is a reduced attention span,
an inability to learn or remember new information, and an inability to regulate one's mood. The typical teenage diet
in the U.S. often includes sugary drinks, processed sugars, fried foods, and an imbalance in healthy nutrients. A poor
diet in adolescence also contributes to the development of depression, sleep disturbances and mood disorders. It
can also contribute to an early development of heart disease, type 2 diabetes, memory disturbances, and brain
inflammation (Griebsch et al., 2023; Moscatelli et al., 2023). Some teens have tried to reduce processed sugar
intake by switching to sports drinks containing aspartame. However, aspartame contains phenylalanine, which
increases brain inflammation and can worsen brain function, increasing the risk for developing Alzheimer's disease
and other forms of neurodegeneration (Czarnecka et al., 2021). Conversely, many children and adolescents have
moved toward a health-conscious lifestyle that includes vegetarian or vegan diets (Figure 6.3). Although nutritional
needs can generally be met with a plant-based diet, the nutrient requirements of adolescents are higher per
kilogram of body weight than adults, and this consideration is important in diet planning. Nutritional deficiencies,
especially of omega-3 fatty acids, iron, zinc, and B12, are more common among vegetarians and vegans, requiring
close monitoring by health care professionals (Rudloff et al., 2019).

FIGURE 6.3 Poor diet choices can be improved by replacing unhealthy ingredients, such as those found in all-meat pizzas, with healthier
plant-based options such as bell peppers or mushrooms. (credit: "Tonight's Pizza" by Alan Levine/Flickr, Public Domain)

Adulthood

The needs of adults change as aging occurs. While adulthood begins at 18 years, the needs of adults change as a
person enters their 30s, 40s, 50s and 60s due to changes in metabolic rate, activity levels, the physical demands by
occupation, hormonal changes, and a wide range of other factors. Moreover, nutritional needs may vary based on a
person's sex. For example, health and nutrition for females must consider important factors across the lifespan,
such as pregnancy, breastfeeding, and menopause. As females age, they are at a higher risk than males of cardiac
disease, breast cancer, and osteoporosis.

Specific recommendations for macronutrients to maintain neurologic health can also vary depending on a range of
factors, including a person's sex, environment, and other characteristics or circumstances. The degree of physical
activity alters protein requirements. Physical body size and weight alter caloric needs. Carbohydrates provide the
main source of energy. In general, 130 g/day of carbohydrates are recommended, and these should be consumed
from high-fiber whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and legumes, as well as low-fat yogurt and other dairy products. A
dietary intake of polyunsaturated fats, which can be found in vegetable oils, nuts, seeds, and fish oil, should
comprise around 15% of the adult diet.
116  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     While caloric needs are higher in early adulthood, this need often declines as a person ages. Because many adults
     do not adjust their diet as they age, overconsumption of calories coupled with a decline in physical activity often
     results in adult-onset obesity, which can be associated with poor cognitive status. Some estimates report that
     42.5% of adults in the U.S. are overweight or obese, and it varies by race and ethnicity (Fryar, et al. 2021). Due to
     the inadequacies of the traditional Western diet, many adults are also nutrient deficient, especially in
     micronutrients, even if their caloric intake exceeds the body's needs.

     Older Adults

     The changing nutritional requirements in older adults are more relevant than ever before. In 2019, estimates show
     that there were more than 703 million people globally over age 65, and more than 50 million were diagnosed with
     dementia. By the year 2050, it is projected that 1.5 billion people will be over age 60, and 153 million will be living
     with dementia (Alzheimer's Disease International, 2023). Nutritional strategies, including the intake of specific
     macronutrients and micronutrients, such as those rich in B vitamins, long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, and
     flavonoids (foods that have antioxidant properties due to their variable phenolic composition, like fruits and
     vegetables, tea, wine, and whole grains), have been shown to delay or slow the onset of age-related conditions.
     Supplementing the diet with micronutrients has been shown to improve cognition in some studies of clients with
     Alzheimer's disease, but the best health benefits have been verified with a varied multinutrient-rich diet rather than
     supplements alone (Fei et al., 2022).

     The process of aging is associated with a loss of muscle mass. While a variety of food sources are recommended to
     support brain health, those containing foods rich in iron, folate, calcium, and vitamins A, C, and D, are particularly
     important for supporting muscle mass as well. Adequate intake of vitamin B12 among older adults is recommended
     to maintain the integrity of nerve cells. Foods high in vitamin B12 include eggs, fortified breakfast cereal, and certain
     fish, such as tuna. However, the absorption of some vitamins may be reduced due to both age-related and other
     changes in the gut, as well as the effect of medications like metformin, proton pump inhibitors, vitamin C
     supplements, colchicine, and medications that are used to treat peptic ulcers and other gastrointestinal problems.
     The tendency of older adults to become dehydrated can also affect the ability to absorb nutrients, and an increase in
     water intake as well as fresh fruits and vegetables can help to overcome dehydration. Special nutritional
     considerations for older adults should include an understanding of maintaining adequate nutrient and fluid intake,
     the client's sensitivities to certain foods, and any challenges with chewing or swallowing.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     A nurse working in an internal medicine clinic is assessing John Everett, a 77-year-old Black male. His daughter
     accompanies him for this routine exam. The nurse asks about John's appetite and recent food intake. He reports
     that he eats "ok," but his daughter says that he is not eating very well. The nurse reviews John's record and notes
     that he has lost 10 lbs since his last visit. John lives alone, and his daughter is concerned he is not eating enough
     nutritious food.

         1. Which of the following age-related findings is associated with older adults?
              a. Increased appetite
              b. Decreased muscle mass
              c. Increased caloric intake
              d. Decreased hydration requirements

         2. Which of the following statements by the client indicates that he is at risk for impaired nutrient absorption?
              a. "I don't drink much water."
              b. "I eat canned vegetables."
              c. "I take my blood pressure medicine with food."

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Neurological Illnesses                                                                        117

         d. "I eat a lot of snacks and small meals."

6.2 Nutrition and Chronic Neurological Illnesses

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 6.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on neurological illness.
  · 6.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on psychiatric illness.

Nutritional Requirement for Optimal Neurological Health

Although the development of neurologic conditions varies in process, there are several common threads in reduced
cognition and other neurologic functions. Neurologic chronic conditions are associated with a variety of factors, such
as increased oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and a disruption in energy metabolism. Each of these factors can
be influenced and modified by dietary intake.

The nurse should screen all clients with neurologic illness for malnutrition in conjunction with the health care team,
using the tools described in Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological Wellness. This
screening is especially important because clients with neurological conditions may have difficulty chewing or
swallowing. Aphasia, apraxia, depression, or altered cognitive states may further challenge adequate intake. Key
nutritional recommendations for preventing neurologic deterioration in neurodegenerative conditions are provided
in this section.

The effect of specific diets (such as ketogenic and Mediterranean diet) among clients with neurologic conditions,
such as epilepsy, traumatic and atraumatic brain injury, multiple sclerosis, autism, and various neurodegenerative
conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), have been
explored in various clinical trials and are described in this section. While the type of diet is important, it is
fundamental that the nurse assess the client's physical ability to eat. The nurse should assess the client's current
food intake, signs of fatigue, loss of movement, and evidence of dry mouth as these findings can make eating
challenging. Meeting the nutritional requirements of clients who have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) secondary to
a stroke or other condition can be particularly challenging because these clients require additional diet
modifications so that foods can be consumed safely to decrease the risk for choking or aspiration.

Meeting the nutritional requirements of clients with a stroke can be challenging, given the potential for difficulty
swallowing (dysphagia). Although the ideal diet for a client who has had a stroke is generally similar to a cardiac diet
(low salt, low fat, high fiber), this may be challenging.

Ketogenic Diet
The ketogenic diet is high in fat and low in carbohydrates, and has been used to facilitate treatment for clients with
drug-resistant epilepsy. The impact of the ketogenic diet, as well as variations like a modified Atkins diet or low
glycemic diets is to promote the formation of ketone bodies. The brain uses ketones to generate energy, and this
type of diet reduces the magnitude of glycolysis. Although the science is still somewhat unclear, it is thought that
this generation of ketone bodies alters the metabolism of certain neurotransmitters and improves mitochondrial
function in a fashion that reduces oxidative stress, improves mitochondrial function, and activates certain signaling
pathways (Francis & Stevenson; Miller, et al., 2020).

The beneficial impact of ketogenic diets in clients with epilepsy is well known to be a reduction in seizures that have
been previously intractable to drug therapy. In addition, the impact of a ketogenic diet in children with epilepsy
often includes an improvement in cognitive function and a reduced rate of developmental delays, if initiated very
early. However, the impact on cognition may be directly related to the diet or to a brain injury associated with
uncontrolled seizures.

The ketogenic diet shows some promise in other conditions as well, such as multiple sclerosis, autism, and
Alzheimer's disease (Li, 2021). In a study of clients with multiple sclerosis, a ketogenic diet may improve
concentration, attention, and memory (Francis & Stevenson, 2018). Although limited data exists due to small
sample sizes and difficulty with blinding procedures, a ketogenic diet has been shown to improve autistic behavior,
but individual food preferences and the gastrointestinal impact of this diet may impact feasibility (Francis &
118  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     Stevenson, 2018). The effect of the ketogenic diet is to produce a state of ketosis, and among individuals with
     Alzheimer's disease, a modest improvement of cognitive function occurs when ketosis is achieved. However, among
     individuals with Alzheimer's disease, cognitive improvement was observed only when clients engaged in a ketogenic
     diet achieved ketosis, even among those with severe Alzheimer's disease (Tabaie, et al., 2022). Among individuals
     with ALS, a high-fat diet, such as the ketogenic diet, has been shown to slow disease progression, while a calorie-
     restricted diet has been shown to reduce survival rates (Jiang et al., 2022).

     Mediterranean Diet
     While the Mediterranean diet (Figure 6.4) has shown effectiveness in preventing heart disease, the antioxidant and
     anti-inflammatory benefit of this diet can help prevent stroke events and slow cognitive decline in clients with
     Alzheimer's disease, in part because of the long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and olive oil. Moreover, the
     polyphenols obtained from fresh fruits and vegetables have been shown to mitigate the phosphorylation of tau
     protein, preventing tangle formation, and to negate beta-amyloid aggregation in the brain. The net effect of reducing
     oxidative stress and neuroinflammation is to enhance neurogenesis, improve transmission across synapses, and
     reduce neuronal death (Román et al., 2019).

     FIGURE 6.4 The long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and olive oil in the Mediterranean diet may help prevent stroke events and slow
     cognitive decline in clients with Alzheimer's disease. (credit: "photo of restaurant, dish, meal, food, salad, green, Greek, mediterranean,
     pepper, produce, vegetable, menu, fresh, healthy, lunch, cuisine, delicious, dairy product, onion, lettuce, cheese, tomato, dinner, oil, diet,
     olive, brunch, appetizer, sense, feta"/PxHere, Public Domain)

     Alternative Food and Supplement Options

     While the ketogenic and Mediterranean diets have shown promise in the prevention and management of neurologic
     conditions, the metabolism of lipids in the brain are dramatically disrupted when there is an excessive intake of
     carbohydrates, particularly those found in processed foods such as high-fructose corn syrup and artificial
     sweeteners. However, complex carbohydrates, such as those found in fresh fruit, vegetables, and high-fiber cereal
     grains, are recommended for the management of cognitive decline (Román et al., 2019).

     Client Teaching

     In general, a diet rich in fruits and vegetables, whole grains, nuts, seeds, fish, meats, eggs, dairy products, healthy
     fats (olive oil, avocado, coconut, and flaxseed oils), and probiotic-rich foods (yogurt, kimchi, kefir, sauerkraut), as
     well as fresh herbs and spices are neuroprotective.

     For clients with neurologic conditions, preventing further brain inflammation can mitigate or slow degenerative
     processes. Resveratrol is a polyphenolic compound that is present in grapes, mulberries, tea, seeds, some cereals,

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 · Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition                                                       119

and red wine consumed in moderation. It can protect the body from developing increased levels of triglycerides and
cholesterol and can have a positive effect in the early stages of neurodegenerative disorders (Oppedisano et al.,
2020).

Ensuring optimal intake or supplementation of vitamins and certain minerals, such as magnesium, can prevent
acute episodes of brain fog and fatigue in persons with MS. When supplementing clients with deficiency of vitamins
A, B12, and D3, it is helpful to administer these supplements with magnesium, as they do not compete with one
another during for absorption. Reducing carbohydrate intake can also help to mitigate the fatigue of MS. Coenzyme
Q10 (CoQ10) has been shown to have a significant antioxidant effect to produce energy and is well known for the
prevention of heart disease, but it also has neuroprotective effects. CoQ10 is not available in foods but is
synthesized by the body. In clients who have experienced ataxia because of neurologic conditions, supplementation
of CoQ10 has been shown to improve both gait and posture (Oppedisano et al., 2020).

A diet high in antioxidants and fiber can help fight inflammation in clients with MS and will slow further
demyelination and prevent constipation. Some sources suggest that a ketogenic diet prevents or slows symptom to
manifest in clients with MS (Dynka et al., 2022).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

During John's visit it becomes apparent that he is experiencing some cognitive decline. The health care provider is
recommending further neurological evaluation for possible dementia. The provider is also concerned about the
client's weight loss and wants the nurse to work with John to improve his food intake.

    3. Which of the following dietary recommendations should the nurse make to John?
         a. Limit all carbohydrate intake.
         b. Increase intake of complex carbohydrates.
         c. Switch to drinking diet beverages with artificial sweeteners.
         d. Limit fluid intake and focus on solid food intake.

    4. John's daughter asks why he can't just take a vitamin to meet his nutritional needs. Which of the following is
        the best response by the nurse?
         a. Vitamins and supplements are used as a last resort.
         b. Vitamins and supplements do not contain adequate amounts of needed nutrients.
         c. Taking vitamins and supplements may be confusing for the client and difficult to remember to take.
         d. Research shows that eating a nutrient-rich diet is the best source of micronutrients to support cognition.

6.3 Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 6.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments utilized for neurological disorders.
  · 6.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      neurological disorders.

Specific dietary needs change over the course of a client's lifespan, and certain neurologic conditions may benefit
from a diet that contains specific key nutrients that promote health and delay symptoms. Anticonvulsants are
medications used to prevent or treat epileptic seizures and can also cause nutritional deficiencies (Table 6.2).
Clients who have experienced a stroke or who have Parkinson's disease, myasthenia gravis, or ALS should be
screened for dysphagia before offering oral meals and then must be monitored when eating for symptoms of
choking, watery eyes, or coughing. While dysphagia symptoms among clients with ALS may present with slowly
progressive symptoms that lead to a malnourished state, clients with Parkinson's disease or myasthenia gravis may
120  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     develop symptoms suddenly and may quickly develop exacerbations in which oral intake is not possible. The nurse
     should assess the client, perform a dysphagia screen, and withhold any oral intake until oral intake is safe. The risk
     for aspiration pneumonia can preclude oral feeding in clients with several neurologic conditions. If these symptoms
     are present, the nurse should consult with a speech pathologist and dietitian for the best treatment plan. Liquids
     may need to be thickened if dysphagia is present, and this can lead to dehydration. The nurse should follow fluid
     intake and urinary output closely to ensure adequate fluid status. In some cases, supplemental nutrition may be
     required temporarily or permanently via enteral feeding to ensure adequate nutrient and fluid intake.

     Medication           Nutritional Considerations

     Anticonvulsant/Antiepileptic Medications (Alcohol should be avoided with all antiepileptic medications.)

     · Phenytoin          · Can cause deficiencies in vitamin D and biotin
     · Barbiturates
     · Carbamazepine

     · Valproic acid      · Can decrease L-carnitine, cause hypoglycemia in neonates, reduce zinc in the
        (VPA)                bloodstream, and cause hair loss

                          · Absorption of VPA diminished with soy
                          · Hepatotoxicity occurs when high-fat diet is consumed

     · Gabapentin         · Increase in body weight by increasing appetite
     · Pregabalin
     · Carbamazepine

     Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors

     · Phenelzine         · May block vitamin B12, cause an increase in body weight and appetite, and reduce
                             activity

     Tricyclic Antidepressants

     · Nortripgyline      · Dietary high fiber, legumes, fish, meat, and vitamin C may decrease drug absorption
     · Amitriptyline      · May cause a decrease in plasma tryptophan serum concentration but an increase in
     · Imipramine
     · Desipramine           brain concentration of tryptophan and the risk for serotonin syndrome
                          · May increase body weight by stimulating hunger and carbohydrate intake

     Antipsychotic Drugs  · Can cause deficiency of riboflavin and vitamin B12
       · Chlorpromazine

     Sleep Medications (Do not take with alcohol.)

     · Zolpidem           · May interact with St. John's wort

     · Triazolam          · May interact with grapefruit juice

     TABLE 6.2 Common Food and Medication Interactions in Clients with Neurologic Conditions (source: FDA, 2020a-b)

     Drug-Food Interactions with Treatments for Neurological Disorders

     Many clients with neurologic conditions require treatments and medications that can affect their nutritional status.
     It is important for the nurse to identify potential nutritional risks and help plan dietary adjustments with clients. This
     section familiarizes the nurse with some of the more common treatments and medications used for these clients.

     A person's genetic background strongly influences food and drug interactions, and certain nutritional deficiencies
     alter the gut microbiome, which can alter future medication absorption. Excessive intake of some vitamins can
     reduce the effectiveness of certain drugs, especially those used to treat epilepsy. Understanding the interactions
     between food and medications used for neurologic conditions among the health care team can ensure appropriate
     use and promote efficacy and client safety.

     Nurses must consistently monitor clients for drug-food interactions; this is a collaborative effort involving the client

     Access for free at openstax.org
                       6.3 · Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition                                  121

reports, pharmacists, physicians, nurses, and dieticians. The ongoing assessment of clients receiving neurologic
medications is critical. For example, identifying changes in body weight or nutritional deficits is key in promoting
medication effectiveness and improving health (Table 6.3).

Increased Body Weight  Decreased Body Weight
                       Amphetamines:
Antidepressants:
                         · Phenifuramine
  · Mirtazapine          · Phentermine
  · Fluvoxamine
  · Phenelzine
  · Citalopram
  · Amitriptyline
  · Doxepin
  · Imipramine

Neuroleptics:          Antipsychotics:
                         · Phenothiazines
  · Clozapine
  · Olanzapine
  · Risperidone
  · Quetiapine
  · Haloperidol

Benzodiazepines:       Psychostimulants:

  · Alprazolam           · Methylphenidate
  · Diazepam             · Glucagon-like protein-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists
  · Clonazepam

Antiepileptics:

  · Valproic acid
  · Gabapentin

TABLE 6.3 Neurologic Medications That Affect Body Weight (sources: FDA, 2022a; Verhaegen et al., 2019)

Medications Used to Treat Parkinson's Disease
One of the main medications used to treat Parkinson's disease is levodopa, a dopaminergic agent. As the body
metabolizes levodopa, elevated homocysteine levels (an amino acid) can present. This elevation can cause greater
stiffness of the aorta and a lower bioavailability of CoQ10, placing the individual at a higher risk for cardiovascular
events such as stroke. Therefore, due to the given the nature of the breakdown of levodopa, an adequate intake of
folate, niacin, and vitamins B6 and B12 is recommended to prevent increased homocysteine levels, mitigating an
increased cardiovascular risk. Alternatively, too much protein when taken with levodopa can inhibit its action, so
medication should be taken 30-60 minutes before a meal and is not recommended in conjunction with a high-
protein diet (Gezmen-Karadag, 2018). Sugar or fat can worsen Parkinson's symptoms as these foods can inhibit
absorption of levodopa, while a high-carbohydrate diet will increase the effect of levodopa (Gezmen-Karadag,
2018). In addition, clients with Parkinson's disease who have a high levodopa requirement will often present with
constipation and may require stool softeners.

Medications Used to Treat Epilepsy
Many of the anticonvulsant drugs (i.e., phenobarbital, carbamazepine) used to prevent seizures can also cause an
increase in vitamin D metabolism in the liver and reduced bioavailability of vitamin D, which decreases calcium
absorption in the intestine. This signals an increase in calcium uptake away from the bones. Low levels of vitamin D,
serum calcium, and serum phosphate have been seen among children with epilepsy who receive these medications
(Kija et al., 2019).

Other nutritional deficiencies that can result from taking antiepileptic drugs include low levels of biotin, an increase
in homocysteine levels, and a deficiency of several B vitamins (Samahan et al., 2020). Therefore, it is recommended
122  6 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

     that clients taking anticonvulsant medications take calcium and vitamin D supplements. It was also noted that high
     folate levels can increase homocysteine concentrations and, therefore, folate levels should be monitored (Safahani
     et al., 2020). Hypocalcemia, reduced serum L-carnitine, zinc, and copper levels have been associated specifically
     with administration of phenytoin or valproic acid, but the supplementation of calcium has been shown to improve
     both cognition and function (Kija et al., 2019).

     Nutrition education is recommended for clients prescribed valproic acid, as the intended action may be inhibited
     among people who consume large amounts of soy, as seen in vegan and vegetarian diets. Moreover, while some
     anticonvulsant medications, such as topiramate, may reduce total body weight, valproic acid has been associated
     with weight gain because of decreased serum glucose levels, which increase appetite. Clients who receive valproic
     acid should be closely monitored, as hepatotoxicity (injury to the liver or impaired liver function) may result. Clients
     taking any anticonvulsant medications should not consume alcohol, because these medications weaken the
     tolerance to alcohol, increasing the risk for intoxication. Table 6.4 provides a list of common medications used to
     treat seizures.

     Generic Name   Nutritional Effect
     Carbamazepine
                      · Can cause deficiency in vitamins B and D
                      · Can cause bone loss, hyperhomocysteinemia

     Clonazepam     · Can decrease appetite but cause weight gain as it slows the metabolism

     Diazepam       · Do not take with grapefruit or grapefruit juice, kava, or St. John's wort

     Ethosuximide   · Can cause loss of appetite and weight loss

     Levetiracetam  · Can deplete biotin, calcium, L-carnitine, and vitamins A, B12, D, and E

     Midazolam      · Do not take with grapefruit or grapefruit juice

     Oxcarbazepine  · Can increase appetite and cause weight gain
                    · Can reduce sodium levels and cause nausea, upset stomach, and indigestion

     Phenobarbital  · Causes vitamin D deficiency
                    · Can cause bone loss
                    · Increases biotin breakdown
                    · Can cause loss of appetite and weight loss
                    · Can deplete calcium and vitamins A, B9 (folate), and D

     Phenytoin      · Vitamins B and D deficiency
                    · Can cause bone loss
                    · Hyperhomocysteinemia
                    · Do not mix with enteral tube feedings

     Pregabalin     · Can increase appetite and cause weight gain
                    · Can lower vitamin B12 levels

     Primidone      · Can cause loss of appetite and weight loss
                    · Can lower vitamin B12 levels

     Topiramate     · Can suppress appetite, causing weight loss
                    · Can cause ketosis and increase risk for kidney stones

     Valproic acid  · Vitamin D deficiency
                    · Can cause bone loss, as well as hyperammonemia and L-carnitine deficiency

     TABLE 6.4 Common Medications Used to Treat Seizures (sources: Dhaliwal et al., 2023; Epilepsy Foundation, 2023)

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 · Neurologic Condition Treatments, Medications, and Nutrition                                                      123

Medications Used to Treat Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Several medications and treatments may be used to treat clients with MS, depending on the type and severity of the
condition and considering potential risks and benefits. One group of medications is immunomodulators. Interferon
beta-1a is an injectable immunomodulator that is often prescribed to clients with MS, as it acts to reduce
inflammation and halt nerve damage through the destruction of certain cells. While flu-like symptoms may be
common, liver damage is a critical side effect of this medication. A loss of appetite as well as nausea, clay-colored
stools, dark urine, and jaundice may indicate that the liver is failing and should be reported to the provider
immediately (Filipi & Jack, 2020). One of the newest medications that prevent MS relapses is ofatumumab, which
can also cause nausea, and if this occurs, the nurse should report it to the health care provider. A rare adverse and
potentially lethal effect of this medication is brain infection, which could cause speech, vision, or muscle movement
abnormalities. The ketogenic diet can reduce the need for medication in people with MS.

Medications Used to treat Depression, Psychosis, and Sleep
Several classes of medications are used routinely to treat depression, such as selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), tricyclic antidepressants, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). One commonly prescribed
medication to treat depression is fluoxetine, which may be associated with increased insulin levels and subsequent
short-term weight gain in some individuals. Other common antidepressants, such as sertraline and paroxetine, have
been linked to high LDL cholesterol, and long-term use may increase the risk for cardiovascular disease. Some of the
tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline, may also cause weight gain, as they can increase appetite. A high
intake of fiber foods, such as legumes, fish, and meat, and foods rich in vitamin C, may decrease absorption of these
medications. Tyramine is a trace monoamine found in aged cheeses and cured meats and should be avoided if the
client is taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Some antipsychotic medications, such as chlorpromazine and
clozapine, can cause a vitamin B12 deficiency and/or constipation. Therefore, supplemental B vitamins and minerals
are recommended, as well as adequate fluid and fiber intake.

For clients with sleep disturbances, medications like zolpidem rapidly decelerate brain activity and can help them
fall asleep and asleep. Clients taking sleeping medications should avoid caffeine and alcohol and should take them
on an empty stomach to ensure adequate absorption. Zolpidem interacts with St. John's wort, and the two should
not be administered together. Another medication prescribed to treat insomnia, triazolam, should not be taken with
grapefruit juice, as this has been shown to increase blood levels of the drug, causing excessive drowsiness.
124 6 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· For proper functioning of the neurologic system,            macronutrients and micronutrients prevents
   specific nutrients are required across the client's        cognitive decline.
   lifespan.                                               · Weight management is important throughout the
                                                              client's lifespan and can promote neurological
· The health of the client and fetus is optimized by          health.
   ensuring that the client consumes adequate              · Neurologic conditions and subsequent treatment
   protein and has a diet is rich in micronutrients           and medications can alter the client's nutritional
   including vitamins A, B9 (folate), B12 (cobalamin),        state.
   D, E, and K as well as minerals such as copper,         · Nurses should be aware of the potential nutritional
   iron, creatine, choline, zinc, and iodine.                 challenges that could present and teach their
                                                              clients about specific nutritional strategies to
· Specific nutrients for infants, children, and               prevent rapid declines related to neurologic
   adolescents offer optimal neural development.              diseases and conditions.

· The nutrient needs for adults change with the
   aging process; ensuring adequate intake of key

Key Terms

anticonvulsants medications used to prevent or treat           emotion, memory, and the autonomic nervous
    epileptic seizures; many anticonvulsants are also          system
    used to treat certain psychiatric conditions           homocysteine an amino acid that can be found in
                                                               meat; high levels are associated with the
Coenzyme Q10 a nutrient that the body produces                 development of heart and neurologic conditions
    and can be found in many foods; CoQ10 facilitates      ketogenic diet a diet that is high in fat with adequate
    the conversion of food to energy and is a powerful         protein and low in carbohydrates to produce
    antioxidant that can promote health in                     ketosis; has been used successfully to treat certain
    cardiovascular and neurologic conditions                   neurologic conditions, such as pediatric epilepsy
                                                           Mediterranean diet a diet that emphasizes foods that
cretinism altered intellectual disability, small stature,      are plant based and contain healthy fats, such as
    and thickening of the facial features                      vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and olive oil as the
                                                               main source of fat
gangliosides glycosphingolipids that are highly            oxidative stress an imbalance in the body's
    available in a healthy nervous system and carry            production of free radicals and antioxidant defense
    most of the sialic acid residues in the brain              that can set the stage for a variety of neurologic
                                                               conditions
hepatotoxicity injury to the liver, or impaired liver      phospholipids a type of fat (lipid) that also contains
    function, due to the exposure to certain drugs, food       phosphorus
    additives, alcohol, solvents, some plants, and other
    environmental toxins

hippocampus a brain structure located just below the
    ventricles of the brain that is a focal point for

Review Questions

1. The nurse is providing dietary instruction to a client who is in the first trimester of pregnancy. Consuming
    which of the following foods should the client prioritize to facilitate fetal neurological development?
     a. Apples and grapes
     b. Whole wheat bread
     c. Fruit juice
     d. Chicken and lentils

2. A 54-year-old client, recently diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, presents to the clinic for a follow-up
    appointment The client asks the nurse if there is any special diet that might help their symptoms. The nurse
    advises which diet as an option for the client to discuss with the neurologist?
     a. Mediterranean diet
     b. DASH diet
     c. Ketogenic diet
     d. Diabetic diet

3. A client is prescribed phenytoin for epilepsy. Which of the following nutritional deficiencies is the client at risk

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 6 · Review Questions 125

      for?
       a. Vitamin D deficiency
       b. Iron deficiency
       c. Hypoglycemia
       d. Hypercalcemia

 4. A 15-year-old client has decided to try a vegetarian diet. Which of the following nutritional deficiencies is this
      client at risk for developing?
       a. Vitamin C
       b. Omega-3 fatty acids
       c. Calcium
       d. Potassium

 5. The patient care technician is assisting a client with Parkinson's disease during mealtime and reports the
      client began to drool and cough while eating. Which action is the most appropriate from the nurse?
       a. Perform a bedside swallow evaluation.
       b. Tell the patient care technician to watch the client carefully for the rest of the meal.
       c. Show the patient care technician how to suction the mouth orally.
       d. Place a nutrition consult for tomorrow morning to initiate tube feedings.

 6. The nurse is educating a client's family about the addition of polyphenols to the client's diet. Which foods
      should be recommended by the nurse?
       a. Chicken
       b. Fish
       c. Whole-fat milk
       d. Spinach

 7. A client diagnosed with epilepsy asks the nurse if nutritional changes could potentially help control their
      seizures. Which diet would the nurse tell the client about?
       a. DASH diet
       b. Ketogenic diet
       c. Mediterranean diet
       d. Vegetarian diet

 8. The nurse is educating a client who is breastfeeding about maternal dietary habits that can promote the
      infant's health. Which of the following statements by the client indicates the need for additional instruction?
       a. "I will be sure to eat some leafy green vegetables."
       b. "I will drink plenty of fluids throughout the day."
       c. "I need to eat fewer carbohydrates."
       d. "I need to eat 300-400 extra calories each day."

 9. A diet rich in flavonoids, which are found in tea, red wine, certain fruits, and vegetables is often recommended
      in neurodegenerative conditions, due to which of the following benefit of flavonoids?
       a. Antioxidant effect
       b. They cross the placental barrier.
       c. They cross the blood-brain barrier.
       d. Anticoagulant effect

10. The nurse is providing discharge instructions to a client who has been prescribed an antidepressant. What
      nutritional recommendations are appropriate for this client?
       a. Drink a glass of orange juice when taking your medication.
       b. Eat a high-fiber meal when taking your medication.
       c. Switch to a high-carbohydrate diet to decrease the risk for weight loss.
126 6 · Suggested Reading

         d. Follow a balanced diet to decrease the risk for weight gain.

Suggested Reading

Alzheimer's Disease International (2023, June 19). https://www.alzint.org/news-events/news/new-data-predicts-
    the-number-of-people-living-with-alzheimers-disease-to-triple-by-2050/

Cortés-Albornoz, M. C., García-Guáqueta, D. P., Velez-van-Meerbeke, A., & Talero-Gutiérrez, C. (2021). Maternal
   Nutrition and Neurodevelopment: A Scoping Review. Nutrients, 13(10), 3530. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
    nu13103530

Gezmen-Karadag, M., Çelik, E., Kadayifçi, F., Yesildemir, Ö., Öztürk, Y. E., & Agagündüz, D. (2018). Role of food-drug
   interactions in neurological and psychological diseases. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 78(3), 187-197.

Zambrano, M., Miller, E. (2019). Maternal Stroke: An Update. Current atherosclerosis reports, 21(9), 33.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11883-019-0798-2

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 7

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

FIGURE 7.1 Endocrine wellness is connected to a healthy diet full of vegetables. (credit: modification of work "Vegetables" by Scott Bauer/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System
7.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness
7.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness
7.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness
INTRODUCTION Endocrine disorders, such as diabetes and thyroid disease, require careful diet and lifestyle
management. Accordingly, nurses play a critical role in promoting nutrition for endocrine wellness. For example,
nurses instructing clients with diabetes on proper nutrition can significantly improve their clients' glycemic control
(Martos-Cabrera et al., 2021). Nurses can collaborate with other health care professionals to develop
comprehensive treatment plans for clients with endocrine disorders. Multidisciplinary interventions can improve
glycemic control and reduce hospitalizations in clients with type 2 diabetes (Ni et al., 2019).
Consider this case: Meena, a 44-year-old Indian American female was recently diagnosed with hypothyroidism and
type 2 diabetes. Meena develops some concerning symptoms and comes to the clinic for evaluation.
128  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

     7.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 7.1.1 Recognize the normal function of the endocrine system.
       · 7.1.2 Recognize cues of nutritional impact on the endocrine system.
       · 7.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the endocrine system.

     Normal Function of the Endocrine System

     The endocrine system is a network of cells, tissues, and organs that regulate and control all processes using
     hormones. Hormones are secretions that help regulate organ function by exerting their effects on certain cells in the
     organ. They coordinate biological functions like metabolism, sexual reproduction, blood pressure, body
     temperature, heart rate, growth, development, and sleeping. Related to nutrition, the endocrine system regulates
     appetite and how nutrients are used.

     The hypothalamus is a region in the brain that regulates the endocrine system through its connection and
     coordination with the nervous system. The pituitary gland, also located in the brain, regulates other glands like the
     adrenal, thyroid, and testicles. These glands include the thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal, pineal, and pancreas which
     play critical roles in regulating calcium levels in the body, metabolism, sexual development, and blood pressure, and
     insulin production, respectively. Figure 7.2 shows the pituitary gland and other key parts of the endocrine system.
     The goal of regulating hormone levels in the blood is to reach a state of balance or homeostasis. Imbalances can
     lead to health problems like high blood pressure, changes in mood and behavior, and weight gain (Betts et al.,
     2022).

     FIGURE 7.2 The endocrine system is comprised of the central glands, found in the brain, and peripheral glands found in other parts of the
     body. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
     license)

     Nutrition plays a vital role in maintaining homeostasis and affecting hormone functions. Overall, a balanced diet with
     limited ultra-processed food, a variety of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and lean protein sources is important

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                              7.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System                    129

for endocrine health. This diet helps individuals maintain a healthy weight and decrease the risk for hormonal
imbalances. Table 7.1 lists the glands that play a key role in secreting and regulating hormones and related
nutritional factors.

Gland            Role                                                                Related Nutritional
                                                                                     Factors

Adrenal          Release cortisol (steroid hormone) commonly referred to as          Adequate protein intake
glands           the "stress hormone"                                                (5-7 oz eq/day for adults)
                                                                                     as part of a balanced diet

Hypothalamus Instructs the pituitary gland when to release hormones                  Diet low in ultra-processed
                                                                                     foods which decreases
                                                                                     inflammation

Ovaries          Produces sex hormones including estrogen and progesterone           Balanced diet with limited
                                                                                     red meat and poultry

Pancreas         Controls the release of insulin and glucagon, which are involved    Limited added sugar,
                 in regulating blood glucose levels and affecting digestion          refined grains, overall
                                                                                     calories

Pineal gland Produces melatonin, which helps regulate sleep                          Foods containing melatonin
                                                                                     have not been found to
                                                                                     affect pineal gland function

Pituitary gland  Known as the "master gland," it influences many other               (< 2300 mg/day); diet low
                 endocrine glands, including the thyroid. It affects various bodily  in ultra-processed foods
                 functions such as blood pressure, metabolism, and growth.           which decreases
                                                                                     inflammation

Testes           Produces the sex hormone testosterone                               Foods or supplements
                                                                                     containing omega-3 fatty
                                                                                     acids

Thyroid          Controls metabolism, heart and digestive function, mood, and Adequate iodine intake

                 muscle and bone development                                         through iodized salt, fish,

                                                                                     shellfish, dairy, seaweed

TABLE 7.1 Key Endocrine Glands and Their Role in Regulating Hormones (sources: Betts et al., 2022; Salas-Huetos A., 2020; Samodien, E.
et al., 2019; Tan, D. X. et al., 2018; U.S. Department of Agriculture & U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020; Xenou, M., &
Gourounti, K., 2021. )

Alterations in Endocrine System Function

Endocrine disorders develop in one of two ways. Primary endocrine disorders result from problems with the
peripheral glands, while secondary endocrine disorders result when the pituitary gland is either overstimulated or
understimulated by the hypothalamus causing an alteration in the peripheral gland's function. The result of all
endocrine disorders is either hyper-functioning or hypo-functioning of the affected gland.

Alterations in Endocrine System Function - Diabetes
The most prevalent endocrine disorder is diabetes (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, n.d.). It is
estimated that 37.3 million Americans have diabetes, with approximately 8.5 million cases (23%) undiagnosed
(National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2023). Diabetes develops when the body is not
able to maintain adequate blood glucose control (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). Type 1 diabetes typically develops early
in life and occurs when insulin producing cells (beta cells) are destroyed in the pancreas resulting in low to non-
existent levels of insulin. Type 2 diabetes results from insulin resistance that develops gradually from obesity and
aging. The insufficient amount of insulin (type 1 diabetes) and/or functionally ineffective amounts of insulin (type 2
diabetes) result in elevated blood glucose levels.

Glycemic control, which is the maintenance of optimal blood glucose levels, is essential to manage potential
complications of diabetes effectively. Poorly controlled blood glucose levels lead to vascular and neurological
complications including myocardial infarctions, cerebral vascular accidents, renal disease, neuropathies, and
130  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

     retinopathy (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). These complications result from several different mechanisms triggered by
     elevated blood glucose levels that either cause buildup within vessels that impede blood flow, reduce the ability of
     the vessels to autoregulate, or trigger altered biochemical processes that hinder the vessel's functionality
     (Brutsaert, 2022). The risk for these conditions developing is increased in clients who have co-morbid conditions.

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       Differences in Insulin Sensitivity Among Diverse Populations
       Members of US racial/ethnic minority groups have higher rates of insulin resistance than non-Hispanic White
       members of the population. This is most likely attributed to both genetic and lifestyle factors (Caballero, 2018).

     Alterations in Endocrine System Function - Other Endocrine Disorders
     Other endocrine disorders commonly seen are hypo/hyperthyroidism and adrenal disorders. Hypothyroidism results
     from the decreased levels of thyroid hormones T4 and T3. Accordingly, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is
     increased, indicating that the thyroid gland is not functioning properly. It usually results from autoimmune causes,
     but it could also occur after radioactive iodine therapy or surgery for hyperthyroidism or goiter (Braunstein, 2022).
     Hyperthyroidism is caused by increased secretion of T4 and T3 caused by Graves' disease, goiter, or thyroiditis.
     Adrenal insufficiency is caused by Addison's disease or a disorder regulating the pituitary gland and results in low
     cortisol levels in the body (Grossman, 2022). In an effort to stimulate the adrenal glands, adrenocorticotropic
     hormone (ACTH) is released. Conversely, Cushing's disease/syndrome develops when corticosteroid levels in the
     body are high either from taking corticosteroid medications or from overproduction by the adrenal glands.

     Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Endocrine System

     Endocrine disorders can be difficult to diagnose. Frequently these conditions develop over time, and clients present
     with symptoms that are non-specific. A thorough history and physical is essential.

     Health History and Physical Assessment
     Taking a client's health history is the first step when assessing the client's endocrine system. In addition to general
     health history questions, it is important to identify conditions for which the client may be at risk and to assess the
     need for genetic testing (Bickley et al., 2021). When collecting information on the client's nutritional status for
     potential effects on the endocrine system, the nurse should ask about changes in appetite, thirst and fluid intake,
     and bowel function. It is also important to know if the client has experienced any changes in weight or energy levels.

     After obtaining a thorough health history, a physical assessment should be performed to look for signs of endocrine
     dysfunction:

       · Inspect the body, looking for abnormal hair growth, skin changes, and abnormal body proportions.
       · Auscultate heart sounds for rate and rhythm as some endocrine disorders cause tachydysrhythmias. Also listen

           over the carotid arteries and directly over the thyroid gland for any bruits.
       · Palpate the thyroid gland (Figure 7.3), adrenal glands, and testes for tenderness, size, symmetry, and shape,

           looking for any nodules, enlargement, or changes in texture.
       · Assess weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) for any changes in body composition.
       · Assess sexual development, including secondary sex characteristics, and menstrual cycles.
       · Evaluate the client's mood and behavior for any changes.
       · Perform point-of-care blood glucose testing (Bickley et al., 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                             7.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System                      131

FIGURE 7.3 As part of the physical assessment, the nurse should palpate the thyroid gland and adjacent structures, shown here in anterior
view. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Laboratory Tests for Endocrine Functioning
Laboratory testing for endocrine disorders includes tests measuring hormones, vitamin levels, electrolytes, and
kidney function among others. Table 7.2 lists the commonly ordered laboratory tests specific to endocrine
disorders.

Laboratory Test      Normal Range                   Indication

Adrenocorticotropic  9-52 pg/mL (picograms/         Elevated level consistent with Addison's disease
hormone (ACTH)       milliliter)

Cortisol             8-20 mcg/dL (micrograms/       Decreased level consistent with Addison's disease
                     milliliter; drawn in am)

Glucose              70-105 mg/dL (milligrams/      Elevated level consistent with diabetes
                     deciliter; fasting)

Hemoglobin A1C       4.7-8.5%                       Elevated levels consistent with diabetes
(HbA1c)

T4                   0.9-2.4 ng/dL (free;           Increased level consistent with hyperthyroidism

                     nanograms/deciliter)

                     5-12 mcg/dL (total;

                     micrograms/deciliter)

Thyroid-stimulating  0.5-5.0 mcIU/mL                Decreased level consistent with hypothyroidism;
hormone (TSH)        (microinternational units per  increased level consistent with hyperthyroidism
                     milliliter)

Urinary free cortisol < 90 mcg (micrograms)/24      Elevated levels consistent with Cushing's syndrome

measurement          hours

TABLE 7.2 Laboratory Tests for Endocrine Disorders (source: Merck Manual Professional Version, 2022)

Analysis of Nutrition and the Endocrine System

The endocrine system requires adequate nutrition to function. Nutritional deficits or imbalances can cause various
endocrine abnormalities. For example, the most common cause worldwide for goiter, or an enlarged thyroid (Figure
7.4), is iodine deficiency as iodized salt is not consistently used worldwide (Can & Rehman, 2023). However, in the
United States, its use has significantly reduced goiter development (Can & Rehman, 2023). Instead, goiter formation
in the United States is usually caused by Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease. Clients who primarily consume
other types of salt (kosher, sea, etc.) need to obtain iodine in their diet through other means.
132  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

       FIGURE 7.4 Iodine deficiencies can lead to goiter, an enlarged thyroid. (credit: "Goitre" by Almazi/ Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     A thorough analysis of the client's nutrition status can help identify potential endocrine-related issues. The nurse
     should review the nutritional assessment to identify any nutrient-related deficiencies. For example, a client with
     limited fruit and vegetable consumption is at risk for vitamin C deficiency. Vitamin C deficiency is associated with
     multiple health problems. Specifically related to the endocrine system, vitamin C affects the regulation of several
     important hormones including insulin growth factor and sex steroids (Shi, Rath, & Niedzwiecki, 2021). Conversely,
     when evaluating the client's nutrition status, there is potential to find excessive intake of nutrients. For example, a
     diet with excessive carbohydrate intake can increase blood glucose levels in individuals contributing to the
     development of insulin resistance and diabetes. Once nutritional imbalances are identified, the nurse can work with
     the client to make dietary changes and reduce the risk for developing endocrine disorders (Bickley et al., 2021).
     Table 7.3 lists signs and symptoms of common endocrine disorders and their corresponding nutritional factors.

     Endocrine        Signs and Symptoms                                         Related Nutritional Factors
     Disorder

     Diabetes         Increased thirst and urination,                            Excessive intake of added sugar, refined
                      unexplained weight loss, increased hunger,                 grains, or overall calories can cause or worsen
                      blurred vision, slow-healing sores or                      this condition
                      infections, fatigue

     Hypothyroidism   Fatigue, weight gain, constipation, dry skin               Deficient iodine intake can cause or worsen
                      and hair, sensitivity to cold, depression,                 this condition
                      joint pain

     Hyperthyroidism  Weight loss, increased appetite, rapid                     Excessive iodine intake can cause or worsen
     (Graves'         heartbeat, trembling hands, nervousness                    this condition
     disease)         or anxiety, sweating, heat intolerance

     Adrenal          Fatigue, weakness, weight loss, nausea                     High sodium diet is beneficial for clients with
     insufficiency    and vomiting, low blood pressure,                          low aldosterone; adequate calcium and
     (Addison's       darkening of the skin                                      vitamin D intake is essential for clients taking
     disease)                                                                    corticosteroids

     Cushing's        Weight gain, especially in the face, neck,                 Controlled sodium diet and low-carbohydrate

     disease/         and abdomen, thinning skin, easy bruising, diet is beneficial

     syndrome         slow healing of wounds, muscle weakness,

                      fatigue

     TABLE 7.3 Common Endocrine Disorders with Signs and Symptoms and Related Nutritional Factors (sources: Braunstein, 2022; Brutsaert,
     2022; Grossman, 2022; Hoffman & Sullivan, 2020; National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2021a-c and 2-18
     a-b)

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System                                             133

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Obtaining Adequate Iodine through Diet Sources
Dozens of countries, including the United States, add iodine to table salt. Despite this practice, there are still
groups who are at risk for iodine deficiency:

  · People who do not use iodized salt including people in Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and Eastern
      Europe

  · Pregnant women
  · Vegans and people who eat few or no dairy products, seafood, and eggs
  · People living in areas with iodine-deficient soils - primarily mountainous areas (Himalayas, Alps, and Andes

      regions) or river valleys prone to flooding (South and Southeast Asia)
  · People who consume foods that interfere with iodine uptake including soy, cassava, and cruciferous

      vegetables

Alternative sources of dietary iodine for these groups include:

  · Seaweed (kelp, nori, kombu, and wakame) (traditionally consumed in China, Japan, and Korea)
  · Fish and other seafood
  · Dairy products

Fruits and vegetables, although they have a lot of other health benefits, are not a good source of iodine.

(source: NIH, 2023)

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Meena, a 44-year-old Indian American female was recently diagnosed with hypothyroidism and type 2 diabetes.
She has a history of class 1 obesity, with a BMI of 33. Meena lives alone and works as an office administrator. Her
hobbies include reading, watching movies, and cooking. Meena presents to the clinic complaining of fatigue and
feeling cold even in warm temperatures.

    1. Which of the following assessment questions is the most important for the nurse to ask this client to obtain
        more information about their nutritional status?
         a. Have you experienced any changes in your weight or appetite?
         b. Do you have trouble sleeping?
         c. Are you able to track what you eat?
         d. Do you like to cook?

    2. Based on the client's chief complaint, which of the following questions should you ask the client about her
        diet?
         a. How much protein do you eat?
         b. Do you consume a lot of sugar?
         c. What type of salt do you use on food?
         d. Do you eat hot meals?
134  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

     7.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 7.2.1 Understand nutritional habits that optimize endocrine wellness.
       · 7.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize endocrine wellness utilizing nutritional habits.

     Planning Nutrition Goals

     It is important to set nutritional goals with individuals with endocrine disorders as diet plays a crucial role in
     managing these conditions and promoting overall health and well-being. Research has shown that dietary
     modifications can significantly improve outcomes and reduce the risk for complications associated with various
     endocrine disorders, particularly diabetes. For example, research has shown that dietary interventions, including
     reducing simple carbohydrate and added sugar intake and increasing protein and fiber intake, can improve blood
     glucose control and reduce the risk for cardiovascular disease in individuals with type 2 diabetes (Gray & Threkeld,
     2019).

     The American Diabetes Association (2019) has identified a framework for nutrition therapy goals that reflect the
     importance of using a holistic approach to working with clients with diabetes. Their broad goals of nutrition therapy
     are to:

       · Promote and support healthful eating patterns, emphasizing a variety of appropriately portioned nutrient-dense
           foods.

       · Consider personal and cultural preferences, health literacy, willingness to change, and access to healthy foods.
       · Not judge clients about their food choices so that their eating can continue to be enjoyable.
       · Provide practical tools for developing good eating practices rather than focusing too much on a particular food

           item or food type.

     Clients with diabetes should follow the prescribed diet which typically includes a limited number of calories and
     carbohydrates. General guidelines for meal planning with diabetes include (CDC, 2023b):

       · Limiting added sugars and refined grains such as white bread, rice, and pasta
       · Including more non-starchy vegetables
       · Limiting intake of highly processed foods

     Setting nutritional goals for clients with endocrine disorders can be difficult. Endocrine disorders are complex
     conditions that can seem overwhelming to the client to manage. In addition to considering the nutritional
     components of the diet, the nurse must consider cultural, socioeconomic, and psychological factors affecting food
     intake. The goal-setting process is only successful if it is collaborative. The nurse should encourage the client to
     explain how their family, culture, and beliefs influence how and what they eat. These influences should be
     incorporated into the goals set.

     When setting nutritional goals, both short-term and long-term goals are needed. Short-term goals may be necessary
     to help stabilize and manage acute changes in hormone levels that have occurred. Short-term goals may require
     more stringent meal planning and food consumption that is not realistically sustainable over time. Long-term goals
     are necessary to help the client manage their condition on an ongoing basis. Ideally, these goals incorporate the
     changes needed to stabilize the client's endocrine health in a realistic and practical manner. Table 7.4 lists common
     endocrine disorders and related nutritional goals.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                       7.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness                                     135

Endocrine           Nutritional Goals
Disorder or Lab
Value

Diabetes (high      Balance carbohydrate intake with insulin requirements, limit simple sugars and refined
blood glucose)      carbohydrates, increase fiber intake, promote weight management

Polycystic ovary    Promote weight loss if overweight or obese, reduce intake of refined carbohydrates and
syndrome (PCOS)     sugars, increase intake of fiber and omega-3 fatty acids, monitor iron and vitamin D levels

Thyroid disorders   Monitor iodine and selenium intake, limit consumption of goitrogens (e.g., soy, cabbage),
(e.g.,              increase intake of iron and vitamin B12, promote weight management
hypothyroidism)

Cushing's disease/  Limit sodium intake, increase potassium and calcium intake, promote weight management
syndrome

Adrenal             Ensure adequate protein and carbohydrate intake, monitor sodium intake, increase
insufficiency       potassium and calcium intake

Hypoglycemia        Balance carbohydrate intake with insulin requirements, eat frequent small meals
                    throughout the day, avoid skipping meals or fasting

Low iron            Increase iron-rich foods such as lean red meat, poultry, fish, beans, and fortified cereals

Low vitamin D       Increase intake of vitamin D-rich foods such as fatty fish, egg yolks, and fortified foods;
                    consider supplementation if necessary

Low vitamin B12     Increase intake of vitamin B12-rich foods such as lean meat, fish, poultry, and fortified
                    foods; consider supplementation if necessary

Low potassium       Increase intake of potassium-rich foods such as bananas, potatoes, tomatoes, spinach,
                    and avocado

Low calcium         Increase intake of calcium-rich foods such as low-fat dairy, leafy greens, and fortified

                    foods

TABLE 7.4 Examples of Endocrine Disorders and Abnormal Lab Values Associated with Nutritional Goals (sources: Brutsaert, 2022;
Hoffman & Sullivan, 2020; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022b; Cushing syndrome, 2023; Kiani et al., 2022; National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2018b; National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2021c;
National Institutes of Health, 2023; Xenou & Gourounti, 2021).

Adequate intake of vitamins and minerals is important for the endocrine system as they play a role in hormone
synthesis, regulation, and metabolism (Hoffman & Sullivan, 2020; Kiani et al., 2022; Lewis, 2022; Shrimanker &
Bhattarai, 2023). These include:

· Vitamin A is important for vision, immune function, and cell growth and differentiation. It also plays a role in
   regulating gene expression and hormone synthesis. Vitamin A is found in green, leafy vegetables and dairy
   products.

· B vitamins, including thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, pyridoxine, biotin, folic acid, and cobalamin,
   are important for energy metabolism and neurotransmitter synthesis. Vitamin B is found many foods including
   leafy green vegetables, enriched grains, and cereals.

· Vitamin C is an antioxidant that helps protect against oxidative stress and inflammation. It also plays a role in
   collagen synthesis and wound healing and has been linked to improved insulin sensitivity and glucose
   metabolism. Fruits and vegetables are important sources of Vitamin C.

· Vitamin D plays an essential role in calcium metabolism, which is critical for bone health. It also plays a role in
   regulating insulin secretion and glucose metabolism, and deficiency has been linked to an increased risk for
   type 2 diabetes. Sources for vitamin D include orange juice and dairy products fortified with vitamin D.

· Vitamin E is an antioxidant that helps protect against oxidative stress and inflammation, which are linked to the
   development of chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. Nuts and seeds are a key source
   of vitamin E.

· Calcium is important for bone health and muscle contraction, but it also plays a role in hormone secretion and
   metabolism. It is involved in the regulation of parathyroid hormone (PTH), which regulates calcium balance in
   the body. Dairy products are a primary source of calcium. For clients who do not eat dairy products, soy
136  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

           products and dark leafy green vegetables are also good sources of calcium.
       · Chloride is an important electrolyte that plays a role in fluid balance and the regulation of pH. It is also involved

           in the production and secretion of gastric acid, which is important for digestion and the absorption of nutrients.
           It is found in food sources with salt.
       · Magnesium is important for muscle and nerve function, but it also plays a role in hormone metabolism and
           signaling. It is involved in the regulation of PTH and insulin secretion, and deficiency has been linked to an
           increased risk for diabetes. Magnesium is found in whole grains and dark-green leafy vegetables.
       · Phosphorus is important for bone health and mineralization, and it is a key component of hydroxyapatite, which
           is the mineral matrix of bones. Several hormones, including parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcitonin, are
           involved in the regulation of phosphorus metabolism and bone mineralization. Also, involved in the regulation of
           glucose metabolism, and several hormones, including insulin and glucagon. Dairy products, meats, nuts, and
           whole grains are good sources of phosphorus.
       · Potassium is an important electrolyte that is involved in muscle contraction and nerve function. It also plays a
           role in insulin secretion and glucose metabolism. Potassium is also found in leafy green vegetables as well as
           starchy vegetables.
       · Sodium is an important electrolyte that plays a role in regulating blood pressure and fluid balance. It also plays
           a role in the regulation of hormone secretion, particularly in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
           (RAAS), which regulates blood pressure and fluid balance. Sodium is readily found in processed foods including
           chips, pizza, and sandwiches.

          SAFETY ALERT

      Managing Hypoglycemia

       Hypoglycemia (a blood glucose level below 70 mg/dL) must be treated immediately to avoid serious
       complications. The 15-15 Rule can be used to treat mild hypoglycemia which occurs when blood glucose levels
       decrease to 55-69 mg/dL. Clients with blood glucose levels in this range should consume 15 g of carbohydrates
       and then recheck their blood glucose level after 15 minutes. Repeat these steps until their blood glucose is
       greater than 70 mg/dL. Examples of food items that have approximately 15 g of carbohydrates include:

         · 4 oz of juice
         · 1 tbsp of sugar, honey, or syrup
         · Small portions of candy (hard candy, jellybeans, etc.)

       Blood glucose levels that do not respond to these interventions require immediate attention at a health care
       facility (CDC, 2022b).

     Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

     Developing and maintaining healthy eating practices can be difficult for any client. For the general population, a
     healthy diet involves eating nutrient-dense foods across all food groups while staying within calorie limits and
     minimizing intake of added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium (Departments of Agriculture and Health and Human
     Services, 2020). Meeting nutritional goals can be especially challenging for individuals with endocrine disorders as
     these conditions often require specific dietary modifications to manage these conditions.

     For example, individuals with adrenal insufficiency may struggle with electrolyte balance and carbohydrate intake.
     Individuals with diabetes often struggle with carbohydrate intake and blood glucose management (American
     Diabetes Association, 2019). Additionally, there are different types of diabetes. Although the nutritional
     requirements for clients with diabetes are generally the same, clients with type 1 diabetes must take insulin to
     regulate their blood glucose levels. Clients with type 2 diabetes can manage their blood glucose levels through diet.
     Similarly named, but unrelated to diabetes is diabetes insipidus. Clients with this condition may be able to decrease
     urine output by eating a low-protein or a low-salt diet, but otherwise nutrition does not cause or prevent this
     condition (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2021).

     Following any dietary recommendations depends on more than just understanding them. Clients must also have
     access and means to obtain and prepare nutritious foods. A client's culture and norms can also affect dietary

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness                                                            137

behaviors and subsequent health risks (Brown et al., 2022). The nurse should consider the client's cultural
background when recommending food choices. Asking the client about their favorite foods and foods that are
typically served at family or community gatherings is one way to learn more about the client's culture.

A recent study determined that overall diet quality has improved in the United States (Orr et al., 2019). However,
there are still disparities among socioeconomic groups. These health disparities can stem from lack of access to or
means to obtain healthy foods. For example, clients may live in rural or inner-city areas that have few grocery stores
and instead must purchase food primarily from convenience stores or fast-food restaurants. Clients with limited
incomes may have to choose lesser quality food to ensure they can purchase enough food. Accordingly, differences
in diet quality may also explain differences in diabetes health-related outcomes among socioeconomic groups (Orr
et al., 2019). The relationship between overnutrition and socioeconomic status is complex, as individuals from
lower socioeconomic groups may also develop obesity due to limited access to fresh and nutrient-dense food and
easy availability of energy-dense food.

     TRADITIONAL FOODS PROJECT

  One example of a population-health based approach to reducing the risk for diabetes is the Traditional Foods
  Project. This was a 6-year cooperative project involving the CDC and 17 native U.S. tribal programs with the goals
  of supporting cultural traditions that could decrease the risk for type 2 diabetes among Native American and
  Alaska Native communities (CDC, 2022c). This project demonstrated how to incorporate culture and history into
  current day health interventions. Brochures with examples of the traditional food stories they documented can
  be found on their website (https://openstax.org/r/diabetesndwp).

Clients' lifestyles also must be considered. Inadequate physical activity, poorly managed stress, and inadequate
sleep can interfere with healthy eating patterns (Kesari & Noel, 2022). Skipping meals and eating late at night has
been linked to hormone imbalances (Gherasim et al., 2020).

Eating disorders, mental illnesses, and unhealthy diet trends can also affect nutritional status and increase the risk
for malnutrition. Alcohol and substance use are significant factors that can affect a client's nutritional status. In
addition to the physical damage caused by alcohol or substance use, the consumption of these substances can
affect dietary habits. Intake of both can alter client's appetites and potentially displace the consumption of nutrient-
dense food. Frequently, overconsumption of alcohol or substances is associated with disrupted, sometimes chaotic
lifestyles that can further impact nutritional intake (Mahboub et al., 2021).

     MANAGING DIABETES THROUGH NUTRITION

  Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/7-2-plan-nutritional-strategies-to-
  impact-endocrine-wellness)
  It can be challenging for clients with diabetes to incorporate all the nutritional changes needed to manage their
  condition. To learn more about the principles of healthy eating with diabetes watch this video from the National
  Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

After the initial health history and assessment, further testing is performed. Meena's vital signs are:
138  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

                        Vital Signs                                 Laboratory Results

     Temperature:       97.6°F          · Elevated TSH level: 10.5 µIU/mL
                                        · Decreased free T4 level: 0.5 ng/dL
     Pulse:             90 beats/min    · Elevated fasting blood glucose level: 210 mg/dL
                                        · Elevated HbA1c: 8.2%
     Respiratory rate:  18 breaths/min

       Blood pressure:  145/95 mm Hg

     TABLE 7.5

     Meena expresses a strong desire to improve her "hormone health" through lifestyle changes, particularly focusing
     on nutrition. However, she is feeling a little overwhelmed. Her diet recall includes foods with a lot of added sugar
     and salt. She tries to cook at home whenever possible to save money. When cooking at home she uses kosher or sea
     salt because she believes these types of salts "are healthier." Her favorite dishes to prepare are Indian dishes she
     enjoyed with her family growing up. She is concerned she will no longer be able to enjoy these foods.

     3. Which of the following nutritional strategies should be included in the client education for Meena's
         hypothyroidism management?
          a. Recommend a low-protein, high-carbohydrate diet.
          b. Encourage increased consumption of iodine-rich foods.
          c. Advise her to avoid goitrogenic foods, such as cruciferous vegetables.
          d. Promote a diet high in saturated fats and processed foods.

     4. Which of the following actions would be most appropriate for the nurse to address Meena's elevated blood
         pressure?
          a. Initiate a sodium-controlled diet and educate Meena on sodium reduction strategies.
          b. Provide instruction on calcium sources in her diet.
          c. Encourage her to increase her fluid intake.
          d. Initiate a low-carbohydrate diet and instruct Meena on how to obtain adequate protein in her diet.

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       Incorporating Cultural Foods into a Diabetes Diet
       Clients with diabetes may still be able to incorporate some of their favorite culture-specific foods into their diet.
       For example, leafy greens including collards, kale, and spinach are a traditional part of African American diets.
       Eating these foods can help control blood glucose levels (CDC, 2022a). The Latin American staple quinoa is a
       good source of fiber. Lastly, legumes and lentils, commonly used in African American, Hispanic, and Latin dishes,
       can also help manage cholesterol and glucose levels.

     7.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 7.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
       · 7.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize endocrine wellness.

     Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client's Readiness to Learn

     A holistic nutritional evaluation of the client involves assessing not only the client's physical symptoms and medical
     history, but also their educational, emotional, social, and spiritual needs. Socioeconomic conditions, cultural norms,
     and religious beliefs affect a person's nutritional intake and learning ability.

     Assessing a client's readiness to learn involves identifying the client's strengths and barriers relative to learning as
     well as their motivation to learn and receptiveness to the instruction. Health literacy is a fundamental consideration
     when teaching clients. Health literacy refers to how well an individual can find, understand, and use information to
     make informed health-related decisions (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2023c). Education goals and
     strategies should be formulated consistent with the client's health literacy level.

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness                                                       139

Client Teaching

Effective education helps clients improve their overall health, manage chronic diseases, and lower the risk for
complications (Ardoin, 2022). Teaching clients how to follow their prescribed diet requires time, client engagement,
and a variety of resources and strategies (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2023). Once the nurse has
assessed the client's education needs, the nurse needs to work with the client to set learning goals and objectives
and select appropriate learning resources (National Library of Medicine, 2021). Client education should be
structured around the methods of learning best suited for the client. Examples of educational resources include
written materials, models, and videos. Be realistic regarding the amount of content that needs to be covered and
respect the client's limits. Use an organized but flexible approach to be able to adjust to the client's response. If
possible, involve family members or caregivers in the process as these individuals can provide additional support to
the client.

The nurse should cover the following items as part of monitoring carbohydrate intake for clients with diabetes (CDC,
2023a):

  · Clients with diabetes should track their carbohydrate intake to better manage their blood glucose levels.
  · Keeping blood glucose levels stable and as close to normal as possible will help the client feel well and prevent

      or delay the development of diabetes-related complications.
  · There are three types of carbohydrates:

      Sugars: naturally found in fruit or milk, or added to many foods (added sugars are identified on the food
          label)

      Starches: grains and starchy vegetables such as corn or potatoes
      Fiber: indigestible part of plants that do not elevate blood glucose levels

  · Carbohydrates are measured in grams and listed on food labels or found in resources listing nutritional
      information for nonpackaged food items.

  · One serving of carbohydrates = 15 g of carbohydrates.
  · The client should follow their prescribed diet indicating how many servings of carbohydrates to consume.
  · The client should try to consume a consistent amount of carbohydrates at each meal to maintain consistent

      blood glucose levels.

     MEASURING PORTION SIZES

  Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/7-3-implement-nutritional-strategies-
  to-impact-endocrine-wellness)
  The portion sizes of food served by restaurants have increased over time. This can make it difficult for clients to
  accurately measure food servings and follow their prescribed diet. This video demonstrates how portion sizes
  can be measured using your hands - no measuring tools required.

7.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 7.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on endocrine wellness.
  · 7.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote endocrine wellness.

Evaluating the Client's Compliance with the Meal Plan

It is important to determine how well the client has followed the prescribed diet. Self-monitoring of food intake
through a food diary (either paper-based documentation or through an app) is one way to determine this. Diet
recalls and food frequency questionnaires are other diet assessment tools that rely upon self-reported data. The
nurse should consider that self-kept food records are not always accurate as self-reported food consumption is
likely to be misreported in some way (Ravelli & Scholeller, 2020). However, reviewing the food diary with the client is
still beneficial because it can encourage discussion and provide an opportunity for additional instruction on food
choices and portion control. For clients with diabetes, an additional method of monitoring compliance is maintaining
140  7 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine Wellness

     and reviewing home blood glucose checks to determine if they are within the recommended ranges for the client.

          CLINICAL TIP

      Food Journals

       Despite potential inaccuracies, it is still helpful to review a client's food journal as part of their assessment to
       learn more about dietary patterns, food preferences, and issues. To promote consistency with the journaling task,
       help the client select the method of journaling that is most feasible for them to use--either a paper journal
       (notebook, diary, or single pages like the journal sample here developed by the CDC My Food Diary
       (https://openstax.org/r/healthyweight) or electronic method (phone application, spreadsheet, or other software).
       This will make the process easier for the client and increase the client's likelihood of following through.

     Evaluating the Effectiveness of the Nutritional Plan

     The plan's effectiveness is evaluated by measuring expected clinical outcomes. If the nutritional plan (meal plan)
     has been effective, the client should report an improvement in their symptoms. There are objective measures that
     can be evaluated as well. Clients with endocrine disorders typically have laboratory tests performed regularly to
     measure the relevant electrolyte and hormone levels. For example, clients with diabetes will have HbA1c levels
     drawn that indicate the client's glucose control over time. Clients with thyroid conditions will have thyroid panel
     drawn. A thyroid panel is a group of laboratory tests that measure hormones and proteins that indicate thyroid
     functioning. Noninvasive means of measuring effectiveness include measuring the client's weight and vital signs to
     determine if there have been improvements. If the goals were not met, the plan needs to be adjusted. Perhaps the
     plan was too difficult for the client to follow and involved too many dietary changes all at once. The updated plan
     could focus on prioritizing and managing fewer nutrients initially and then expand as the client is able to manage the
     changes. If the client followed the plan but did not see the expected outcomes, work with the health care provider
     and dietician to adjust the plan.

          CLINICAL TIP

      Assessing Blood Glucose Levels

       Measuring blood glucose levels is a routine part of evaluating the effectiveness of the treatment plan for a client
       with diabetes. When measuring a client's blood glucose level, either by performing a point-of-care fingerstick
       glucose measurement or a venous lab drawn, always note the last time the client ate. This is important to know
       when interpreting the result as glucose levels fluctuate with meals.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part C

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Parts A and B.

     To improve her endocrine health, the nursing team encourages Meena to engage in regular physical activity and
     provides education on a balanced diet and portion control. They also refer her to a registered dietitian for
     personalized nutritional guidance. In addition to these lifestyle changes, Meena is advised to monitor her blood
     glucose levels regularly to help manage her type 2 diabetes and maintain better glycemic control.

     For her hypothyroidism management, the nursing team educates Meena about incorporating iodine-rich foods, such
     as seafood, dairy products, and iodized salt, into her diet to support thyroid function. Meena is receptive to this but
     is concerned because her family traditionally has not eaten much meat or seafood. She has eaten some fish, but
     reports she has a limited grocery budget, and she does not think she can afford to eat it regularly. The team works
     with Meena to identify budget-conscious ways to incorporate seafood consistent with her cultural practices into her
     diet. They also collaborate with an endocrinologist to ensure that Meena receives appropriate thyroid hormone

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Endocrine Wellness                                                  141

replacement therapy and ongoing monitoring.

Through this comprehensive care plan, Meena is supported in her efforts to improve her endocrine health and
overall well-being. The nursing team continues to follow up with Meena and assess her progress, adjusting the care
plan as needed.

    5. Which of the following statements would indicate that Meena has successfully incorporated the
        recommended dietary changes for her endocrine health?
         a. "I've been eating more fruits and vegetables and have reduced my intake of processed foods."
         b. "I've started skipping breakfast to reduce my overall calorie intake."
         c. "I only eat low-fat foods now and have completely eliminated carbohydrates from my diet."
         d. "I drink diet soda instead of regular soda to reduce my sugar intake."

    6. Which of the following outcomes would indicate an improvement in Meena's endocrine health after
        implementing the care plan?
         a. Decreased TSH level and improved blood glucose control
         b. Increased TSH level and decreased T4 level
         c. Increased appetite and weight gain
         d. Decreased heart rate and increased blood pressure
142 7 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· The endocrine system plays a crucial role in            physical needs, but psychological, social, and
   regulating many bodily functions. Accordingly,         cultural needs as well.
   endocrine disorders can manifest themselves         · Nutritional strategies should be realistic and
   through a wide range of signs and symptoms.            manageable for the client to follow.
                                                       · Evaluation of nutritional interventions is based
· Proper nutrition is essential for its optimal           upon subjective information from the client
   functioning of the endocrine system. Tailored meal     regarding how well the client is adhering to the
   plans can help minimize symptoms and facilitate        diet and symptom improvement as well as
   disease management.                                    laboratory values related to the specific endocrine
                                                          disorder.
· Assessing client nutrition from a holistic
   perspective is necessary to address not only

Key Terms

Addison's disease inadequate secretion of hormones     pituitary gland gland in the brain that regulates
    by the adrenal glands causing low blood pressure,      growth and development as well as the function of
    weakness, and skin discoloration                       other glands

cortisol a steroid hormone that helps regulate the     primary endocrine disorders caused by dysfunction
    body's response to stress                              in the affected peripheral endocrine gland

Cushing's disease/syndrome weight gain, bruising,      renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS)
    and weakness caused by excessive cortisol in the       system of hormones that regulates blood pressure
    body                                                   and fluid balance

endocrine system a network of glands that regulate     secondary endocrine disorders develop when the
    and control all body processes through hormones        pituitary gland is either overstimulated or
                                                           understimulated by the hypothalamus causing an
glycemic control maintaining optimal blood glucose         alteration in the peripheral gland's function
    levels
                                                       T3 triiodothyronine hormones released by the thyroid
goiter enlarged, abnormal growth of the thyroid gland      gland to help regulate weight, energy levels, and
Graves' disease hyperthyroidism causing eye                metabolism

    protrusion, heat intolerance, and anxiety          T4 tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine) long-acting
homeostasis state of balance in the body                   hormone released by the thyroid gland that can be
hormones body substances that coordinate biological        converted to T3

    functions like metabolism, sexual reproduction,    type 1 diabetes develops when insulin producing
    blood pressure, body temperature, heart rate,          cells (beta cells) are destroyed in the pancreas
    growth and development, and sleeping                   resulting in low to non-existent levels of insulin
hypothalamus a critical gland found in the brain that
    works with the nervous system to control the       type 2 diabetes results from insulin resistance that
    endocrine system                                       develops gradually from obesity and aging
iodized salt table salt fortified with iodine

Review Questions

1. A client has been diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome. Which of the following dietary recommendations are
    appropriate for this client?
     a. Low-protein diet with added salt
     b. Low-fat diet with added potassium
     c. Low-carbohydrate diet with limited salt
     d. High-carbohydrate diet with limited salt

2. The nurse is providing diet instruction to a client with a vitamin D deficiency. Which of the following
    statements by the client indicates the need for further instruction?
     a. "I should avoid eating tuna and salmon."
     b. "I should eat fortified cereal for breakfast."
     c. "My diet plan may not be enough. I may need to take a vitamin D supplement."
     d. "I should try to eat more spinach."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 7 · Review Questions 143

 3. A nurse is caring for a client with diabetes. Which of the following nutritional habits would be most likely to
      optimize endocrine wellness for this client?
       a. Eating a diet high in saturated fats
       b. Consuming complex carbohydrates
       c. Eating a low-fiber diet
       d. Consuming refined carbohydrates

 4. A client presents with symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Which nutritional plan would be most
      likely to optimize endocrine wellness for this client to regulate hormonal imbalances?
       a. Consuming a diet high in refined carbohydrates
       b. Limiting complex carbohydrates
       c. Consuming a diet low in fiber
       d. Eating a diet low in processed and packaged foods

 5. A client presents with symptoms of hypoglycemia. Which nutritional strategy would be most effective in
      optimizing endocrine wellness for this client to maintain blood sugar levels?
       a. Consuming a low-fiber diet
       b. Consistently eating refined carbohydrates
       c. Consuming a diet high in protein and unsaturated fats
       d. Eating a low-fat diet

 6. Which nutritional strategy would be most beneficial for a client with Addison's disease?
       a. Limiting salt intake
       b. Limiting potassium intake
       c. Increasing calcium intake
       d. Increasing vitamin C intake

 7. A client with newly diagnosed diabetes presents for education on dietary modifications. Which of the
      following is an appropriate method for the nurse to assess the client's readiness to learn?
       a. Ask the client to recite the appropriate dietary modifications for diabetes.
       b. Ask the client about their prior knowledge of diabetes and dietary modifications.
       c. Provide the client with written materials on diabetes and dietary modifications.
       d. Ask the client to demonstrate how to administer insulin.

 8. Which of the following indicates the diet plan for the client with diabetes type 2 needs to be adjusted?
       a. The client reports weight loss.
       b. The client's hemoglobin A1C level has remained at 5.2%.
       c. The client's hemoglobin A1C has increased to 9.5%.
       d. The client has not experienced hypoglycemia.

 9. The nurse is reviewing the dietary recall of a client recently diagnosed with hypothyroidism. Which of the
      following foods the client documented they ate frequently indicates the need for additional diet instruction?
       a. Shrimp
       b. Low-fat milk
       c. Nuts
       d. Cabbage

10. A client with hyperthyroidism is prescribed a nutritional plan to optimize endocrine wellness. Which of the
      following food choices align with the recommended diet?
       a. Canned tuna
       b. Canned meats
       c. Shellfish
       d. Unsalted nuts
144 7 · Suggested Reading

Suggested Reading

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023). Diabetes. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/index.html
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (n.d.). Diabetes for health professionals.

    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/professionals/clinical-tools-patient-management/diabetes
Office on Women's Health. (2021). Thyroid disease. A-Z Health Topics. https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/

    thyroid-disease
Young, W. (2022). Overview of endocrine disorders. Merck Manual Professional Version.

    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/principles-of-endocrinology/
    overview-of-endocrine-disorders

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 8

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Endocrine Health

FIGURE 8.1 Nutrition from colorful fruits and vegetables plays a role in endocrine function. (credit: modification of work "Colors and
vitamins!" by Julien Lehuen/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan
8.2 Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses
8.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION Eight major hormone-secreting glands make up the complex endocrine system. The hormones
control growth, development, metabolism, reproductive function, and state of mind. Because nurses are
responsible for assessing clients as part of the initial stages of the nursing process, an understanding of normal
endocrine physiology will alert the nurse to any deviations when assessing endocrine function during the head-to-
toe client assessment. The nurse must also understand how nutrition plays a role in reparative processes and
optimum endocrine function throughout the lifespan and when clients have chronic endocrine conditions.
Consider this case: Sarah Yellowhorse is a 30-year-old Native American woman beginning the third trimester of her
first pregnancy. She has arrived at the clinic for her 24-26-week checkup. Her vital signs are within defined limits,
and her weight gain is as expected for this stage of her pregnancy. She has no history of diabetes or significant
medical or surgical conditions. However, she has a family history of diabetes types 1 and 2. Her mother was
diagnosed at 3 years old with type 1 diabetes, and last year her father was diagnosed at age 56 with type 2
diabetes. Sarah is concerned about her risk for developing gestational diabetes due to her ethnicity and family
history. She consumes some vegetables, such as squash and corn, but she has been eating more potatoes and
processed foods.
146  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     8.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 8.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during pregnancy.
       · 8.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during infancy.
       · 8.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during childhood.
       · 8.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during adolescence.
       · 8.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during adulthood.
       · 8.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the endocrine system during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     A cascade of endocrine-related changes occurs during pregnancy. Many of these physiologic changes occur in the
     endocrine system (Figure 8.2) to prepare the pregnant individual for fetal growth and bodily changes during
     pregnancy. The placenta drives these changes by producing human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) (Kepley et al.,
     2023). This hormone stimulates the corpus luteum to produce the progesterone necessary for growing and
     maintaining a fetus, and it changes the pregnant individual's immune function to protect the fetus from immune
     rejection. HCG also stimulates the ovaries to increase estrogen and progesterone production until weeks 10-12 of
     pregnancy, when the maturation of the placenta is complete (Herrick & Bordoni, 2023). The placenta then takes
     over the production of those hormones throughout the pregnancy. In addition, the pregnant individual's
     hypothalamus creates and releases thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) to stimulate thyroid-stimulating hormone
     and prolactin from the pituitary gland (sometimes called the master gland).

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                             147

FIGURE 8.2 The endocrine system is made up of eight major glands: the adrenal glands, hypothalamus, pineal gland, pituitary gland,
pancreas, ovaries or testes, thyroid gland, and parathyroid glands. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The placenta increases TRH, thus stimulating the pituitary gland, which then increases thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), a hormone that triggers secretion of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland. Thyroid hormone
production increases by 50% throughout pregnancy (Singh & Sandu, 2023). These hormones include
triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), which regulate weight, energy levels, and metabolism. The influx of
thyroid hormones is required for fetal brain development and thyroid function (Kepley et al., 2023). The parathyroid
gland (Figure 8.3) secretes parathyroid hormone (PTH) to generate and maintain sufficient calcium levels for fetal
growth (Hysaj et al., 2021). PTH allows adequate calcium absorption during pregnancy by maintaining ionized blood
calcium phosphate levels by monitoring extracellular calcium concentrations (a lower calcium concentration triggers
the release of PTH). Other functions of PTH include conserving calcium, decreasing phosphate reabsorption, and
stimulating vitamin D production needed for the intestinal absorption of calcium. Vitamin D deficiency in pregnant
clients is associated with elevated PTH levels (Hysaj et al., 2021). PTH concentration during the first trimester is in
the lower normal range, but during the pregnancy, PTH levels increase to reach mid-normal range by the third
trimester (Hysaj et al., 2021). The pituitary gland increases by approximately 136% because of lactotroph
hyperplasia, which results in an influx of prolactin (Nana & Williamson, 2022). Prolactin levels increase by 10 times
during pregnancy to promote breast tissue development for later milk production.

The corpus luteum and placenta release a peptide called relaxin, which affects the connective tissue in the body. It
has several effects in pregnancy (Kepley et al., 2023). Relaxin softens the birth canal, supports growth of mammary
148  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     glands, and prevents premature uterine contractions. Relaxin also facilitates the release of nitric oxide, which
     promotes systemic vasodilation resulting in decreased maternal blood pressure. In addition to the changes caused
     by relaxin, cortisol levels increase during pregnancy, which is vital for fetal brain development (Kepley et al., 2023).
     However, excessively elevated glucocorticoid levels impair neurodevelopment in the fetus. To combat pain during
     labor, endorphin and enkephalin levels increase.

     FIGURE 8.3 The parathyroid glands are small oval glands located next to the thyroid gland in the neck. (credit: modification of work from
     Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System During Pregnancy
     Nutrition during pregnancy is vital for the health of both the pregnant client and the fetus. Normal hormonal changes
     cause disruptions in the pregnant individual's body, and nutritional requirements change throughout the pregnancy
     with the need to support the nutrition of both the client and the fetus. A balanced diet, micronutrients, and intake of
     omega-3 fatty acids promote a healthy pregnancy during hormonal changes. To prevent a vitamin D deficiency, the
     National Institutes of Health (2022c) recommends a daily intake of 15 mcg during pregnancy and lactation.

     Pregnancy requires proper nutrient-rich foods to support optimal endocrine function and ensure the health of both
     the pregnant client and the fetus (Jouanne et al., 2021). The pregnant client needs carbohydrates to fuel the
     increased energy demands of the growing fetus (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2020). These carbohydrates
     support proper hormone production, including insulin, which regulates blood glucose levels. The growing fetus
     needs adequate protein to develop and to produce hormones. Healthy fats play a role in hormone synthesis, fetal
     development, and absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (Jouanne et al., 2021). Table 8.1 lists macronutrient intake
     ranges for the pregnant client. A registered dietitian specializing in prenatal nutrition can guide the pregnant client
     to support the fetus, client, and the endocrine function of both.

     Macronutrient  Percentage of Total Daily                     Food Sources
                    Calories

     Complex        45-65%                                        Whole grains, fruits, and vegetables (preferred
     carbohydrates                                                carbohydrate source)

     Protein        10-35%                                        Lean meats, poultry, fish, eggs, legumes, and dairy
                                                                  products

     Healthy fats   20-35%                                        Avocados, nuts, plant-based oils, fatty fish, flaxseed, and

                                                                  walnuts

     TABLE 8.1 Macronutrient Intake to Support Pregnant Client and Fetus (sources: Jouanne et al., 2021; U.S. Department of Agriculture,
     2020)

     Pregnancy Complications: Hyperemesis Gravidarum
     Some pregnant clients experience hyperemesis gravidarum, a condition during pregnancy characterized by
     extreme, persistent nausea and vomiting. Although the exact cause is unknown, genetic predisposition and
     hormonal and gastrointestinal changes may play a part. The hormonal change theory involves the dramatic increase

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                149

in HCG because some correlational studies show elevations in HCG with hyperemesis gravidarum. Estrogen is also
believed to be a contributing factor. As estrogen levels rapidly increase, so does vomiting. Estrogen-containing
medications are known to cause nausea and vomiting as a side effect, which supports this theory. Lower esophageal
sphincter relaxation during pregnancy is the basis for the gastrointestinal change theory. Even though the basis for
this theory is structural, hormones still play a role. It is theorized that the increased levels of progesterone and
relaxin hormones circulating in the bloodstream contribute to the relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. The
lower esophageal sphincter closes to prevent acid from traveling back up the esophagus, as occurs during acid
reflux. However, the relaxin hormone limits the functionality of the esophageal sphincter, contributing to heartburn.

Hyperemesis gravidarum complicates pregnancy because it can prevent the client and fetus from absorbing vital
nutrients. Nutritional recommendations for a client with hyperemesis gravidarum include switching the prenatal
vitamins to folic acid supplements only and the inclusion of a ginger supplement. There is limited research on diets
changes that can minimize nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. One correlational study found fewer symptoms
among women who consumed vegetables, fruits, and beans or legumes. However, women with elevated HCG levels
in the same study who consumed increased amounts of processed white bread had a higher incidence of
hyperemesis gravidarum (Tan et al., 2021).

Pregnancy Complications: Gestational Diabetes
Pregnant clients may have preexisting diabetes (either type 1 or type 2) or may develop diabetes during pregnancy,
which is known as gestational diabetes (GD). GD is a disorder that occurs as the result of changes caused by
human placental lactogen, a hormone that helps regulate insulin secretion, which leads to dysfunction or delayed
response of the beta cells to blood glucose, thereby producing glucose intolerance (Quintanilla Rodriguez & Mahdy,
2022; Rasmussen et al., 2020). Other hormones associated with GD include corticotropin-releasing hormone and
progesterone because these hormones are associated with insulin resistance and elevated blood glucose levels.
These changes typically occur around the 24th to 28th week of pregnancy, with some individuals having complete
resolution after childbirth. However, clients who experience GD have an increased risk for type 2 diabetes later in
life.

Risk factors for GD include obesity, family history, a history of GD with previous pregnancy, polycystic ovary
syndrome, and high-risk race or ethnicity (Quintanilla Rodriguez & Mahdy, 2022). A recent study of live births in the
U.S. found that the rates of gestational diabetes among pregnant women with their first live birth increased across
all race and ethnicity groups between 2011 and 2019 (Shah et al, 2021). However, rates were significantly higher
among most non-Hispanic Asian and Hispanic/Latina subgroups compared to non-Hispanic White individuals.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Greater Risk for Gestational Diabetes
  In the U.S., American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) women have higher rates of GD compared to non-
  Hispanic white women (Stotz et al., 2021). A recent study found AI/AN women were aware of the role of
  nutrition for maintaining a healthy weight during pregnancy and decreasing the risk for type 2 diabetes, but they
  were not aware that these principles could be applied to reduce their risk for GD. These findings highlight the
  need for culturally relevant diet instruction and interventions to address this disparity.

Nutritional considerations are the main factors for glucose control (Rasmussen et al., 2020). Pregnant clients with
GD should receive recommendations from their obstetrician and counseling from a registered dietitian and diabetes
expert. The nurse maintains sacred relationships with their clients, and this opportunity gives the nurse an
advantage in educating them on the correct micronutrient and macronutrient consumption before diabetes
counseling occurs. Many clients believe that blood glucose is solely related to sugar consumption and do not
understand that the body breaks down carbohydrates to glucose, thus affecting blood glucose levels (Chen et al.,
2020; Rasmussen et al., 2020). In addition, when individuals consume insufficient carbohydrates and increase their
fat intake, they can develop elevated levels of serum fatty acids. This increase in serum fatty acids results in
increased insulin resistance as well as higher than expected fetal fat accumulation and infant adiposity (Rasmussen
et al., 2020).

Low-glycemic, high-fiber foods such as vegetables, legumes, nuts, fruits, and whole grains are recommended
150  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     (Rasmussen et al., 2020). Other healthy diet options include lean proteins such as chicken, turkey, and salmon
     (which contains omega-3 fatty acids) and healthy fats such as avocados and nuts. Pregnant clients also need to
     consider portion control when consuming carbohydrates. The California MyPlate for Gestational Diabetes provides a
     visual example of recommendations for the pregnant client (California Department of Public Health, 2018).
     Pregnant clients should consume the recommended amounts of folic acid, vitamin D, iron, and calcium. Currently,
     there is no evidence to suggest that taking additional amounts of these micronutrients affects GD (Rasmussen et al.,
     2020).

     The glycemic index is a system that ranks carbohydrate-containing foods based on their ability to raise blood sugar
     levels quickly or significantly (Rasmussen et al., 2020). Different carbohydrates vary in their ability to raise blood
     sugar levels based on the chemical structure of the food and their digestibility and absorbability. The scale goes
     from 0 to 100, with higher values indicating faster and higher blood sugar levels. Although this tool is valuable, it
     does not consider the amount of carbohydrates consumed, only the number of carbohydrates per serving size. In
     contrast, glycemic load considers a food item's glycemic index and total carbohydrate content. It accurately
     represents how specific foods in specific quantities affect blood sugar levels.

     Nurses should instruct clients to consume foods on the lower end of the glycemic index spectrum because these
     foods will help them manage their blood glucose properly. Nurses should also advise clients to check the glycemic
     load before consuming a meal to know how those foods will impact their blood glucose. Pregnant clients with GD
     also need to be advised on the frequency and consistency of meals. Three main meals and 2 or 3 smaller meals or
     snacks eaten at the same time each day are recommended to avoid excessive food intake and ensure steady blood
     glucose levels throughout the day. Rasmussen et al. (2020) suggest carbohydrate intake at breakfast of 30 g
     maximum (equivalent to 2 slices of bread or 1 bowl of cereal), based on limited research that shows elevated blood
     glucose levels in the morning.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     Sarah goes to the laboratory before her 24-28-week check for her oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Her results
     show an elevated level, indicating a need for further testing, so a second OGTT is ordered for confirmation. Following
     the second OGTT, Sarah is diagnosed with GD. Sarah is referred to a registered dietitian who specializes in GD. Sarah
     and the dietitian develop a personalized meal plan:

       · Morning: 30 g of carbohydrates--2 slices of toast with poached eggs
       · Snack: a serving of vegetables and hummus
       · Lunch: 60 g of carbohydrates--sandwich on whole grain bread with lean shredded chicken and vegetables such

           as lettuce; she eats a serving of fruit such as an apple, and drinks mainly water
       · Snack: ¼ cup of almonds
       · Dinner: Lean protein with vegetables and 60 g of brown rice

     Sarah is taught to monitor her blood glucose levels and to engage in some physical activity. Her health care provider
     started her on a low dose of 500 mg metformin twice daily. Her subsequent examination will occur at 32 weeks'
     gestation. The nurse encourages Sarah to call the office if she has any questions or concerns before her next
     appointment and to adhere to the treatment plan. The nurse also encourages her to communicate openly with her
     health care team throughout the pregnancy.

         1. The consumption of which nutrient should Sarah most closely monitor to manage her blood glucose levels?
              a. Water
              b. Fats
              c. Proteins
              d. Carbohydrates

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                 151

    2. The nurse asks Sarah about her protein intake. Sarah reports that she has been regularly craving and eating
        cheeseburgers. Why should the nurse be concerned about this finding?
         a. Sarah is not choosing lean protein sources.
         b. Sarah is eating too much cheese.
         c. Eating a lot of red meat can indicate anemia.
         d. This is not a concerning finding as long as Sarah is consuming adequate amounts of food.

Chronic Pregnancy Complications: Thyroid Disease
Thyroid hormones change during pregnancy, especially when the pregnant individual already has a chronic thyroid
condition (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases [NIDDK], 2017; Singh & Sandhu, 2023).
Long-term thyroid disorders such as hypothyroidism (the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone)
or hyperthyroidism (the thyroid gland produces and excretes too much thyroid hormone) require careful
management and oversight during pregnancy to ensure proper fetal growth and overall well-being of both the
pregnant client and fetus. Proper thyroid hormone levels ensure the baby's brain and nervous system develop
correctly. As previously discussed, during normal pregnancy T4 levels remain unchanged; during hypothyroidism, T4
levels register as low, and TSH levels elevate as the pituitary gland attempts to trigger the thyroid to release more
T4. Sometimes, T4 can remain within normal limits, and only TSH is elevated (NIDDK, 2017; Singh & Sandhu, 2023).
Some signs of hypothyroidism include exhaustion, cold intolerance, muscle cramps, constipation, and memory or
concentration problems.

The goal of treatment during pregnancy is to maintain maternal hyperthyroidism at the expected upper limits using
the lowest effective prescribed dose of medication while avoiding fetal hypothyroidism. The treatment modality
remains based on the etiology of hyperthyroidism. Graves' disease is treated with antithyroid, beta blockers, and
surgical interventions while monitoring for gestational thyrotoxicosis during pregnancy.

Nurses must remain cognizant of nutritional recommendations as they develop teaching and discharge plans.
Nutritional recommendations for pregnant clients include sufficient iodine intake. Good nutritional sources of iodine
include dairy, seafood (watch out for elevated mercury-seafood options), eggs, meat, and poultry (NIDDK, 2017;
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2023). Iodine is added to table salt and to some prenatal vitamins. Nazeri et al.
(2021) found that iodine supplementation can improve iodine levels in pregnant individuals, but the effects on the
fetus have not yet been established.

     SAFETY ALERT

 Mercury Consumption

  Pregnant individuals need to be aware of mercury consumption during pregnancy. Mercury is a toxic metal with
  serious adverse effects for the developing nervous system. Fish containing high levels of mercury include shark,
  swordfish, and king mackerel; fish with low levels mercury include salmon, trout, and shrimp (U.S. Food and Drug
  Administration, 2023).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

Sarah delivers a baby girl at 38 weeks' gestation weighing 9 lb 1 oz. Sarah followed the recommendations of her
nurse, dietitian, and health care provider, and her blood glucose levels are now at baseline pre-pregnancy levels.
Because Sarah is at increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes, her nurse needs to incorporate this information
into Sarah's postpartum education.

    3. Sarah asks if her diabetes will recur now that she is no longer pregnant. How should the nurse respond?
152  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

              a. "You need to be monitored 6 weeks after delivery for the signs of diabetes."
              b. "Now that you are no longer pregnant, your diabetes has resolved and is no longer an issue."
              c. "Having gestational diabetes increases your risk for developing type 1 diabetes later."
              d. "Having gestational diabetes increases your risk for developing type 2 diabetes later."

         4. The nurse reviews diet strategies with Sarah to decrease her risk for developing type 2 diabetes. Which of the
             following statements indicates additional instruction is needed?
              a. "I will limit my intake of concentrated sweets."
              b. "I will avoid eating nuts."
              c. "I will try to eat different fruits and vegetables."
              d. "I will incorporate protein into my meals and snacks."

     Infancy

     The endocrine system undergoes extensive development during infancy. The hypothalamus and pituitary gland's
     primary function encompasses controlling and releasing hormones that regulate growth and metabolism. These two
     glands are in the brain and mature during infancy to allow for appropriate hormone secretion. Growth hormone
     encourages growth and development. Growth hormone is at a high level during infancy and contributes to rapid
     developmental alterations during the first year of life (Murray & Clayton, 2022). The thyroid gland produces the
     hormones triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), which are required for cellular proliferation and differentiation,
     energy balance, cardiovascular physiology, and overall growth and development.

     During the first few weeks of life, infants use hormones acquired from their mothers via the placenta until their
     thyroid gland takes over hormone production and secretion. The adrenal glands (located above the kidneys)
     produce cortisol and aldosterone. Cortisol regulates metabolism, the stress response, and immune function, and
     aldosterone maintains salt and fluid balance (Kiebzak et al., 2021). Insulin and glucose are hormones regulated by
     the beta cells in the pancreas. Infants remain sensitive to insulin, which allows for glucose stability. As with the
     other endocrine glands, the pancreas continues its development during infancy, and hormonal regulation and overall
     control continue to mature throughout infancy.

     Macrosomia refers to a newborn who is significantly larger than average for their gestational age (Akanmode &
     Mahdy, 2023). This condition is seen more frequently in infants whose mothers are obese, had GD, or had a
     postdate pregnancy (Akanmode & Mahdy, 2023). Sustained elevations in a pregnant client's blood glucose levels
     transfer through the placenta to the fetus, resulting in fetal hyperglycemia. This causes hyperplasia of the beta islet
     cells in the infant's pancreas, leading to overutilization of glucose and storage by the fetus, resulting in increased
     fetal weight (Akanmode & Mahdy, 2023). Other factors affecting the fetus with fetal hyperglycemia include fetal
     adiposity and hyperinsulinemia.

     Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System During Infancy
     Blood glucose problems take the form of neonatal hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. The definition of hypoglycemia
     is a blood glucose level at or below 40 mg/dL in the first 4 hours of life and a level below 45 mg/dL between the 4th
     and 24th hours (target level is 90-100 mg/dL; Kurtoglu et al., 2019; Rozance, 2023). Clients experiencing
     hypoglycemia during these time frames are categorized as having transient neonatal hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia
     that persists longer than 60 minutes despite medical interventions is referred to as prolonged hypoglycemia.

     Hypoglycemic conditions can develop among infants in the following situations: small for gestational age, sepsis,
     asphyxia, premature birth, transient hyperinsulinemia, diabetes during pregnancy, intrauterine growth restriction,
     toxemia, and increased metabolic requirements. The signs and symptoms in a newborn include tremors, irritability,
     diaphoresis, tachypnea, decreased sucking ability, and high-pitched cry leading to lethargy, hypertonicity,
     convulsions, and coma.

     When treating hypoglycemia, oral feedings are preferred. However, if the infant is unable to take an oral feeding, or if
     no improvement occurs after 30 minutes, then 2 mL/kg 10% dextrose is given intravenously over 1 min; if the infant
     has a seizure, 4 mL/kg should be given. Subsequently, glucose is given intravenously at 6-8 mg/kg/min (Kurtoglu et
     al., 2019). Discontinue intravenous glucose supplementation and resume solely oral feedings after clearance by the
     pediatrician or neonatologist.

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                 153

Hyperglycemia in a newborn refers to a blood glucose level greater than 125 mg/dL or a plasma glucose level
greater than 150 mg/dL (Kurtoglu et al., 2019). Before the development of the pancreas and beta cells, the insulin
receptors are not mature, and insulin production and secretion remain low. Neonatal hyperglycemia may be seen in
preterm babies following bouts of hypoglycemia resulting from glucose and lipid infusion. Hyperglycemia increases
the preterm infant's susceptibility to infection, oxidative stress, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, prolonged
hospitalization, retinopathy, and mortality (Kurtoglu et al., 2019). Continuous monitoring remains important during
this situation. Treatment includes decreasing the rate of glucose administration and adjusting the rate of insulin
administration to keep the plasma glucose level between 150 and 200 mg/dL (Kurtoglu et al., 2019).

     CLINICAL TIP

 Macrosomia

  Infants with macrosomia require lab work and close monitoring after birth for respiratory and metabolic issues.
  Clinical evaluation of the infant's respiratory effort following delivery is vital because meconium aspiration (when
  the newborn breathes in a mixture of stool and amniotic fluid during delivery) and transient tachypnea are more
  frequently seen in infants with macrosomia. Blood work should also be drawn immediately after delivery. These
  infants are at risk for hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, increased bilirubin (due to increased
  hemolysis and inefficient enterohepatic circulation), and polycythemia.

Childhood

A child's growth, health, and development depend on a functioning endocrine system. The hormones act as
chemical messengers to control physical functions and physiologic development, including growth, metabolism,
sexual development, and other physical functions. As children undergo critical and rapid alterations, the main
hormonal signals are sent from the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. These two endocrine organs stimulate the
production and release of specific hormones that target the other endocrine glands.

A child's endocrine system goes through many phases as it is stimulated during the growth and development of the
thyroid, adrenal glands, pancreas, and gonads (testes in males and ovaries in females). The hormones are necessary
for optimal development as the child prepares for puberty (a stage of development in which sexual maturation and
reproduction capabilities refine and mature). The pituitary gland produces growth hormone, which plays an integral
role in the child's growth. Insulin-like growth factors (IGF) play a role in mediating growth hormones; both growth
hormone and IGF are peptide hormones that effect growth, maintain bone mass, and aid in cellular differentiation
(Caputo et al., 2021).

Growth hormone and IGF promote bone and tissue growth, adequate nutrients, and hormone balance, which all
play integral roles in overall growth and development across the lifespan (Caputo et al., 2021). Without IGF, the
utilization of nutrients at the cellular and tissue levels would be compromised. Growth hormone and IGF maintain a
correlational relationship with insulin secretion, leading to the possibility that growth hormone and IGF affect
carbohydrate metabolism (Caputo et al., 2021). IGF enhances insulin sensitivity because it prompts glucose uptake.

Dietary guidelines for this age group recommend plant-based fiber because it incorporates amino acids that impact
nutrient metabolism and absorption. Protein (lean meat and dairy products) and amino acids are essential for
healthy growth and development because they play an anabolic role similar to that of growth hormone and IGF. The
recommendation is 5-20% for children ages 2-3 and 10-30% for older children and adolescents (U.S. Department
of Agriculture, 2020).

Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System During Childhood
Children are not immune to endocrine dysfunction. The nurse must recognize that proper balanced nutrition is vital
in supporting optimal endocrine function and development in children and across the lifespan. Children require
balanced nutrition to support the production and regulation of hormones (Caputo et al., 2021; U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 2020). Proteins are the building blocks of neurotransmitters and hormones. Amino acids used to
construct proteins stimulate growth hormone and IGF secretion.

A balanced diet includes a wide selection of nutrient-rich foods. When children do not get the proper nutrition they
need, they may be diagnosed with failure to thrive, meaning their weight gain is significantly below that of other
154  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     children of the same age and sex. A mix of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats
     encourages growth, development, and proper endocrine function (Caputo et al., 2021). The U.S. Department of
     Agriculture recommends that children consume 2 or 3 servings of vegetables per day, 2 or 3 servings of fruit, 3
     servings of dairy products, 4-6 oz of lean proteins per day, and limited sugary, processed, and fried foods (Figure
     8.4). Fruits and vegetables provide many anti-inflammatory and vital vitamins and nutrients for proper endocrine
     function. Diets high in protein increase growth hormone and IGF secretion levels, ensuring adequate growth (Caputo
     et al, 2021). Protein comes from lean meats, poultry, fish, eggs, dairy, legumes, and plant-based protein sources
     such as tofu.

     FIGURE 8.4 A breakfast that includes fruits, whole grain, and dairy can be fun and encourage children to meet recommended daily
     nutritional guidelines. (credit: "Breakfast for kids: `Berry Bears'" by Ritas Safo/Flickr, Public Domain)

     Healthy fats include avocados, seeds, nuts, and plant-based oils. These fats aid in hormone production and remain a
     supportive element of brain development.

     Carbohydrates should be mainly whole grains, such as oats, brown rice, whole wheat bread, and quinoa. Refined
     sugars and processed foods should be avoided. These recommended carbohydrate options allow for slower energy
     release and limit blood glucose spikes while providing sustained energy. Children need micronutrients such as
     calcium, vitamin D, iron, zinc, selenium, and iodine for proper endocrine health. These micronutrients are found in a
     variety of fruits and vegetables. These recommendations are designed for the general population, but clients
     diagnosed with a medical condition may need a referral to a registered dietitian. The National Institutes of Health
     Office of Dietary Supplements provides recommendations on micronutrient intake by age (https://openstax.org/r/
     odnihgovfact).

     Childhood Obesity and Malnutrition
     Obesity in childhood is common, occurring in approximately 17% of youth ages 10-17 (Robert Wood Johnson
     Foundation, 2023). Although such children look overnourished, the opposite is true (Kobylinska et al., 2022).
     Malnutrition occurs when the body either does not receive sufficient nutrients or is unable to absorb essential
     nutrients. The individual's body composition changes, and functions are impaired (Kobylinska et al., 2022). Obesity
     and malnutrition share a paradoxical relationship. Although obese children receive an abundance of calories, these
     calories may lack essential nutrients to promote daily performance, encourage proper growth and development, and
     encourage overall bodily homeostasis. Moreover, the child with obesity cannot fully absorb the essential nutrients
     because of systemic inflammation (Kobylinska et al., 2022).

     Malnutrition in children with obesity may result from poor dietary choices (nutrient-poor foods), sedentary lifestyles,
     socioeconomic factors (limited access to healthy and wholesome foods), or lack of nutritional education. These

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Endocrine Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                  155

children are at increased risk for developing chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and
metabolic syndrome. Addressing this condition requires the collective efforts of family, caregivers, health care
providers, nurses, dietitians, and communities.

Childhood: Precocious Puberty
Precocious puberty, also known as early development of secondary sexual characteristics, begins before the age of
8 years in females and 9 years in males (Breehl & Caban, 2023). Precocious puberty may be caused by many
different endocrine-related factors, including obesity (Soliman et al., 2022). Several correlational studies show high-
caloric intake with early puberty onset (Soliman et al., 2022). For example, excessive weight or obesity in childhood
has a correlational relationship with the development of precocious puberty (Chen et al., 2017). The mechanism of
the link between obesity and precocious puberty is still under investigation.

Adolescence

Many changes occur within the endocrine system during adolescence. As puberty progresses in adolescence, sexual
maturation and reproduction capabilities refine and mature; these capabilities define puberty (Breehl & Caban,
2023). The primary physiological function of puberty is the production of mature adults capable of sexual
reproduction. Hormonal changes trigger the onset of puberty, which occurs between the ages of 8 and 13 years in
females and 9 and 14 years in males. The physical changes associated with puberty in females include breast
development, menarche, and growth of pubic and axillary hair. In males, the changes include genitalia development,
voice deepening, increasing height, and growth of pubic hair.

The endocrine glands involved in puberty include the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, adrenal glands, ovaries, and
testes. All of the hormones affect nearly every organ system in the body. For example, in the musculoskeletal
system, the muscles grow; the circulatory and respiratory systems see rapid growth. The nervous system is
influenced by hormonal changes as well. The increase in estrogen and testosterone affects the limbic system
through receptor binding, stimulating the sex drive and increasing the emotional roller coaster (Breehl & Caba,
2023). Children might undergo these changes earlier in life (precocious puberty) or experience delayed puberty
(after age 13 in females or age 14 in males).

Impact of Nutrition on the Endocrine System During Adolescence
Nutritional recommendations are crucial for adolescents transitioning from childhood into sexual maturity (Soliman
et al., 2022). The rapid changes and increasing energy demand for protein and micronutrients remain necessary for
growth and development during this stage of life. Food insecurity, obesity, and body dysmorphia prevent this age
group from getting the necessary nutrients. Evidence-based data supporting dietary recommendations for
adolescents going through puberty are limited (Soliman et al., 2022). The Dietary Guidelines for Americans
2020-2025 recommend 3 servings of vegetables, 2-2½ servings of fruits, 7-10 servings of grains, 3 servings of
dairy products, and 5-7 oz of lean protein (such as chicken, poultry, and seafood) per day (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 2020). The recommendations also include limiting fried, fatty, and processed foods.

     TRENDING TODAY

 Type 2 Diabetes on the Rise in Adolescents

 As you work through this Trending Today feature, recall that nurses should rely on evidence-based practice
 (EBP), which uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal evidence, to inform their practice and care of clients.
 Nurses should encourage clients to evaluate nutritional information on social media with the same scrutiny.

  Type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents is on the rise due to an increase in childhood obesity (Teska, 2023).
  Nurses need to consider nutritional aspects to effectively impact childhood obesity.

  On social media, adolescents may view numerous pop-up ads about food and nutrition, which may impact their
  dietary choices. Research by Chung et al. (2021) addresses the impact of food advertisement via social media on
  the dietary choices adolescents make.

  First, read the report Adolescent Peer Influence on Eating Behaviors via Social Media: Scoping Review
  (https://openstax.org/r/adolescent) (Chung et al., 2021).
156  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

       Next, take some time to review the following social media content and think critically about the information
       provided and its appeal to adolescent clients:

         · @healthywellnesstips (https://openstax.org/r/healthywellnesstipsinsta) (Instagram)
         · Kids Nutrition & Recipes (https://openstax.org/r/kidsnutrition) (Facebook)
         · Mayo Clinic Minute: How to help overweight kids get healthier (https://openstax.org/r/mayo) (YouTube)

       Now answer the following questions:

       1. What is the purpose of the social media content you viewed or read?
       2. How might this social media content influence the dietary choices of adolescents?
       3. If a client came to you with this information, how would you educate them to critically use these sources?
       4. How does the social media content you reviewed support or refute the findings in the review by Chung et al.?
       5. What alternative sources would you recommend to clients to educate them about this topic?

     The nurse should perform a thorough nutritional assessment by asking the adolescent client about their favorite
     foods, the foods they consume both at home and when they are with their peers, the number of servings of nutrient-
     dense foods they eat each day, and ways that social media may be influencing their dietary habits. Adolescents who
     do not consume enough nutrient-rich foods may be at risk for deficiencies of iron, folate, vitamin B6, and vitamin
     B12, which might delay their growth and development, as well as puberty.

     Adulthood

     The human body in adulthood continues to rely on the homeostasis, metabolic requirements, development, and
     reproduction function that the endocrine system provides through the secretion of hormones (Campbell & Jialal,
     2022). Physiologic changes continue as adolescents transition into young adults and then into adulthood. These
     changes include peak physical growth; sexual maturation; brain development; and reproductive, metabolism, and
     hormonal stability. Women stop growing earlier than men do, between 20 and 35 years of age, whereas men
     continue to grow into adulthood and reach peak physical strength and stamina between 30 and 40 years of age.

     Adults also reach sexual maturation. Sexual maturation and reproductive system markers include regular menstrual
     cycles for females and peak testosterone production for males. Secondary sexual characteristics such as breast
     development in females and facial hair growth in males reach full development. Growth hormone continues to play a
     role in adulthood, as male skeletal growth is typically completed during this stage of life. Growth hormone
     contributes to muscle growth, repair, and maintenance. Thyroid hormones, including T4 and T3, play a role in
     metabolism, heart function, and energy regulation. Insulin regulates blood glucose levels; during adulthood,
     nondiabetic adults respond effectively to the insulin their bodies produce, allowing them to fully use the
     carbohydrates consumed and aid in the metabolism process.

     As in all stages of life, the body continuously attempts to achieve homeostasis. This hormonal balance is crucial for
     overall health, reproductive function, mood regulation, and metabolism. Hormonal changes vary based on
     individuals' genetics, lifestyle, and overall health. Nutrition integrates within the system to help it reach
     homeostasis.

     Nutrition plays a pivotal role in the health of adults for optimal endocrine function and prevention of endocrine
     dysfunction (Caputo et al., 2021). The role of healthy nutrients includes overall health and endocrine disorder
     prevention; energy-based performance; weight management; bone, mental health, and cognitive function; healthy
     aging; and disease management and healing. A balanced diet includes whole grains, lean protein, fruits, vegetables,
     healthy fats, and water. Micronutrient foods include antioxidant-rich foods, containing vitamins A, C, D, zinc, iodine,
     selenium, iron, and magnesium, which decrease inflammation and the inflammatory process, containing vitamins A,
     C, D, zinc, iodine, selenium, iron, and magnesium. Foods that contain these important micronutrients include leafy
     green vegetables, citrus fruits, berries, nuts, seeds, lean meats, fatty fish, dairy, and whole grains. The nurse should
     advise individuals to avoid processed and refined sugary foods and beverages to encourage optimal endocrine
     function. Heavily processed foods contribute to inflammation, insulin resistance, and hormonal imbalances.

     Later Adulthood

     Age-related changes affect every endocrine organ (van den Beld et al., 2018). As the function of the organ system

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses                                                                         157

begins to decline with age, other factors, such as inflammation and caloric intake, play a role in endocrine function.
A study by van den Beld et al. (2018) found that regular aging changes were associated with an increase in the
concentration of serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH); but alterations in TSH concentration remained
dependent on iodine status. T3 blood concentrations fluctuate depending on the individual. The overall decline in
thyroid hormone activity resulted from hormone metabolism changes, inflammation, and energy restriction. Further
research is needed to develop age-specific hormone reference ranges to guide health care providers in hormone
replacement therapy (van den Beld et al., 2018).

The hypothalamic-pituitary-somatotropic axis remains responsible for growth hormone secretion into the blood
from the pituitary gland (van den Beld et al., 2018). Average age-related growth hormone secretion decline is called
somatopause. Somatopause is associated with adipose tissue increase and leads to the decline of growth hormone
and insulin-like growth factor after puberty.

Undernutrition occurs as normal aging brings appetite suppression and limited food intake (Molfino et al., 2021; van
den Beld et al., 2018). The endocrine system plays a role in appetite suppression and anorexia. Hormonal changes
include increases in cholecystokinin, leptin, and cytokines and a decrease in ghrelin. Appetite suppression in older
adults revolves around the increase in levels of cholecystokinin. Nurses and health care providers combat
cholecystokinin with an antagonist to stimulate the appetite and increase nutritional consumption. Frail older adults
can experience diminished leptin levels, while healthy older adults can have increased concentration levels of
circulating leptin (van den Beld et al., 2018). Aging is also associated with glucose intolerance, elevated insulin
levels, and vitamin and mineral deficiencies.

For older adults, consuming enough protein to minimize age-associated loss in muscle mass is important. The
recommendation for protein intake includes 23-31 oz per week at the minimum or 35% of total calories (Molfino et
al., 2021; U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2020). Continuous anorexia in frail older adults negatively impacts their
body composition; to combat this problem, early nutritional intervention improves outcomes and quality of life
(Molfino et al., 2021). Like all age groups, older adults should strive to choose nutrient-rich foods. The ability to
absorb Vitamin B12 decreases with age and the use of certain medications, so ensuring adequate intake of this
vitamin is of particular concern (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2020).

8.2 Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 8.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on endocrine illness.
  · 8.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on acute exacerbation of chronic endocrine illness.

Nutritional Requirements for Optimal Endocrine Health

When hormones are out of balance--either an excess or deficiency of a certain hormone--an endocrine disorder is to
blame, and such fluctuations can lead to various types of systemic dysfunction (Rodolico et al., 2020). Endocrine
disorders are categorized as either primary or secondary. Primary endocrine disorders occur due to an imbalance in
the hormone production from the original endocrine gland; for example, primary hyperthyroidism originates in the
thyroid gland. In addition, because the endocrine system has a master gland (the pituitary gland) that regulates
hormones based on blood levels, disrupted hormone levels can cause secondary endocrine disorders, meaning that
the disorder does not come from the original organ but from the pituitary gland. For example, secondary
hyperthyroidism results from a TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma.

Nutrition is a significant factor in the development, management, and progression of various endocrine-related
disorders. Nutrients may either aggravate or alleviate endocrine symptoms or conditions.

Diabetes
The pancreas is the endocrine gland responsible for the production and secretion of insulin and glucagon. The
pancreas contains islets of Langerhans, containing insulin-producing beta cells and glucagon-secreting alpha cells.
These hormones fluctuate based on blood glucose levels, and an imbalance can result in negative effects. The most
notable endocrine disorder is diabetes, which is one of the most common endocrine conditions in the United States
(Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, n.d.; Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). The subclassifications for diabetes
158  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     clinically define each type of the disorder. The categories include type 1 diabetes (insulin-dependent diabetes),
     type 2 diabetes (noninsulin-dependent diabetes), and gestational diabetes (Table 8.2).

     Diabetes     Metabolic Process    Medical                    Insulin Type      Medication       Dietary
     Type                              Treatment                                      · Metformin    Recommendations
     Gestational  Pregnancy-related                                 · Long-
     diabetes     changes result in      · Medication                   acting and                     · Fruits and
                  dysfunction of         · Insulin                      short-                             vegetables
     Type 1       beta cells and                                        acting
                  resistance to          · Insulin                                                     · Lean proteins
                  insulin by cells.                                 · Long-                            · Low glycemic
                  Beta cells are                                        acting and
                  destroyed and                                         short-                             index foods
                  produce no insulin.                                   acting
                                                                                    · Short-acting   · Fruits and
                                                                                       insulin:         vegetables
                                                                                        Regular
                                                                                           human     · Lean proteins
                                                                                           insulin   · Low glycemic
                                                                                        Insulin
                                                                                           lispro       index foods

                                                                                    · Intermediate/
                                                                                       Long-acting
                                                                                       insulin:
                                                                                        Insulin
                                                                                           NPH
                                                                                        Insulin
                                                                                           glargine
                                                                                        Insulin
                                                                                           determir
                                                                                        Insulin
                                                                                           degludec

     Type 2       · Beta cells         · Medication               · May or          · Stimulate      · Fruits and
                     produce                                         may not           insulin          vegetables
                     insulin but                                     need              production
                     with limited                                    medication                      · Lean proteins
                     production.                                                    · Meglitinides   · Low glycemic
                                                                  · Dietary         · Sulfonylureas
                  · Beta cells do                                    changes        · Dipeptidyl-       index foods
                     not produce
                     enough insulin                                                    peptidase 4
                     to meet                                                           inhibitors
                     metabolic                                                      · SGLT2
                     demand.                                                           inhibitors
                                                                                    · GLP-1
                  · Beta cells                                                         agonists
                     produce
                     enough
                     insulin, but
                     the cells
                     develop
                     resistance.

     TABLE 8.2 Types of Diabetes, the Involved Metabolic Processes, and Possible Treatments

     Any of the subcategories of diabetes lead to the same clinical objective finding of hyperglycemia, which is defined as
     a fasting serum glucose level greater than 126 mg/dL, a random glucose level greater than 200 mg/dL, or a
     hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c) greater than 6.5% (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, n.d.; Sapra & Bhandari,

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses                                                                            159

2023). Many health care providers check clients' HbA1c levels when monitoring blood glucose control and dietary
modifications. Continuously elevated levels impair the beta-cell function of the pancreas, resulting in further
impaired insulin secretion (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023).

Type 1 diabetes results from the destruction of beta cells in the pancreas that eliminate the production and
secretion of insulin (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). This destruction of insulin-producing cells, usually secondary to an
autoimmune disease, results in a dramatic decrease of insulin and elevated glucose levels. The absence of insulin
puts the client at risk for complications involving vascular and neuropathic issues and death. Type 1 diabetes
requires both insulin injections and nutritional management.

Type 2 diabetes has a different etiology than type 1 diabetes and has more of an insidious onset, with layered causal
effects (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). In contrast to type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes results from a sensitivity or
resistance to the insulin the body creates. The difference is that in type 1 diabetes, the pancreas no longer creates
insulin, so insulin injections are necessary for life, whereas insulin is still produced in type 2 diabetes. However, the
circulating insulin in type 2 diabetes does not respond as it should (attributed to fatty acids and proinflammatory
cytokines causing glucose transportation challenges). Long-term hyperglycemia results in continued damage to the
small blood vessels and the potential development of chronic complications such as kidney failure, blindness,
neuropathy, and amputation. Some risk factors for the development of type 2 diabetes include obesity and the
decline of organ function or receptor cells associated with aging. Other endocrinopathies, such as acromegaly and
Cushing's syndrome, are associated with diabetes and glucose intolerance, so the health care provider must assess
for these in the client with diabetes.

Nutrition is the building block for disease management and care plans. Optimal diabetes management includes
strict monitoring of carbohydrate intake and blood glucose levels (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). To ensure optimal
endocrine health, individuals should eat a balanced and nutrient-rich diet that includes complex carbohydrates,
fiber-rich foods, lean proteins, and healthy fats (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et al., 2021; Sapra & Bhandari,
2023). Portion control and mindful eating guide weight management and overall glycemic control in this client
population.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Sarah delivered her baby 4 years ago. She has returned to the clinic for an annual exam. Before the examination, her
primary health care provider ordered blood work to check Sarah's metabolic processes and endocrine function.
Sarah's HbA1c result is 7.7%. Sarah weighs 167 lb and is 5 feet tall.

    5. The nurse recognizes that the test result indicates which condition?
         a. Hyperthyroidism
         b. Type 1 diabetes
         c. Type 2 diabetes
         d. Hypoparathyroidism

    6. Which of the following dietary recommendations should the nurse reinforce during this visit?
         a. Lean proteins, fruits, vegetables, and plenty of starchy potatoes
         b. Lean proteins, fruits, vegetables, and low glycemic index foods
         c. High glycemic index foods with limited proteins, fruits, and vegetables
         d. No dietary recommendations, just medications

Thyroid Disease
Thyroid disorders refer to abnormal function of the thyroid (Figure 8.5). The gland plays a vital role in regulating
metabolic functions in the body through the production and secretion of thyroid hormones. Thyroid disorders result
from insufficient or excessive production or secretion of thyroid hormones or the hormones that stimulate the
160  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     thyroid to perform those functions. Treatment options for thyroid disorders depend on the specific condition and the
     etiology. Some medical interventions include hormone replacement therapy, antithyroid medications, radioactive
     iodine therapy, or surgical removal of the gland. The nurse should have a basic comprehension of thyroid function
     and the integral role of dietary factors.

     FIGURE 8.5 The butterfly-shaped thyroid gland is located in the front of the neck. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and
     Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Hyperthyroidism is defined as a low or suppressed level of TSH alongside elevated levels of T3 and T4 (Mathew et
     al., 2023). If the T3 level is high and the TSH level is low, but the T4 level is normal, the condition is known as T3
     toxicosis. When TSH is low but the T3 and T4 levels are normal, the condition is known as subclinical
     hyperthyroidism. The causes of hyperthyroidism include Graves' disease, toxic multinodular goiter, toxic adenoma,
     iodine-induced pituitary adenoma, and iatrogenic or drug-related causes. Graves' disease is the most common
     cause and is associated with autoimmune disease. Graves' disease triggered by autoimmune causes is mostly likely
     to develop in the younger population; it is more likely associated with iodine deficiency and toxic multinodular goiter
     when seen in older adults. The condition is more common in women and is associated with micronutrient
     deficiencies, including iodine and selenium. Iodine and selenium are involved in thyroid hormone development, so
     inadequate amounts increase an individual's risk for thyroid complications.

     Hypothyroidism is categorized as primary or secondary (Patil et al., 2023). Primary hypothyroidism results when the
     gland produces inadequate amounts of T4. Secondary hypothyroidism, or central hypothyroidism, results from
     dysfunction at the pituitary or hypothalamus level. Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of primary
     hypothyroidism in countries with insufficient iodine. Iodine is a vital mineral for the production of thyroid hormones.
     Adequate intake of iodine allows the thyroid to function effectively and prevent thyroid dysfunction such as
     hypothyroidism or goiter development.

     In the United States, where iodine is in sufficient supply, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, an autoimmune disease, is the
     leading cause (Patil et al., 2023). Other causes include medications such as lithium and amiodarone, radioactive
     iodine (treatment for Graves' disease), surgical interventions, radiotherapeutics, pituitary tumors, hypothalamus-
     compromising tumors, TRH resistance, brain radiation therapy, and cancer drugs. Postpartum thyroiditis, a transient
     autoimmune condition similar to Hashimoto's thyroiditis, affects approximately 8% of pregnant women the first year
     after delivery (Rad & Deluxe, 2023). Optimal well-being and thyroid function can be maintained when clients strive
     toward nutritional balance. A diet that includes iodine incorporates fish, dairy products, and iodized salt (Mathew et
     al., 2023; National Institutes of Health, 2022a).

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Endocrine Illnesses                                                                          161

Acromegaly
Acromegaly is a disorder caused by too much growth hormone (Adigun et al., 2023; NIDDK, 2020) and results in
overgrowth of bones in the face, hands, and feet in response to excessive levels. The primary causes relate to an
increase in growth hormone (GH), with the most common cause relating to a somatotroph GH-secreting adenoma of
the anterior pituitary gland. Other primary causes are related to familial conditions, such as multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1, familial acromegaly, McCune-Albright syndrome, and the Carney complex (Adigun et al., 2023).
Secondary causes are related to lymphoma, pancreatic-islet cell tumors, and excess growth related to specific
tumors or cancers. Clients with acromegaly may have a prominent forehead (and crease), brow, prognathism
(mandibular enlargement), macroglossia, thick eyelids, a large nose, a large lower lip, and voice deepening (Adigun
et al., 2023).

Nutrient and dietary patterns impact the GH and IGF changes that occur with acromegaly. Caputo et al. (2021)
concluded in their study that diets low in carbohydrates, such as a ketogenic diet (35 g of carbohydrates per day),
were associated with a decrease in IGF while allowing levels of GH to remain stable. For appropriate management of
their disease process, individuals with acromegaly should seek the advice of a registered dietitian when changing to
a ketogenic diet.

Dwarfism
Dwarfism is the medical term for short stature (Jain & Saber, 2023). There are two types of dwarfism based on the
client's physical appearance: proportionate short stature and disproportionate short stature. Proportionate stature
refers to the length of the client's limbs and trunk, which are symmetrically small, whereas disproportionate stature
describes a difference in length between a client's trunk or extremities. Dwarfism has many causes, including
familial inheritance, growth or puberty delay, bone disorders, systemic diseases, and idiopathic, endocrine, and
genetic causes.

When dwarfism results from an endocrine disorder, the growth hormones are deficient (Jain & Saber, 2023). The
hormones that promote chondrogenesis include GH, IGF, androgens, T3, and T4. Chondrogenesis impacts the
growth and development of vertebrae, cartilage, hyaline, fibrous, and elastic cartilage (Jain & Saber, 2023). The GH-
IGF-1 axis is the regulatory path for height. IGF is responsible for stimulation of bone elongation and soft tissue and
cartilage growth; low levels of IGF correlate with short stature.

Nutritional factors support the health and well-being of individuals with dwarfism. Calcium and vitamin D maintain
healthy bone growth. Because individuals with dwarfism have higher incidences of bone and joint issues, nurses
should educate these clients about adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D (Caputo et al., 2021; Jain & Saber
2023). Calcium and vitamin D sources include dairy and plant-based milk products, leafy green vegetables, and
fortified foods. Individuals can also obtain vitamin D through sun exposure and the intake of fatty fish.

Protein is necessary for growth and tissue repair and should make up 15% of an individual's daily caloric intake
(Caputo et al., 2021).

Addison's Disease
The adrenal glands have two parts, the cortex and the medulla, each producing different hormones (Allen & Sharma,
2023). The adrenal cortex releases cortisol, aldosterone, and androgenic steroids, and the medulla secretes
epinephrine and norepinephrine. The hypothalamus releases the corticotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates
the anterior pituitary gland to release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the adrenal cortex located within
the adrenal glands. Aldosterone is a hormone produced by the zona glomerulosa in the adrenal cortex. It plays a
role in blood pressure regulation and electrolyte maintenance through the absorption of sodium into the
bloodstream and the release of potassium into the urine (Allen & Sharma, 2023). Cortisol is a glucocorticoid
hormone produced in the zona fasciculata within the adrenal cortex that regulates fats, proteins, and carbohydrates
used in the body while also playing a role in suppressing inflammation, blood pressure regulation, bone formation,
and increasing blood glucose. Androgenic steroids are hormones produced in the zona reticularis of the adrenal
cortex, and these hormones remain the precursor for estrogens in the ovaries and androgens in the testes. The
adrenal medulla remains responsible for the hormone's epinephrine and norepinephrine, which work within the
body during stressful situations to stimulate the "fight-or-flight" response or the "rest-and-digest" response.

When the adrenal glands do not secrete enough (clinical definition less than 3 mcg/dL of cortisol levels with
elevated ACTH) adrenal hormones, the condition is known as adrenal insufficiency (Allen & Sharma, 2023; Munir et
162  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     al., 2023). Primary adrenal insufficiency is called Addison's disease, which occurs as a result of an autoimmune
     response that destroys the three layers of the adrenal cortex, limiting the production and excretion of hormones. If
     adrenal insufficiency occurs due to too much glucocorticoid administration, the disease is secondary adrenal
     insufficiency.

     Dietary recommendations are vital in people with primary adrenal insufficiency. The effects of Addison's disease can
     lead to an imbalance of sodium, so these clients require instruction regarding salt and sodium-rich foods. If a client
     reaches a state of adrenal crisis, they require hydrocortisone and intravenous saline infusions.

     Cushing's Syndrome
     When the adrenal cortex produces an abundance of cortisol (primary hypercortisolism), the condition is known as
     Cushing syndrome (Allen & Sharma, 2023; Chaudhry & Singh, 2023). Cortisol affects the transcription and
     translation of enzyme proteins that metabolize fats, glycogen, protein synthesis, and Krebs cycle while elevating
     blood glucose levels and increasing insulin resistance (Chaudhry & Singh, 2023). Clients with Cushing's syndrome
     often have comorbidities such as hypertension, peptic ulcer disease, or diabetes.

     Low-carbohydrate diets are recommended because they improve related conditions such as hyperglycemia, weight
     gain, hypertension, and insulin resistance (Dugandzic et al., 2022). Low-carbohydrate diets include 25-50 g of
     carbohydrates daily or around 5-10% of daily caloric intake. Clients on low-carbohydrate diets should avoid sugars,
     refined fats, and highly processed foods.

     Alternative Food and Supplement Options

     The endocrine system regulates bodily functions by producing and secreting varying hormones. A balanced diet
     remains the general foundation for supporting endocrine function. Some specific foods and nutritional supplements
     support the endocrine system and allow optimal function in individuals with endocrine disorders. Although many
     nutrients and supplements support the endocrine system whether or not an endocrine disorder is present, there is
     no one-size-fits-all plan. Individuals must tailor their nutritional needs based on factors such as health conditions.

     Diabetes
     The goals of nutrition in diabetes are to manage serum glucose levels, achieve or maintain body weight goals, and
     delay or prevent complications (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et al., 2021). Dietary adherence increases the
     client's quality of life and is the best preventive against potentially developing life-threatening complications. When
     teaching clients with diabetes, counseling them about nutrient-rich foods is as important as teaching them which
     foods to avoid. Clients are often taught to adjust insulin requirements to match consumption instead of focusing on
     fundamental diet instruction (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et al., 2021). Significant risks for complications
     associated with diabetes arise from poor dietary choices.

     Dietary intake for people with diabetes involves consideration of both macronutrients and micronutrients (Pancheva
     et al., 2021). Increasing daily water intake helps regulate blood glucose levels, maintains kidney function, prevents
     dehydration, and helps with weight loss (Sedaghat et al., 2021). Protein recommendations are 1-1.5 g/kg body
     weight per day or 15-20% of total daily calories consumed (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019). The client's kidney function or
     the presence of kidney disease needs assessment because most renal diets include protein restrictions.

     Fat recommendations include restricting saturated fats to less than 10% of daily intake and eating good fats such as
     fatty fish that contain omega-3 fatty acids, avocado, nuts, and nut butters (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et al.,
     2021). Saturated fats maintain a correlational relationship to cardiovascular disease in individuals with diabetes and
     are found in fast foods, red meat, and full-fat dairy foods. Saturated fat intake in the United States, including in
     children, is much higher than recommended (Pancheva et al., 2021). Nurses should teach clients to avoid or limit
     fried or fast foods, limit intake of saturated fats, use liquid vegetable oils, and consume 1 or more servings of
     omega-3 fats every day, such as fatty fish, walnuts, soybean oil, ground flax seeds, or flaxseed oil.

     Carbohydrate intake has the most substantial influence on glucose control (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019).
     Recommendations for carbohydrate consumption sometimes fluctuate as differences of expert opinion do not agree
     on low carbohydrate versus average carbohydrate intake for diabetes maintenance and weight loss. The definition of
     low carbohydrate varies among experts and is not recommended for pregnant or lactating women. The current
     carbohydrate recommendations include 45-50% of the daily intake of carbohydrates (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019;
     Pancheva et al., 2021). Experts agree that people with diabetes should avoid consuming sucrose (table sugar) and

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                                                               163

sugar-sweetened beverages (particularly those that include high-fructose corn syrup) because they provide "empty"
calories and can contribute to weight gain (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019). Another recommendation is to consume
fructose as a monosaccharide in the form of fruits, some vegetables, and honey. The daily fiber recommendation is
20-35 g/day. Fiber can be found in raw vegetables and minimally refined grain (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et
al., 2021). Total fiber intake includes both dietary fiber and functional fiber. While dietary fiber is considered a
carbohydrate, the lignin found in plants is not readily digested by the stomach or absorbed within the
gastrointestinal tract. Functional fiber remains responsible for the physiologic benefits of fiber. Diets high in fiber are
beneficial for individuals with many chronic disorders, including diabetes.

Vitamins A, E, C, and D are not associated with glycemic control or prevention of complications. However, they do
limit oxidative stress and systemic inflammation in association with immune system benefits and inflammatory
response. Sodium should be limited to 2300 mg/day to prevent the known correlation between the development of
cardiovascular disease and hypertension associated with diabetes (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019).

Probiotics are "good" bacteria associated with fermented foods such as yogurt, kefir, and kimchi. Positive
correlational studies show that with probiotic consumption, some individuals saw improvement in glycemic and
serum lipid levels (Gray & Threlkeld, 2019).

Hyperthyroidism and Hypothyroidism
The National Institutes of Health [NIH] (2022a) recommends a varying dose of iodine that increases with age as well
as during pregnancy. Processed canned foods may be high in sodium but do not contain iodized salt. Some
multivitamins include iodine-containing kelp (seaweed). Some plant foods such as soy, cabbage, broccoli,
cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts contain iodine. Too much iodine leads to thyroid gland inflammation, so nurses
should monitor clients for nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, weak pulse, and coma (NIH, 2022a). Selenium deficiency or
inadequate consumption can lead to thyroid dysfunction (NIH, 2022b). Selenium is added to many dietary
supplements but is naturally present in Brazil nuts, seafood, organ meats, cereals, grains, and dairy products.
Selenium acts as a protective mechanism against autoimmune thyroid dysfunction. Antioxidants and other
micronutrients produce anti-inflammatory effects in the thyroid, and a diet high in fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts,
fish, complex carbohydrates, extra virgin olive oil, and plant-based oils is recommended for thyroid health during
times of thyroid dysfunction (Bellastella et al., 2022; Osowiecka and Myskowska-Ryciak, 2023). Other micronutrient
recommendations include vitamin D, vitamin B complex, vitamin A, vitamin C, magnesium, folic acid, zinc, iron, and
selenium.

Nurses should also teach clients to limit saturated fatty acids, refined and processed foods, and sugar because
these induce inflammation (Bellastella et al., 2022; Mathew et al., 2023; Osowiecka & Myskowska-Ryciak, 2023).
Some foods cause goiter, or an enlarged thyroid gland, and thereby interfere with thyroid function (Can & Rehman,
2023). Cabbage, broccoli, and soy have been potentially linked to goiter development (Bellastella et al., 2022;
Mathew et al., 2023; Osowiecka & Myskowska-Ryciak, 2023). If thyroid disease is secondary to another condition,
dietary requirements should address both conditions. This emphasizes the importance of a thorough holistic
assessment that includes nutrition.

8.3 Treatments and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 8.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments used for endocrine disorders.
  · 8.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      endocrine disorders.

Health Assessment Considerations

Not all foods are able to provide necessary nutrients, especially for individuals with endocrine disorders. Nutrition
education plays a direct role in optimal health and wellness as well as in the management of disease processes
because foods can either enhance or inhibit wellness in the endocrine system. Diet instruction requires careful
explanation of scientific concepts in the context of the client's specific situation. These concepts can seem
overwhelming to the client who must balance evidence-based recommendations with real-world conditions. Clients'
food choices are not just by their knowledge of nutrition, but their ability to obtain and prepare nutritious foods that
164  8 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

     align with their culture and lifestyle.

     Drug-Food Interactions Associated with Treatments for Endocrine Disorders

     Endocrine-related medical interventions and medications are used to manage various endocrine disorders and
     conditions (Campbell & Jialal, 2022). These treatment options often involve the use of medications that interact
     with nutrition. Certain medications used in endocrine care affect nutrient absorption, metabolism, and utilization.
     These medications may also have specific recommendations regarding time frames with the food interaction.
     Nurses must understand these interactions to educate clients to avoid complications, promote optimal treatment
     outcomes, and ensure overall well-being.

     Diabetes
     Diabetes is an endocrine disorder that involves the amount of insulin the body creates, secretes, and utilizes (Sapra
     & Bhandari, 2023). The medications used to manage diabetes, such as insulin and oral antidiabetic medications,
     require careful observation, monitoring, and coordination with meals and carbohydrate intake to ensure proper
     blood sugar levels (Chen et al., 2020; Gray & Threlkeld, 2019; Pancheva et al., 2021; Rasmussen et al., 2020). When
     individuals take insulin incorrectly such that the dosage is not appropriate for the given amount of carbohydrates
     consumed, the individual can enter a state of either hypoglycemia (low serum blood glucose level) or hyperglycemia
     (high serum blood glucose level; Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). Health care providers may prescribe antidiabetic
     medications such as metformin to manage type 2 diabetes (Sapra & Bhandari, 2023). These medications need to be
     taken with meals to limit gastrointestinal adverse effects. Studies indicate that people who take metformin are at
     risk for vitamin B12 deficiency (American Diabetes Association [ADA], n.d.). These individuals therefore need regular
     laboratory testing for B12 deficiency.

     Clients with diabetes need to understand how alcohol consumption affects their blood glucose levels. If an
     individual with diabetes drinks alcohol on an empty stomach or in excess, the liver cannot release stored glucose,
     resulting in hypoglycemia. Alcohol also impairs the body's capability to indicate low blood glucose levels; for
     example, the individual may not experience the usual signs and symptoms of low blood glucose, such as shakiness
     or sweating. Alternatively, alcoholic drinks that contain sugary mixes potentially increase blood glucose levels. If
     clients with diabetes choose to drink alcohol, strict glucose monitoring and moderate consumption are
     recommended because excessive alcohol use is associated with increased liver, nerve, and heart damage. Some
     antidiabetic medications, such as sulfonylureas or insulin, interact with alcohol and increase the blood
     glucose-lowering effects of the medication, leading to hypoglycemia.

     Some supplements, including chromium and niacin, may interact with diabetes medications and lead to
     hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia (ADA, n.d.). Chromium deficiency can increase blood glucose levels. In a client with
     kidney disease, chromium supplementation may further damage the kidneys (ADA, n.d.). Some individuals may take
     niacin to increase their "good" cholesterol levels; nurses should be aware that niacin can raise fasting glucose levels
     (ADA, n.d.). Individuals with diabetes should consult their health care provider before adding supplements to their
     daily dietary intake.

     Thyroid Disorders
     Thyroid conditions require individuals to take thyroid medications. Some medications for treating thyroid conditions
     are associated with potential nutritional interactions (Wiesner et al., 2021). Levothyroxine should be taken at a
     consistent time in the morning on an empty stomach 1 hour before a meal. Foods that interfere with absorption
     include soy, calcium supplements, and some fruit juices, including grapefruit, orange, and apple juice (Wiesner et
     al., 2021). Some clients who are prescribed levothyroxine concurrently take calcium to avoid osteoporosis, so the
     nurse should advise these clients to avoid taking calcium, as well as iron, supplements within 4 hours of taking
     levothyroxine because these supplements also reduce absorption of the medication (DailyMed, 2023).

     Parathyroid Disorder
     Calcium and loop diuretics balance sodium levels (Ellison, 2019). Loop diuretics inhibit the
     sodium-potassium-chloride transporter and increase calcium excretion. Furosemide increases calcium excretion
     and plasma parathyroid hormone (PTH). This hormone is created in the four small parathyroid glands located near
     the thyroid. It regulates the homeostasis of calcium, vitamin D, and phosphate in the bloodstream, maintaining bone
     stability (Khan et al., 2022). PTH responds to low calcium levels detected in the blood and stimulates the production

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                                                        165

of vitamin D and calcitriol. The increase in calcium excretion from loop diuretics leads to the parathyroid gland
decreasing the production of PTH. PTH, as the negative-feedback loop, signals the parathyroid glands to stop
releasing PTH. A correlation has been noted between furosemide users and increased risk for hip fractures in the
older adult female population (Mohn et al., 2018). Older adults absorb less calcium and are at an increased risk for
fractures.

Thiazide diuretics affect the distal tubules, leading to increased calcium reabsorption (Mohn et al., 2018). A
correlation study showed that individuals who took hydrochlorothiazide also had a decrease in urinary calcium in
hyperparathyroidism, with no change in PTH observed (Mohn et al., 2018). However, more research is
recommended in the field of thiazide diuretics and risk factors for fractures in the older population.
166 8 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary                                                   Clients with this condition must closely monitor
                                                                  their diet to limit carbohydrates and manage their
  · Nutrition plays a fundamental role in human                   caloric intake to regulate their blood glucose
      growth and development, beginning in utero and              levels.
      extending throughout the lifespan.                      · Clients with thyroid disorders must manage their
                                                                  intake of iodine-rich foods, selenium, and other
  · Pregnancy-related conditions that can impact the              key micronutrients to help regulate their thyroid
      pregnant client's nutrition and affect the fetus            function.
      include hyperemesis gravidarum and gestational          · Clients with acromegaly may benefit from a
      diabetes.                                                   ketogenic diet.
                                                              · Diet plays a significant role for individuals with
  · Appropriate nutrition and a properly functioning              endocrine disorders. However, some medications
      endocrine system are essential for growth and               used to treat these conditions can affect nutrient
      development through puberty for children and                absorption.
      adolescents.                                            · Clients with diabetes must balance food intake
                                                                  with insulin or oral antidiabetic medication
  · During adulthood, the endocrine system works to               administration to decrease the risk for
      maintain homeostasis but eventually begins to               hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia.
      exhibit age-related declines. Adults must adjust        · Clients taking levothyroxine for hypothyroidism
      their nutritional intake accordingly to decrease the        must take the medication on an empty stomach
      risk for developing diabetes and other endocrine            and avoid certain foods that can inhibit its
      disorders.                                                  absorption.
                                                              · Clients taking calcium and loop diuretics are at risk
  · During later adulthood, individuals must maintain             for fractures because these medications decrease
      adequate nutritional intake to counteract                   calcium and parathyroid hormone levels.
      decreased appetite.
                                                                mg/dL
  · Endocrine disorders develop either from                 hyperthyroidism a clinically abnormal, elevated level
      malfunction of the endocrine gland responsible for
      secreting a particular hormone (primary disorder)         of thyroid hormone in the blood; characterized by an
      or from pituitary gland malfunction (secondary            increased metabolic rate, excessive body heat and
      disorder).                                                sweating, diarrhea, weight loss, tremors, and
                                                                increased heart rate
  · Diabetes is the most common endocrine disorder.         hypoglycemia a blood glucose level at or less than 40
                                                                mg/dL
Key Terms                                                   hypothyroidism a clinically abnormal, low level of
                                                                thyroid hormone in the blood; characterized by low
acromegaly a disorder that results in overgrowth of             metabolic rate, weight gain, cold extremities,
    bones in the face, hands, and feet in response to           constipation, reduced libido, menstrual
    abnormally high levels of growth hormone                    irregularities, and reduced mental activity
                                                            insulin-like growth factor (IGF) a peptide hormone
dwarfism short stature secondary to a genetic or                that promotes bone and tissue growth
    medical condition                                       malnutrition occurs when the body either does not
                                                                receive sufficient nutrients or is unable to absorb
gestational diabetes a disorder that produces                   essential nutrients, resulting in body composition
    glucose intolerance during pregnancy as the result          changes and impaired functions
    of dysfunction or delayed response of the beta cells    puberty a stage of development in which sexual
    to blood glucose                                            maturation and reproduction capabilities refine and
                                                                mature
glycemic index a system that ranks carbohydrate-            relaxin a hormone secreted by the corpus luteum and
    containing foods on a scale from 1 to 100 based on          then by the placenta to help prepare the body for
    their ability to raise blood sugar levels quickly or
    significantly

human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) a hormone
    that stimulates the corpus luteum to produce the
    progesterone necessary for promoting and
    maintaining a growing fetus; reduces the pregnant
    individual's immune function to protect the fetus
    from immune rejection

hyperemesis gravidarum a condition during
    pregnancy characterized by extreme, persistent
    nausea and vomiting

hyperglycemia a blood glucose greater than 125 mg/
    dL or plasma blood glucose level greater than 150

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     8 · Review Questions 167

    childbirth                                              metabolism, weight, and energy levels
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) a hormone that        type 1 diabetes insulin-dependent diabetes;

    triggers secretion of thyroid hormones by the           develops when insulin producing cells (beta cells)
    thyroid gland                                           are destroyed in the pancreas, resulting in low to
thyroxine (T4) tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine) long-         non-existent levels of insulin
    acting hormone released by the thyroid gland that   type 2 diabetes noninsulin-dependent diabetes;
    can be converted to T3                                  results from insulin resistance that develops
triiodothyronine (T3) hormone released by the               gradually from obesity and aging
    thyroid gland to help regulate processes including

Review Questions

1. How does protein intake contribute to growth and development during childhood?
     a. Maintains digestive function
     b. Influences nutrient absorption
     c. Plays an anabolic role similar to that of growth hormone
     d. Mediates levels of growth hormone

2. Which of the following foods supplies micronutrients that decrease inflammation?
     a. Kale
     b. Sourdough bread
     c. Beef
     d. White rice

3. Medications given to older adults to stimulate appetite target which hormone?
     a. Ghrelin
     b. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
     c. Insulin
     d. Cholecystokinin

4. Which of the following is a good food choice for a client with Hashimoto's thyroiditis who needs to consume
    iodine-rich foods?
     a. Leafy green vegetables
     b. Fish
     c. Citrus fruits
     d. Whole grains

5. The nurse is providing dietary education for a client with diabetes. The client asks why their sodium intake
    should be limited. What is the best response from the nurse?
     a. "Lowering your sodium intake can decrease your blood glucose level."
     b. "A low-sodium diet can decrease inflammation in the body."
     c. "Sodium-controlled diets can lower your elevated risk for developing cardiovascular disease and
          hypertension."
     d. "Adding less salt to your food can decrease the food's glycemic index."

6. What is the recommended daily intake of saturated fats for individuals with diabetes?
     a. Less than 5%
     b. Less than 10%
     c. Less than 15%
     d. Less than 20%

7. What should the nurse include in dietary instructions for a client with diabetes regarding alcohol
    consumption?
     a. Alcohol consumption can either raise or lower blood glucose levels.
168 8 · Suggested Reading

         b. Alcohol consumption does not affect blood glucose levels.
         c. Drinking alcohol is acceptable if low-sugar or sugar-free ingredients are used in mixed drinks.
         d. Drinking alcohol may worsen signs of hypoglycemia when it occurs.
    8. Which of the following practices will help clients with diabetes decrease the risk for hypoglycemia after
        insulin administration?
         a. Administering less than the prescribed dose of insulin
         b. Coordinating insulin administration with their meal schedule
         c. Eating less than the prescribed amount of carbohydrates
         d. Administering insulin between meals
    9. Which of the following instructions should the nurse include when teaching a client about levothyroxine?
         a. "You can take this medication at any time during the day."
         b. "You can take this medication at the same time you take vitamins and other supplements."
         c. "Take this medication at the same time every day with meals."
         d. "Take this medication on an empty stomach."
  10. The nurse is documenting a client's medications during an admission assessment. Which of the following
        medications can decrease parathyroid levels, thereby increasing the risk for bone fractures?
         a. Levothyroxine
         b. Metformin
         c. Furosemide
         d. Insulin

Suggested Reading

American Diabetes Association. (2023). Recipes & nutrition. https://diabetes.org/healthy-living/recipes-nutrition
American Thyroid Association. (2023). Iodine deficiency. https://www.thyroid.org/iodine-deficiency/
Babiker, A., Alawi, A., Al Atawi, M., & Al Alwan, I. (2020). The role of micronutrients in thyroid dysfunction. Sudanese

   Journal of Paediatrics, 20(1), 13-19. https://doi.org/10.24911/SJP.106-1587138942
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Eat well. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/managing/eat-

    well.html
Cleveland Clinic. (2023). Endocrine system. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/21201-endocrine-system
Szczuko, M., Kikut, J., Szczuko, U., Szydlowska, I., Nawrocka-Rutkowska, J., Zitek, M., Verbanac, D., & Saso, L.

   (2021). Nutrition strategy and life style in polycystic ovary syndrome--Narrative review. Nutrients, 13(7), 2452.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13072452

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 9

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

FIGURE 9.1 Nutritional deficiencies are known to cause hematologic changes that can impact quality of life. (credit: modification of work
"display of vegetables and one orange" by Baileynorwood/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System
9.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness
9.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness
9.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness
INTRODUCTION Metabolic processes with high energy requirements are sensitive to nutrient deficiencies. The
production of blood cells, called hematopoiesis, is an energy-intensive metabolic process essential for oxygen and
nutrient transport and protects against invasion of pathogens while maintaining hemostasis. The appropriate
balance of water and cellular components--such as albumin, electrolytes, macronutrients, and micronutrients--is
necessary for blood to optimally function. In the bone marrow, where hematopoiesis occurs, amino acids build the
hemoglobin contained in each red blood cell. Red blood cells use only glucose as fuel, which must be in constant
supply to support red blood cell metabolism (American Society of Hematology, n.d.).
Consider this case: Grant is a nurse and Ms. Foster is a client. Ms. Foster was sent to the emergency department by
her primary care physician after receiving results of her annual laboratory testing that revealed severe anemia (a
reduction in circulating red blood cells). Ms. Foster is a 75-year-old widow from a senior living facility who prepares
her own meals and is independent in her activities of daily living (ADLs). She has a history of type 2 diabetes and
hypertension; she reports that she recently had an episode of fainting and is no longer able to walk to her building's
elevator without stopping for rest.
170  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     9.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 9.1.1 Recognize cues that indicate the impact of nutrition on the hematological system.
       · 9.1.2 Analyze cues to determine the impact of nutrition on the hematological system.

     Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Hematological System

     Early recognition of hematologic abnormalities and micronutrient deficiency signs can lead to prompt interventions.
     Nurses play a key role in assessment, delivery of age-appropriate intervention, and education aimed at restoration
     and prevention of recurrence. Through a comprehensive client assessment, the nurse can apply the nursing process
     specific to nutritional practices that impact hematologic function. Considering the client's nutritional preferences,
     the nurse can develop strategies to promote hematologic wellness.

     Providing holistic care to clients is a core competency for nurses; however, the quality of nutritional assessments
     and decision-making can be inconsistent due to variations in clinical experience and settings of practice (Lulloff et
     al., 2019). Delays in diagnosing excessive or deficient nutritional intake can lead to hematologic abnormalities,
     which can result in life-threatening complications and long-term disease consequences. Accurate assessment of
     the client's nutritional status with early intervention gives clients the best chance for recovery.

     Nurses who provide continuity and consistency through frequent assessment are well-positioned to recognize
     subtle changes and to work collaboratively with the health care team to develop a plan of care. Assessment of
     nutritional impact on the hematological system crosses multiple domains of clients' needs with emphasis on
     physiological and psychosocial integrity and management of care.

     Physiological and Psychosocial Assessment
     The nurse should begin the assessment with a health history. The client's age and sex are important to consider as
     bone marrow function and immunity decrease with age, and sex influences specific risk factors for hematologic
     changes (Márquez et al., 2020). The health history includes past medical and surgical history, with emphasis on
     blood disorders and any past episodes of bleeding, autoimmune disease, and gastrointestinal disease that may
     result in malabsorption. Surgical history should include the presence of postoperative complications such as poor
     wound healing and excessive bleeding or bruising. The nurse should explore family medical history because
     hereditary anemias and certain metabolic conditions can impact hematopoiesis. Also, because many medications
     have known hematologic side effects, the nurse should obtain an accurate list of the client's current medications,
     including over-the-counter products, vitamins, herbs, and nutritional supplements that may provide cues to risk
     factors when analyzing health data.

     The purpose of a nutritional assessment is to identify risk factors and specific nutritional deficiencies, to determine
     nutritional needs, and to identify the physiological, psychosocial, and socioeconomic factors that may affect
     hematologic function (Serón-Arbeola, 2022). Dietary history, including the client's eating and drinking habits, could
     highlight specific nutrient deficiencies; however, obtaining accurate dietary intake is challenging. If time permits, the
     use of a food diary actively completed by the client is helpful. Behavioral and emotional considerations and social
     determinants of health also must be explored (Walker-Clarke et al., 2022). Specific themes to discuss include:

       · Access to food
       · Aversion to specific foods
       · Mental health influences of eating, such as anxiety and depression
       · Food preparation knowledge and skill
       · Time constraints and family meal patterns
       · Attitudes and beliefs surrounding food consumption

     A physical assessment will include subjective and objective data (Table 9.1), be system-based, and include vital
     signs and anthropometric measurements, specifically, height, weight, and body mass index (BMI). Of particular
     importance is the amount of weight loss (percentage) experienced over a specific period of time. Rapid, unexpected
     weight loss of 5-10% from baseline is a risk factor for systemic manifestations of nutritional deficiencies. Triceps
     skinfold thickness (TSF) and midarm circumference (MAC) are used with increased frequency to further define

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                9.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System          171

nutritional status, particularly in clients with concerns of malnutrition. TSF correlates with fat mass and MAC with
protein composition (Serón-Arbeola et al., 2022).

Subjective and Objective Findings                         Related Nutritional Deficiency
                                                          Iron, copper, vitamin B12, vitamin C, vitamin E, folate
Anemia:
  · Pallor
  · Fatigue
  · Changes in energy level
  · Dyspnea, tachypnea
  · Tachycardia
  · Hypotension
  · Dizziness
  · Fainting
  · Difficulty sleeping
  · Ability to maintain ADLs and recreational activities
  · Unusual food cravings (pica)
  · Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) abnormalities

Thrombocytopenia/Coagulopathy:                            Vitamin K, vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin B12
  · Gingival bleeding
  · Easy bruising
  · Petechiae (Figure 9.2)
  · Prolonged bleeding
  · Bloody stool
  · Prolonged menstrual cycle

Neutropenia:                                              Copper, vitamin D, vitamin B12, vitamin C
  · Frequent fevers
  · Frequent infections
  · Delayed wound healing

TABLE 9.1 Assessment for Potential Nutritional Deficiencies (sources: Le, 2016; Yu, 2019)

CLINICAL TIP

Ask Open-ended Questions

Nurses should always ask clients open-ended questions to elicit a more informative history. For example, the
nurse could ask "How often do you eat red meat each month?" (instead of "Do you eat red meat?").
172  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     FIGURE 9.2 Petechiae, a condition characterized by small nonblanching spots as a result of bleeding, may be caused by a vitamin C
     deficiency. (credit: "This photograph depicts a close view of a patient's skin revealing the presence of numerous perifollicular petechiae,
     the etiology had yet to be determined"/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Domain)

     Management of Care: Diagnostic Assessment
     Blood analysis is the primary diagnostic method for evaluating concerns of hematologic changes impacted by
     nutritional deficiencies; however, nutritional screening, often performed by a registered dietician, should be
     completed first in a comprehensive assessment (Table 9.2).

     Some laboratory results can determine the client's nutritional status. Prealbumin levels can be used to evaluate the
     client's protein status. Transferrin is a protein that transports iron through the blood to different tissues and organs
     and is often measured when iron deficiency is suspected as a cause of anemia. Complete blood count (CBC), serum
     iron level, serum vitamin B12, and folate levels should also be checked. Blood tests for specific vitamin deficiencies
     may be necessary for clients who have gastrointestinal malabsorption (Read et al., 2021; Socha et al., 2020).

     When blood results fail to confirm a diagnosis in symptomatic clients, a bone marrow aspiration and/or biopsy may
     be necessary to evaluate the production of hematologic stem cells and the bone marrow microenvironment for
     evidence of malfunction.

     Diagnostic Study                      Hematologic or Other      Nursing Considerations
     Nutritional Screening Tools           Manifestation
                                                                       · Age and population specific
                                             · More than 5% weight     · Client language
                                                 loss over past 3      · Complete within 48 hours of admission
                                                 months

     Nutritional Risk Screening            · All hospitalized        Not applicable
     2002 (NRS2002)                           clients

       Malnutrition Universal              · Community clients       Not applicable
       Screening Tool (MUST)               · Older clients           Not applicable
                                           · Critically ill clients  Not applicable
       Mini Nutritional Assessment
       (MNA-SF)

       Nutritional Risk in Critically Ill
       (NUTRIC)

     TABLE 9.2 Diagnostic Studies

     Access for free at openstax.org
                              9.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System           173

Diagnostic Study              Hematologic or Other          Nursing Considerations
                              Manifestation
CBC With Differential                                         · Total volume of blood obtained in 24 hours;
Complete Metabolic Profile      · Bruising, petechiae             check facility policy
                                · Gingival bleeding
Albumin, Prealbumin, Vitamin    · Dyspnea                     · Is there a fasting requirement?
D (25OHD)                       · Tachycardia                 · Appropriate collection tube
Haptoglobin, Lactate                                          · Handling requirements: specific days
Dehydrogenase (LDH),            · Poor wound healing
Reticulocyte,                                                     processed; temperature of sample once
Vitamin E                       · Hemolytic anemia                obtained
Ferritin, Iron, Transferrin     · Thrombocytosis

                                · Microcytic anemia
                                    (small red blood cell)

Folate, Vitamin B12           · Macrocytic anemia
                                 (large red blood cell)

                              · Neutropenia

Vitamin C                     · Excessive bleeding
                                 and bruising

                              · Brittle, spoon-shaped
                                 nails

Vitamin K, PT/PTT             · Prolonged bleeding
                              · Coagulopathy

Copper                        · Anemia (normocytic)
                              · Neutropenia
                              · Malabsorption

                                 (diarrhea, failure to
                                 thrive)

Bone Marrow Aspiration/       · Overlapping                 Does the client need sedation?
Biopsy                           hematologic
                                 abnormalities

TABLE 9.2 Diagnostic Studies

Analysis of Nutrition and the Hematologic System

Developing clinical judgment requires the nurse to recognize laboratory abnormalities and associate significance to
the client's history and physical assessment (NCSBN, 2022). Making connections between a client's diet
history--such as lacking red meat, a critically low hemoglobin, and signs and symptoms of anemia--will result in
identification of potential complications and anticipation of medical intervention. See Table 9.3.

Among nutritional blood disorders, iron deficiency anemia is the most common with increased prevalence in young
children, pregnant women, and older adults (Burton et al., 2020). Iron deficiency anemia is characterized by a low
hemoglobin concentration with small (microcytic), pale (hypochromic) red blood cells. The nurse should consider
other nutrient-related hematologic disorders as well:

  · Vitamin B12 deficiency
  · Folate deficiency
  · Vitamin K deficiency
  · Vitamin C deficiency
174  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     · Vitamin D deficiency

     Deficiency                       Conditions and            Medical Management        Nursing Considerations
     Iron deficiency                  Individuals at Risk
                                                                  · Ferrous sulfate         · Take 1 hour before or
                                        · Infants                     100-200 mg/day for        2 hours after meals
                                        · Menstruating                adults dosed on
                                                                      severity of anemia    · Take with vitamin C
                                            females                                             to increase
                                        · Older adults over 65    · Orally or                   absorption
                                                                      intravenously
                                            years                                           · Avoid antacids,
                                        · Vegans                  · Dose dependent on           proton pump
                                                                      age and hemoglobin        inhibitors (may
                                                                      level                     decrease iron
                                                                                                absorption)

                                                                                            · Common side effect:
                                                                                                constipation;
                                                                                                increase fiber in diet

                                                                                            · Food sources: red
                                                                                                meat, beans, dark
                                                                                                green leafy
                                                                                                vegetables, iron-
                                                                                                fortified foods

                                                                                            · Monitor labs every 3
                                                                                                weeks during first 2
                                                                                                months of therapy

     Vitamin B12                      · Autoimmune              · Vitamin B12             · Clients with
                                         gastritis                 intramuscularly or        malabsorption
                                                                   high dose Vitamin         syndrome or gastric
                                      · Celiac disease             B12 orally daily          resection require
                                      · Inflammatory bowel                                   parenteral
                                      · Gastric bypass or       · Diet modification          administration

                                         ileal resection                                  · Protect vials from
                                      · Strict vegans                                        light
                                      · Pancreatic
                                                                                          · Take with meals to
                                         insufficiency                                       increase absorption
                                      · Alcohol use disorder
                                                                                          · Food sources: animal
                                                                                             meat, fish, eggs,
                                                                                             dairy

     TABLE 9.3 Management of Common Nutrition-Related Blood Disorders (sources: Burton et al., 2020; Maxfield & Crane, 2022; Nemati et
     al., 2022; Sizar et al., 2022; Socha et al., 2020)

     Access for free at openstax.org
            9.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Hematological System                                           175

Deficiency  Conditions and            Medical Management        Nursing Considerations
Folate      Individuals at Risk
                                        · Folic acid, orally      · Take antacids at
              · Pregnant clients            once daily                least 2 hours after
              · Clients with alcohol                                  folic acid
                                        · Dose dependent on
                  use disorder,             age                   · Take folic acid early
                  malabsorption,                                      in pregnancy for
                  hemolytic anemia,                                   prevention of neural
                  eczema                                              tube defects

                                                                  · May turn urine
                                                                      intensely yellow

                                                                  · Food sources: leafy
                                                                      green vegetables,
                                                                      fruits, nuts, eggs,
                                                                      meats

Vitamin K   · Newborns                · Phytonadione may        · Lab analysis
            · Liver disease              be given                  impacted by drugs:
            · Cystic fibrosis            intramuscularly,          warfarin, antacids,
            · Celiac disease             subcutaneously, or        antibiotics, aspirin
            · Inflammatory bowel         orally; dose is
                                         dependent on           · Food sources:
               disease                   condition and age         cheese, green
                                                                   vegetables, meat,
                                      · Intravenously in life-     eggs
                                         threatening bleeding

Vitamin C   · Food insecurity         · Ascorbic acid           · May decrease
(scurvy)    · Infants only               100-300 mg/day for        response to warfarin
                                         children and              and antibiotics
Vitamin D      receiving cow's milk      500-1000 mg/day
            · Alcohol use disorder       for adults             · May interfere with
            · Smoking                                              blood and urine
            · Eating disorder         · Diet modifications         glucose test
            · GI tract disorder
            · Type 1 diabetes         · Vitamin D3              · Food sources: citrus
            · Iron overload              (cholecalciferol)         fruits, tomatoes,
                                         orally daily or high      strawberries,
            · Residential/assisted       dose orally weekly        cantaloupe, peppers
               living
                                                                · Order lab as 25(OH)
            · Dark skin tones                                   · Laboratory analysis
            · Obesity
            · Chronic disease                                      impacted by
            · Decreased exposure                                   barbiturates and
                                                                   corticosteroids
               to sunlight                                      · Food sources: fatty
                                                                   fish, liver, fortified
                                                                   milk

TABLE 9.3 Management of Common Nutrition-Related Blood Disorders (sources: Burton et al., 2020; Maxfield & Crane, 2022; Nemati et
al., 2022; Sizar et al., 2022; Socha et al., 2020)

Nursing Considerations
As the client's relevant information is identified, the nurse will apply the nursing process, determine related nursing
diagnoses, and prepare to implement evidence-based care. Potential nursing diagnoses for aiding the client in the
restoration of hematologic wellness include (Doenges et al., 2022):

  · Imbalanced nutrition, undernutrition
176  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     · Fatigue, related to malnutrition
     · Failure to thrive, related to nutritional deficiency
     · Frail elderly syndrome, related to malnutrition
     · Knowledge deficit, related to nutrients needed for hematologic wellness
     · Decreased activity tolerance, related to fatigue
     · Impaired skin integrity, related to anemia, nutritional deficiency
     · Impaired memory, related to anemia
     · Infection, delayed wound healing, related to nutritional deficiency
     · Impaired gas exchange, related to anemia
     · Risk for infection, related to nutritional deficiency
     · Risk for bleeding, related to nutritional deficiency
     · Risk for falls, related to anemia
     · Risk for unstable blood pressure, related to anemia
     · Risk for constipation, after iron supplementation
     · Risk for ineffective tissue perfusion, related to anemia
     · Risk for delayed child development, related to nutritional deficiencies

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     Grant continues with his assessment of Ms. Foster. She reports difficulty sleeping for the past several months and
     poor concentration. Over the past 3 days, she has been short of breath with little exertion and lightheaded. As Grant
     discusses her diet history and food preferences, Ms. Foster reports that she constantly craves ice; otherwise, her
     diet consists of bread, chicken, and canned vegetables. While Grant continues to perform his assessment, her
     primary care physician (PCP) calls to report Ms. Foster's hemoglobin as 6.2 gm/dL from the morning labs and
     requests additional diagnostic evaluation to determine the etiology of her severe anemia. Grant recognizes that
     older adults are at risk for nutritional anemias and suspects this for Ms. Foster. He understands the importance of a
     thorough history and assessment to avoid potentially life-threatening complications of anemia. Grant has completed
     his assessment of Ms. Foster and has obtained the following blood samples as ordered by her PCP:

       · CBC
       · Serum iron
       · Ferritin
       · Folate
       · Vitamin B12

     Her CBC confirms severe microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 6.0 gm/dL with a low mean corpuscle volume). Since Ms.
     Foster has symptomatic anemia with shortness of breath and lightheadedness, Grant notifies the emergency
     department physician and requests an additional evaluation. An ECG and chest radiograph are performed; the
     physician determines that the source of Ms. Foster's symptoms is unlikely related to hemorrhage and is most likely
     related to a nutritional deficiency. An order to transfuse 1 unit of packed red blood cells over 2-4 hours is received.

     Grant recognizes that iron deficiency is the most common cause of nutritional microcytic anemia. He is also aware
     that the turnaround time for laboratory iron studies is 24-48 hours. He updates Ms. Foster and her daughter with
     the plan of care and determines the priority nursing diagnosis to be impaired gas exchange, related to anemia;
     imbalanced nutrition, less than body requirements, related to iron deficiency.

         1. Which nutritional screening tool should the nurse anticipate as part of Ms. Foster's evaluation?
              a. Nutritional Risk Screening 2002 (NRS2002)
              b. Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST)
              c. Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA-SF)

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness                                                        177

         d. Nutritional Risk in Critically Ill (NUTRIC)

    2. Ms. Foster's priority nursing diagnosis is impaired gas exchange, related to anemia; imbalanced nutrition, less
        than body requirements, related to iron deficiency. What other nursing diagnosis should the nurse consider
        addressing during this visit?
         a. Knowledge deficit, related to nutrients needed for hematologic wellness
         b. Impaired skin integrity, related to anemia, nutritional deficiency
         c. Impaired memory, related to anemia
         d. Infection, delayed wound healing, related to nutritional deficiency

9.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 9.2.1 Prioritize hypotheses of nutritional habits that optimize hematological wellness.
  · 9.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize hematological wellness utilizing nutritional habits.

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

Once nutritional deficiencies impacting hematopoiesis have been discovered, the nurse should explore goals aimed
at restoration of wellness. Barriers to a client's success can include physiological and psychosocial factors. Assisting
the client in determining which nutritional habits can be modified is challenging but essential at this stage of
planning. The nurse should consider both the setting (hospital, clinic, client's home) and the audience for
discussion. Goals that consider cultural influences are more likely to guide the client toward a nutritional lifestyle
with a lasting positive impact (Walker-Clarke et al., 2022).

Physiological Factors
Most physical attributes are non-modifiable; however, understanding the impact of physiological factors on nutrition
is an important component of client education. Providing anticipatory guidance related to nutrient demands in
various stages of life can influence goal setting through the management of expectations. Although clients cannot
manipulate their family medical history and genetics, health promotion strategies can be applied using these factors
as motivators.

Typically, males have higher energy demands than females, as well as an increased trajectory for height and weight
compared. Nutritional needs increase during pregnancy because of physiological and hormonal changes and fetal
demand. Folate deficiency is common during pregnancy and can lead to serious hematologic deficits in both the
pregnant client and fetus (Grzymislawska et.al., 2020).

Neonates and infants have increased caloric and protein needs to support the rapid growth and development that
occurs during this time, as well as to prevent anemia and bleeding disorders. Breastfed infants are dependent on the
health and diet of the person feeding them. Research has discovered that genetic variations in both the parents and
child can affect the production and consumption of milk (Golan, 2020). With this knowledge, nurses can
intentionally explore breastfeeding habits and provide support and rationale if nutritional supplementation is
indicated.

As humans age, growth hormone and erythropoietin deficiencies occur, which contribute to decreased production of
red blood cells. Additionally, appetite and food intake decrease due to delayed gastric emptying and changes in
taste. Papillae (taste buds) density decreases in older adults that results in taste and smell alterations. Poor dental
health, ill-fitting dentures, and dry mouth further contribute to decreased food intake, leading to nutrient
deficiencies. Although energy needs decrease with age, protein and micronutrients requirements increase (Kaur et
al., 2019).

Disease comorbidities often result in increased caloric, protein, and micronutrient needs. Acute and long-term
illnesses such as trauma, burns, cancer, lung disease, and immune dysfunction require even higher protein and
micronutrient intake to restore homeostasis during the healing stage.
178  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     Psychosocial Factors
     Psychological and social factors impact eating behaviors throughout the lifespan (Walker-Clarke et al., 2022). These
     are often considered modifiable contributors and are a major target for interventional strategies to restore
     hematologic wellness (Figure 9.3). Assisting clients in recognizing the presence of these factors is the first
     step--requiring empathy, emotional intelligence, and therapeutic communication. For example, although eating
     more beef or fresh spinach may help combat iron deficiency in the older adult, financial constraints may prevent this
     intervention; therefore, the nurse is challenged to create a more realistic economical and culturally sensitive option
     for the client.

     FIGURE 9.3 Psychological and social factors influence nutritional goals. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
     license)

     Planning Nutritional Goals

     Understanding clients' needs requires knowledge regarding their food preferences and choices. Accessing nutrient-
     rich food lists for the client to review can facilitate a meal plan that is both desirable and feasible. Food preferences
     often cross physical, psychological, social, and environmental domains. Common themes to explore include:

       · Taste and food preferences of the client and their household
       · Health concerns
       · Convenience and time
       · Cultural and religious traditions
       · Social influences
       · Physical environment
       · Economics
       · Availability and variety

     Planning nutritional goals starts with the nurse determining what is reasonable to tackle during the time available
     and in the current setting, considering both physiological and psychosocial influences. It is important to evaluate the
     client's immediate external constraints such as finances, knowledge level, and current well-being. For example, has
     the client recently received medication with drowsiness as a side effect? Will the client be able to focus on the
     education to actively participate in goal planning?

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness                                                    179

Grant is planning a discharge for Ms. Foster as she completes her blood transfusion. He recognizes that Ms. Foster
may be experiencing fatigue or drowsiness from the medical interventions and anxiety and/or fear related to the
need for a major modification to her diet. Further, he is aware that the emergency department environment can be
distracting to learning. With these factors in mind, Grant determines that he will focus the discharge education on
iron replacement therapy, follow-up with her PCP, and referral to a dietician.

He develops the following goal for Ms. Foster's discharge education: Provide oral and written information on iron
replacement therapy including dose, route, frequency, side effects, and administration considerations immediately
before discharge. Grant will include a list of food sources rich in iron and inform Ms. Foster that taking her iron
supplement with 4-6 oz of orange juice can improve iron absorption.

    3. Which of the following psychosocial factors should be considered first as the nurse prepares a list of iron-rich
        foods?
         a. Cultural and religious preferences
         b. Home-cooked or prepared meals
         c. Social influences
         d. Availability and variety

    4. Which of Ms. Foster's risk factors for worsening anemia is modifiable?
         a. Hypertension
         b. Diabetes
         c. Decreased taste
         d. Decreased food intake

Encouraging Change
To prevent client frustration that can derail nutritional goals, the nurse should anticipate obstacles to the first steps
of the plan. After creating a plan to restore hematologic wellness, asking open-ended questions regarding the plan's
steps can proactively help identify solutions to barriers (Hooker et al., 2018). Use of motivational interviewing,
increasing knowledge, and assessing readiness for change are the first steps. Ultimately, the client needs to believe
that the nutritional change will improve their life. For example, in the case of Ms. Foster, Grant learns that Ms.
Foster's grandson is getting married in 3 months, and she has been worried about her ability to walk the distance
required at the wedding venue. Grant uses this information as an influence of motivation, encouraging her to add
iron-rich foods to at least 2 meals daily, eat meals in the dining room with her friends as much as possible, and use a
daily pill container or set a reminder to take her daily iron replacement. Convenient foods containing iron, such as
canned or frozen spinach, iron-enriched bread and cereals, and canned white beans, are recommended staples to
have on hand. He informs Ms. Foster that with these strategies, she should see a significant improvement in her
anemia and energy level within 2-3 months, just in time to participate in the wedding festivities.

9.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 9.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
  · 9.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize hematological wellness.

Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

Assessing clients for nutritional influences on hematologic wellness must encompass the client and their support
circle. The nurse should consider the different realms the client may be impacted by in their nutritional choices
(Figure 9.4). For example, adolescents, who may be adequately knowledgeable about nutrient-rich food sources,
may choose less-healthy options at school due to peer influence. The nurse should help clients visualize potentially
challenging situations. Visualization of the situation--and how to respond to the situation--can empower clients to
improve their attitude and practice of healthy eating and is part of a holistic approach to fostering hematologic
wellness (Wiafe et al., 2023).
180  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     FIGURE 9.4 Holistic nutritional assessment domains are important in assessing clients for nutritional influences and must encompass the
     client and their support circle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Age-Specific Considerations
     For infants, school-aged children, and adolescents, determining where children spend their time and with whom is
     an important step in developing a holistic approach to nutritional interventions. The modern family is diverse, and
     often consists of multigenerational members and different households influencing each other's health practices.
     Gaining the confidence of the family unit's influencer(s) requires a nurse's thoughtful approach and cultural
     sensitivity (Barnes et al., 2020). For infants, family traditions regarding the addition of solid food and cow's milk to
     the diet can contradict current evidence-based recommendations and can result in nutritional anemias. Discussing
     menstruation may be taboo for some female adolescents and thus result in undisclosed menorrhagia and secondary
     iron-deficient anemia. Older adults are often uncomfortable discussing oral health issues and economic burdens
     that may have led to late recognition of malnutrition. The nurse is in a unique situation to holistically assess clients
     and their families utilizing active listening and therapeutic communication strategies.

     Client Teaching

     As the teaching session begins, the nurse should ask the client to describe what they already know about the health
     concern and should be prepared to adjust their educational plan. If the client reports having nutrient-deficient
     anemia but does not understand what anemia is, the educational plan should start with an overview of the function
     of red blood cells and how they are produced in the body. Most clients will struggle with adherence to a nutritional
     plan (meal plan) if they do not understand why the modification is necessary. This is a component of determining
     the client's health literacy. Other variables of health literacy to consider include:

       · Language spoken and read
       · Cultural considerations regarding who should be present for the educational session
       · The learning style of the client and their significant other as applicable
       · External constraints (time, state of health)

     Learning Modalities
     Taking advantage of technology and existing reputable resources can be a time saver for both the nurse and the
     client. Reputable references may be available electronically and/or in writing. Determining access to a computer or
     internet service is vital if relying on an electronic modality for content. Additionally, consideration of the material in
     the client's primary language cannot be overlooked. Potential options include:

       · One-on-one teaching
       · Group or family teaching
       · Demonstration--including food preparation and shopping
       · Printed materials
       · Videos, podcasts, applications for smart phones
       · Community resources

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness                                                   181

A list of client education resources is included at the end of this chapter.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Grant starts discharge education with Ms. Foster by sharing his intended goal and time frame for completion. Ms.
Foster's daughter offers to retrieve the car to expedite discharge. Grant suggests that she stay for the education and
participate in identifying potential barriers to the plan. Ms. Foster reports that her anemia should be resolved since
she received a blood transfusion. Grant explains to Ms. Foster that the lifespan of transfused red blood cells is
approximately 60 days and that she will need to start oral iron replacement therapy as soon as possible to restore
her hematologic wellness. He then modifies his educational plan to include an overview of red blood cell production,
signs and symptoms of anemia, and the expected time for recovery of symptoms.

    5. A holistic approach to client teaching includes consideration of which of the following?
         a. Spiritual influences
         b. Family presence
         c. Medical diagnosis
         d. Family medical history

    6. Which of the following age-specific considerations should the nurse consider first before initiating the
        educational session with Ms. Foster?
         a. Hearing or vision changes
         b. Cognitive function
         c. Preferred spoken language
         d. Level of alertness

9.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 9.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on hematological wellness.
  · 9.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote hematological wellness.

Evaluating Client Readiness to Follow a Nutritional Plan

Assessing a client's readiness to change their nutritional lifestyle requires a collaborative conversation. The nurse
should emphasize the direct link between iron-deficient anemia, their current eating habits (craving ice and lack of
iron-rich foods) and their recent symptoms. Evidence-based research has shown that clients are more likely to
engage in healthy behavior if they believe that their symptoms and complications will negatively affect their lifestyle
(Lee & Chung, 2021). Often the only motivator prompting change is the presence of unpleasant symptoms. The next
step is for the client to reflect on how they feel about change and what they need to be successful. At this point, the
focus should shift to providing additional nutritional knowledge, such as specific dietary needs, and establishing the
client's desire to achieve change. The use of a scoring scale can be helpful, asking questions such as

  · "How important is it to you to make this change, on a scale of 0 to 10 with 10 being extremely important?"
  · "How confident are you that you can make this change, on a scale of 0 to 10 with 10 being extremely

      confident?"

The nurse must keep in mind that this is not a static process, and the focus must remain on a shared decision-
making conversation (National Lipid Association, 2021).

Making Connections
As previously stated, the client who makes connections between food choices and hematologic wellness is more
182  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     likely to intentionally change nutritional habits. According to the Transtheoretical Model (TTM), change occurs as a
     series of steps aligned with the client's degree of motivation (Nakabayashi et al., 2020; Lee & Chung, 2021). This
     model has been widely used for health education interventions and more recently applied to nutritional
     interventions, specifically. The model includes five stages: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action,
     and maintenance. Figure 9.5 depicts this model, applied to the scenario in this chapter's unfolding case study.

     FIGURE 9.5 The Transtheoretical Model is applied to the this chapter's unfolding case study to illustrate how the client (Ms. Foster) is
     changing nutritional habits. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The nurse's role is to raise a consciousness that empowers the client to recognize there are more positive outcomes
     than negative to this nutritional modification. The benefit of using the TTM in practice is its applicability in all
     settings, adaptability to different nutritional needs, flexibility, and cost-effectiveness (Nakabayashi et al., 2020).

     An important assumption to the effectiveness of the TTM is the client's nutritional health literacy, as it relates to
     hematological wellness. Clients with low-to-moderate nutritional literacy are likely to have poor self-management
     skills and communication with health care providers (Zhong et al., 2020). Client education targeted at enhancing
     nutritional knowledge is an important point for nursing intervention. In Ms. Foster's case, she has identified a lack of
     knowledge regarding iron-rich foods; therefore, the nurse should incorporate information about iron-rich foods into
     the decision-making conversations with Ms. Foster.

     Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Nutritional Plan

     According to TTM, maintenance of the behavior change takes 6 months to achieve. In the case of a nutrition-related
     hematologic disease, the client will need to be evaluated at more frequent intervals due to the serious potential
     consequences of untreated blood disorders. The nurse should be aware that pharmacologic interventions vary in
     their onset and duration of action. Correcting long-term nutritional deficiencies is a process. Some medications are
     dosed according to the extent of the blood abnormality and require intermittent laboratory analysis for dose

     Access for free at openstax.org
                               9.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Hematological Wellness                      183

modifications. For instance, ferrous sulfate has a dose range that is different for infants and children versus adults
and is based on the severity of anemia using hemoglobin and symptoms as determinants. It is recommended to
check hemoglobin every 3 weeks during the first month of treatment for potential dose modifications. The nurse
should provide anticipatory guidance to the client in terms of frequency of return visits, what will be evaluated at
each visit, and what changes or symptoms the client should expect. The client is likely to remain motivated if they
can identify signs of improvement, even outside of actual visits with their health care team.

Modification of the Nutritional Plan
The final phase of any change plan is to make modifications based on the evaluation outcome, remembering that
change is a dynamic, cyclic process. Use of motivational interviewing with open-ended questions will assist the
client in recognizing self-efficacy. Bringing the focus back to hematologic wellness and the potential consequences
the client faces if untreated, while praising the successful change, is key. The nurse should re-address the
previously established goals and look for opportunities for improvement. In Ms. Foster's case, the nurse would
consider the following questions:

  · What iron-rich foods have you incorporated into your diet?
  · How often do you consume each food? What serving size do you consume?
  · How do you rate your level of fatigue and shortness of breath over the past week, compared with before you

      started iron replacement 3 weeks ago?
  · What barriers do you have to obtaining access to iron supplements and food items?

      UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part D

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
Case Study Parts A, B, and C.

After discussing Ms. Foster's symptoms in relation to her anemia, Grant reviews iron replacement therapy, including
the importance of taking iron with a citrus beverage such as orange juice to aid in iron absorption. He informs Ms.
Foster that most insurance companies will not cover the cost of iron replacement as it can be purchased over the
counter. Grant further offers to search her local pharmacy website to determine the cost and formulations available.
He provides a written client education handout on iron deficiency anemia as well as instructions for Ms. Foster to
call her PCP for a follow-up appointment in 3 weeks. Grant then discusses several foods that are iron rich (Table 9.4)
and helps Ms. Foster identify 3 food items that she feels she can incorporate into her daily diet. Ms. Foster's
daughter repeats the items needed to initiate this plan and offers to take her mother to the store before returning
home. Ms. Foster reminds her daughter that she has groceries delivered every other week but will increase to a
weekly delivery to ensure fresh or frozen spinach availability daily. At this point, Grant asks Ms. Foster the following:
"How confident are you that you can make this change, on a scale of 0 to 10, with 10 being extremely confident?"

Food Item                      Serving Size                              Iron Content

Tofu                           ½ cup                                     3 mg
                                                                         2 mg
Kidney beans                   ½ cup                                     5 mg
                                                                         8 mg
Beef liver                     3 oz                                      3 mg
                                                                         18 mg
Canned white beans             1 cup                                     2 mg
                                                                         2 mg
Boiled lentils                 ½ cup

Fortified breakfast cereal     ½ cup

Potato, baked, flesh and skin  1 medium size

Tomatoes, canned, stewed       ½ cup

TABLE 9.4 Iron-Rich Foods (source: National Institutes of Health, 2023)

Ms. Foster reports a confidence level of 8, vocalizing her motivation to actively participate in her grandson's wedding
in 3 months. Grant feels confident that he and Ms. Foster have developed a solid plan in a collaborative manner. He
184  9 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic Wellness

     provides Ms. Foster with a copy of the plan and educational materials and recommends she ask her PCP for a
     referral to a registered dietitian to help with meal planning. He adds the nursing care plan to Ms. Foster's electronic
     medical record to ensure that her PCP's office will have access during the follow-up appointment.

         7. What stage of change is Ms. Foster in at the conclusion of the nurse's teaching session?
              a. Contemplative
              b. Pre-contemplative
              c. Preparative
              d. Action

         8. What should the nurse recognize first when modifying a nutritional plan for change?
              a. Change is a cyclic process.
              b. Motivational interviewing is the preferred method to determine success of the prior plan.
              c. Goals of the initial plan for change are important.
              d. Barriers to success of the initial nutritional change plan exist.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         9 · Chapter Summary 185

Chapter Summary

· Iron deficiency anemia, characterized by low            burns, cancer, lung disease, and immune
   hemoglobin concentration and microcytic red            dysfunction require even higher protein and
   blood cells, is the most common nutritional blood      micronutrient intake to restore homeostasis during
   disorder in young children, pregnant women, and        the healing stage.
   older adults.                                       · Aging adults are susceptible to nutrient-deficient
                                                          blood abnormalities because of decreased
· Nutrient-related hematologic disorders include          production of hormones and red blood cells and a
   vitamin B12 deficiency, vitamins C, K, and D           decreased appetite/food intake related to delayed
   deficiency, and folate deficiency.                     gastric emptying, changes in papillae, and
                                                          declining oral health.
· Delays in diagnosing excessive or deficient          · Use of the TTM for nutrition educational
   nutritional intake can lead to hematologic             interventions can provide clients a degree of
   abnormalities resulting in life-threatening            motivation for successful restoration of
   conditions. Accurate assessment of the client's        hematologic wellness.
   nutritional status with early intervention gives
   clients the best chance for recovery.

· Acute and long-term illnesses such as trauma,

Key Terms

macrocytic anemia anemia that is marked by                 nutritional value such as ice, dirt, clay, and paper
    abnormally large red blood cells. Example: Folate  Transtheoretical Model (TTM) an integrative model
    and vitamin B12 deficient anemia
                                                           of behavior change that assesses an individual's
microcytic anemia anemia that is marked by                 readiness to act on a healthier behavior and that
    abnormally small red blood cells. Example: Iron-       provides strategies, or processes of change, to guide
    deficient anemia                                       the individual

pica craving and chewing substances with no

Review Questions

1. Which nutritional deficiency listed increases the risk for bleeding?
     a. Vitamin K
     b. Iron
     c. Vitamin B12
     d. Folate

2. The nurse is providing nutritional counseling to a client planning pregnancy. The nurse should emphasize the
    importance of consuming what micronutrients to avoid macrocytic anemia?
     a. Vitamin D
     b. Vitamin E
     c. Folic acid
     d. Vitamin C

3. A middle-aged client with a history of alcohol use disorder is admitted to an acute care setting with symptoms
    of severe anemia. The nurse anticipates what nutrient(s) to be deficient?
     a. Iron
     b. Vitamin B12
     c. Calcium
     d. Copper

4. The nurse notices that a client has excessive bruising and brittle nails. The client reports frequent infections.
    Which nutritional deficiency would the nurse expect for this client?
     a. Iron
     b. Protein
     c. Vitamin C
186 9 · Suggested Reading

         d. Copper

    5. A nurse is preparing discharge instructions for a client who has just been diagnosed with iron deficiency
        anemia and will be starting oral iron replacement therapy. Which of the following is an important nursing
        consideration to include in the teaching plan?
         a. Hemoglobin should be checked in 6 months.
         b. Always take iron with milk or food to increase absorption.
         c. Always take iron with a citrus beverage, 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals, to increase absorption.
         d. Increase diet in fatty fish.

    6. Which nursing diagnosis is a priority for an older adult client just diagnosed with nutritional anemia?
         a. Risk for falls
         b. Risk for imbalanced nutrition, less than body requirements
         c. Frail elderly syndrome, related to malnutrition
         d. Risk for bleeding

    7. The nurse is preparing discharge instructions for a client with anemia related to vitamin B12 deficiency. The
        nurse suggests which of the following food items be increased in the client's diet?
         a. Animal meat, fish, eggs, and dairy
         b. Beans, seeds, and nuts
         c. Dark green leafy vegetables
         d. Citrus fruits and acidic raw vegetables

    8. Which of the following psychosocial influences impacting nutritional goals for hematologic wellness is the
        best target for an initial nursing intervention?
         a. Health literacy
         b. Transportation
         c. Social support
         d. Cognitive function

    9. Assessing a client's readiness to learn about nutrition-related hematologic illness, utilizing a holistic
        approach, should include all of the following except:
         a. Providing written materials regarding vitamin C deficiency to the client immediately before discharge
         b. Determining the client's preferred language for learning
         c. Discussing the client's preferred learning style
         d. Delaying discharge education until the client's significant other is present

  10. When evaluating the effectiveness of a nutritional plan for iron deficiency anemia, the nurse considers which
        of the following factors?
         a. Behavior change typically takes 6 months to achieve, according to the Transtheoretical Model (TTM).
         b. Hemoglobin is expected to increase as a response to oral ferrous sulfate within 2 to 3 months of starting.
         c. An early sign suggesting improved anemia may include the client's report of sleeping more.
         d. Shortness of breath may take several months to improve.

Suggested Reading

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, November 16). Iron. Infant and Toddler Nutrition.
    https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/vitamins-minerals/iron.html

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2022, March 24). Blood tests. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/blood-
    tests

Nguyen, M., & Tadi, P. (2022). Iron supplementation. In StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK557376/

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 10

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Hematologic Health

FIGURE 10.1 A healthier version of nachos that contains sweet potatoes, which are high in vitamin C, and beans, which are high in iron, can
provide nutrients that promote hematologic wellness. (credit: modification of work "Good-For-You-Nachos" by Alabama Extension; ACES |
Janet Guynn/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan
10.2 Nutrition and Chronic Hematologic Illness
10.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION Nutritional needs vary from one life stage to the next. Specific stages of life have increased needs,
such as during pregnancy and vulnerable times, including acute and chronic illness. Meeting nutritional needs from
infancy through older age builds a framework for health and well-being throughout life (Rodríguez-Mañas et al.,
2023).
Nutritional deficiencies impacting hematologic health occur at all ages and affect people of all backgrounds and
socioeconomic status. Specific comorbidities and lifestyles contribute to a higher chance of experiencing undesired
consequences of these deficiencies and require special consideration by the health care team.
Consider this case: Catalina is a 15-year-old Black female adolescent with no prior medical problems. She is in the
10th grade, is in the high school band, and previously made good grades. She reports to her primary care clinic
today with concerns of increasing fatigue, headaches, and shortness of breath when playing her trumpet in the
school band. Her mother reports that her academic performance has declined over the past 6 weeks. Her diet is
reported to be normal for her age, although she does not care for most fruits and vegetables and seldom eats red
meat.
188  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     10.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 10.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during pregnancy.
       · 10.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during infancy.
       · 10.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during childhood.
       · 10.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during adolescence.
       · 10.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during adulthood.
       · 10.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the hematologic system during later adulthood.

     The most common hematologic consequence throughout the lifespan is anemia, affecting approximately 1.8 billion
     individuals worldwide (Safiri et al., 2021). Although the specific nutrient responsible for nutritional anemia can vary,
     the condition is characterized by a deficiency in healthy red blood cells. This can lead to various health conditions
     and is a major public health issue with significant implications for quality of life, productivity, and mortality.

     Less common than anemia, nutritional bleeding disorders are a group of conditions that can lead to problems
     involving prolonged bleeding and thrombosis caused by a lack of nutrients in the diet, such as vitamin K, vitamin C,
     or iron. Recognizing signs and symptoms related to these deficiencies is critical to avoid life-threatening
     complications, particularly during health emergencies such as trauma or sepsis. Although seen less frequently,
     macronutrient and micronutrient deficiencies can also impair immune system function and tissue healing, effects
     that can be particularly problematic for individuals living with acute or chronic illnesses such as infections or
     autoimmune diseases.

     Controlling anemia requires an interdisciplinary team to prioritize the highest-risk groups, including young children
     and clients of reproductive age. Despite the nature of the disease, dietary iron deficiency (ID) is the leading cause of
     anemia in all regions (Safiri et al., 2021). Recent reports indicate an increased trend in anemia and iron deficiency
     among pregnant clients and young children over the past two decades (National Center for Health Statistics, 2023).
     According to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria, anemia and iron deficiency among pregnant individuals
     and U.S. children have reached the significance of mild and moderate public health problems, respectively (Jefferds
     et al., 2022). More attention must therefore be paid to nutritional interventions for these high-risk groups.

     Impact on Health During Pregnancy

     Red blood cell production increases by 30% during pregnancy to support blood volume expansion and fetal growth
     (Benson et al., 2022). Iron is preferentially used for erythropoiesis (production of red blood cells); therefore, iron
     deficits can quickly occur, resulting in maternal and fetal anemia.

     Anemia affects approximately 36% of pregnant people worldwide and approximately 12% of pregnant people in the
     United States. The most common causes of anemia in pregnancy are iron deficiency and acute blood loss (Smith et
     al., 2019; WHO, n.d.-a). Figure 10.2 is an image of human blood from a case of iron deficiency. If iron needs are not
     met, there is an increased chance of maternal and fetal adverse outcomes. As the severity of anemia worsens, so do
     the associated risks, which can result in prolonged hospitalization for postpartum clients (Smith et al., 2019;
     Jefferds et al., 2022). Clients who have multiple births are twice as likely as those who have single births to develop
     iron deficiency anemia (IDA) due to increased blood volume expansion and utilization of iron stores.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                         10.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan                         189

FIGURE 10.2 Human blood from a case of iron deficiency anemia. The red blood cells are pale and smaller than the larger white blood cells
shown in the image. (credit: "This photomicrograph of a Prussian blue stained bone marrow sample, revealed that there was a lack of iron
stores. Prussian blue staining for iron particles, which reveals little or no stainable iron in the bone marrow reticulum cells, and
normoblasts, is the definitive test for iron deficiency, in the case of iron deficiency anemia (IDA)" by CDC/Dr. Gordon D. McLaren, Public
Domain)

The third trimester of pregnancy is the highest risk period of gestation. If the pregnant client has anemia (any type)
during pregnancy, they will have a decreased tolerance of blood loss occurring during birth, increasing their risk for
hypovolemic shock, heart failure, infection, and the need for blood transfusion (Sharma et al., 2021; Smith et al.,
2019). See Table 10.1 for complications and risks associated with anemia in pregnancy.

Race disparities in nutritional anemia exist both globally and within the United States. According to data from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a program conducted by the National Center for
Health Statistics to assess the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the United States, non-Hispanic
Black pregnant women have the highest prevalence of IDA, particularly during the third trimester of pregnancy
(Sharma et al., 2021).

Maternal Risks for Developing Anemia in  Maternal Complications of  Fetal Complications of
Pregnancy                                Anemia                     Anemia

  · Maternal age less than 20 years        · Maternal death           · Preterm birth
  · Maternal age greater than 40 years     · Cesarean delivery        · Low birth weight
  · Multiparous                            · Preeclampsia             · Small for gestational
  · Multiple pregnancy                     · Placenta previa with
  · In vitro fertilization                                                age
  · Underweight before pregnancy               hemorrhage             · Fetal death
  · Prior cesarean delivery                · Placental abruption
  · Hypertension                           · Hypovolemic shock
  · Chronic disease

TABLE 10.1 Complications and Risks Associated with Anemia in Pregnancy

Screening for anemia and ID in pregnant clients to improve maternal and infant health outcomes is a secondary
health promotion intervention. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) now recommends
screening for anemia in all pregnant clients at the first prenatal visit and, if detected, screening for iron deficiency.
However, current guidelines do not recommend prepregnancy iron screening. This decreases the chance of early
identification because individuals may not be aware they are pregnant until later in the pregnancy.
190  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     Iron deficiency and IDA are found equally often among pregnant individuals; however, ID alone doubles in the third
     trimester and might go completely undetected if the client is asymptomatic (Cochrane et. al, 2022; Nour, 2022).
     Iron requirements gradually increase during pregnancy from 0.8 mg/day to 7.5 mg/day by the third trimester. The
     average Western diet includes 1-5 mg of iron daily from food sources; therefore, iron stores will be depleted quickly
     from a pregnant client if not supplemented (Means, 2020). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
     recommends 30 mg/day of elemental iron at the start of pregnancy, and the WHO recommends 60 mg/day. If the
     pregnant client is diagnosed with anemia during pregnancy, iron should be increased to 60-120 mg/day (National
     Institutes of Health [NIH], 2023; WHO, n.d.-b).

          CLINICAL TIP

      Elemental vs. Nonelemental Iron

       Elemental iron is a natural substance (heavy metal) directly used by erythrocytes in the body. Nonelemental iron
       is a chemical compound of iron bound to salt, such as ferrous sulfate. Iron supplements contain an iron salt
       compound because it is absorbed better than natural iron (Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 2023).
       Various iron supplements are available over the counter, which is often confusing for patients and health care
       professionals. Although health care providers often write prescriptions for iron supplementation, most
       pharmacies do not carry a "prescription-strength" iron supplement, and clients are directed to over-the-counter
       products. These product labels will contain two different amounts of iron, elemental and nonelemental;
       therefore, when providing patient education, nurses must be aware of the amount of elemental iron prescribed
       and teach clients how to read the labels.

     Folate and Vitamin B12 Requirements
     Before the United States FDA began mandating folate fortification in 1998, folate (vitamin B9) deficiency was a
     common cause of anemia during pregnancy (Ismail et al., 2023). Folate demands increase during pregnancy to
     support fetal and maternal tissue development (Ballestín et al., 2021). Both anemia and folic acid deficiency can
     place the fetus at risk for neurologic compromise, including defects in brain development and in the myelination of
     nerve fibers (Jefferds et al., 2022). Although not a common cause of anemia in most women, vitamin B12 deficiency
     can cause serious maternal-fetal consequences for women with gastrointestinal malabsorption.

     Folate and vitamin B12 deficiencies do not always result in macrocytic anemia during pregnancy; however, a
     physiologic decline is expected (Achebe & Gafter-Gvili, 2017). Folate deficiency in pregnant clients can result in low
     birth weight and small-for-gestational age (SGA) newborns. Adequate maternal intake of vitamin B12 is necessary to
     support fetal growth and development. Signs and symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency include fatigue, pallor,
     tachycardia, poor exercise tolerance, and suboptimal work performance and should be considered in clients with a
     history of malabsorption conditions (Achebe & Gafter-Gvili, 2017).

     As a primary health promotion intervention, the WHO recommends 400 mcg daily of folic acid in pregnant clients
     until 3 months postpartum. The CDC recommends 400 mcg/day of folic acid for all individuals of childbearing age to
     prevent neural tube defects in the event of pregnancy. Prenatal vitamins generally contain 1 mg of folate; however,
     doses of up to 5 mg/day are recommended for those with higher demands, such as during pregnancy in women who
     have previously had a pregnancy affected by a neural tube defect (Khan, 2023).

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       Vitamin B12 Deficiency
       Vitamin B12 is readily stored in excess in the liver, so most pregnant clients are not deficient. However, when
       vitamin B12 cannot be obtained or absorbed, such as with dietary insufficiency or malabsorption, hepatic stores
       are depleted, creating a deficiency (Ankar & Kumar, 2022). This includes pregnant clients with a history of a
       strict vegan diet for the previous 3 years and those who have undergone bariatric surgery. The WHO and the NIH
       recommend 2.6 mcg of vitamin B12 daily during pregnancy, increasing to 2.8 mcg postpartum if breastfeeding
       (NIH, 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan                                               191

  The risk of developing vitamin B12 deficiency is higher for people who do not get vitamin B12 from their diet,
  such as those who are vegetarian or vegan and those with health conditions or medication regimens that
  interfere with absorption of the vitamin:

    · Intestinal diseases
    · Previous gastric or ileac resection
    · History of celiac disease or inflammatory bowel disease
    · Autoimmune disorders (Graves' disease, thyroiditis, vitiligo)
    · Prolonged use of proton pump inhibitors or H2 receptor antagonists

  Clients with a proven deficiency will need higher doses of replacement therapy as follows:

    · Deficiency from diet: 1000 mcg orally once daily
    · Deficiency from malabsorption: 1000 mcg parenterally (intramuscular injection) once every 3-4 weeks

        (Ankar & Kumar, 2022)

Infancy

Infancy, from birth to 12 months, is a period of intense physical and developmental growth. Hematopoiesis
(formation of blood cellular components) and hemostasis (usual reaction to a bleeding injury to stop blow flow) are
incomplete at birth, and micronutrient deficiencies can impair the child's long-term potential. Requirements for
macronutrients and micronutrients are higher during infancy and childhood than other developmental stages and
are influenced by the rapid cell division occurring during growth (Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine,
2020a). Research indicates that micronutrient deficiencies negatively affect the thymus, which can impact
lymphocyte function, increasing the risk of infection and inflammatory disease in children (Pai et al., 2018).

Infants receive passive immunity while in utero and through breast milk. This is partially the basis of the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations for breast milk as the "sole source of nutrition for the first 6 months
of life, or as long as both mother and baby desire" (Meek et al., 2022). After 6 months, infants should be introduced
to supplemental solid foods, including iron-fortified infant cereal. Introducing supplemental foods can be
challenging for caregivers, leaving infants and toddlers at additional risk for nutritional deficiencies, especially if
food allergies or intolerances are identified. To ensure that infants and young children achieve desirable physical
and social milestones, nurses must be well versed in the nutritional considerations affecting this vulnerable
population. Educating potential and new parents regarding all health benefits for the breastfed infant is an essential
client-centered nursing intervention.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Infant Benefits of Breastfeeding
  According to the AAP Section on Breastfeeding (Meek et al., 2022), exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6
  months of an infant's life can decrease risk for:

    · Acute and chronic infections, including lower respiratory and ear infections and tooth decay
    · Food allergies
    · Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
    · Otitis media
    · Eczema
    · Asthma
    · Childhood and adult obesity
    · Types 1 and 2 diabetes
    · Gastrointestinal discomfort, including vomiting, diarrhea, and colic

Anemia
According to the WHO, infantile and childhood anemia in the United States ranges from 6-18%, with higher rates
among low-income families. As with other age groups, ID is the most common cause of anemia, followed by other
192  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     nutritional anemias, vitamin B12, and folate (NIH, 2022).

     Iron deficiency occurs in 12% of infants ages 6-11 months and 8% of toddlers in the United States. Among
     toddlers, IDA ranges from 0.9-4.4%, depending on the racial and ethnic makeup and socioeconomics of the
     household (NIH, 2023). During the first 2 years of life, iron needs are high to build iron stores and support the child's
     rapid physical and cognitive development rate. Premature infants, infants born to those with iron-deficiency, and
     infants with low birth weight have been shown to have lifelong learning and memory deficits because of damage to
     the hippocampus, the brain's memory center. Accordingly, clinical consequences of ID and IDA in children include
     (Benson et al., 2022; Drakesmith et al., 2021):

       · Impaired psychomotor development and cognitive function
       · Delayed attention skills
       · Social withdrawal
       · Decreased leukocyte and lymphocyte function
       · Decreased response to childhood vaccines
       · Increased neurotoxicity when ID is associated with high lead blood concentrations

     Infant iron stores start to diminish at 6 months of age. After this time, breastfed infants are at greater risk for anemia
     because the iron content of breast milk depends on the lactating person's diet, whereas infant formula is fortified
     with iron. Full-term infants are at the highest risk between ages 6 months and 9 months if they are not consuming
     iron-fortified formula or successfully introduced to solid foods rich in iron (NIH, 2023). Additionally, children
     younger than 2 years are more likely than older children to have IDA associated with a transition to solid foods.
     Recommendations for preventing and treating ID and IDA are shown in Table 10.2.

     Recommending                     Infant Considerations          Iron Dosing                Iron-Fortified Foods
     Organization
                                      Less than 12 months old,       Iron-fortified formula     Label will indicate "with
     Centers for Disease              not exclusively breastfed                                 iron"
     Control and Prevention                                          2-4 mg/kg/day
                                      Less than 12 months old,       elemental iron until 12      · Infant rice cereal
                                      preterm or small for           months old                   · Commercially
                                      gestational age,
                                      exclusively breastfed          Consult health care              prepared baby food:
                                                                     provider for                     beef, turkey, pork,
                                      Less than 12 months old,       recommendations.                 lamb, spinach
                                      full-term, and                                              · Mashed chickpeas,
                                      appropriate for                *If eating iron-fortified        white beans, broccoli
                                      gestational age,               foods starting at 6          · Pureed or mashed
                                      exclusively breastfed          months old, iron                 sweet potatoes; soft,
                                                                     supplement may be                cooked beans; green
                                                                     discontinued.                    peas

     American Academy of              4-12 months old, full-         1 mg/kg/day elemental
                                                                     iron until eating iron-
     Pediatrics                       term, exclusively              fortified solid foods

                                      breastfed

     TABLE 10.2 Recommendations for Iron Supplementation in Infants

     Access for free at openstax.org
                        10.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan                      193

Recommending  Infant Considerations                             Iron Dosing               Iron-Fortified Foods
Organization
                                                                2 mg/kg/day elemental
              1-12 months old,                                  iron until 12 months old
              preterm, exclusively
              breastfed                                         2 mg/kg/day elemental
                                                                iron until 24 months old
World Health  6-23 months old if diet

Organization  does not include iron-

              fortified foods, or if living

              in a region where anemia

              prevalence is greater

              than 40%

TABLE 10.2 Recommendations for Iron Supplementation in Infants

Individuals living at high altitudes (greater than 1,500 m) are at increased risk for anemia secondary to increased
erythropoiesis. This is a compensatory response to a lower oxygen saturation of the blood, so health care
professionals must interpret hemoglobin carefully by using altitude-adjusted algorithms (Mairbäurl et al., 2023).
Children living at high altitudes may need a greater intake of iron and micronutrients to avoid growth and
development delays (Sharma et al., 2019).

Bleeding Risks
Vitamin K is an essential fat-soluble vitamin required for adequate blood clotting. Infants have minimal vitamin K
stored at birth because only small amounts pass through the placenta. Vitamin K comes from one of two sources:
diet or synthesis by anaerobic (relating to absence of oxygen) bacteria located in the stomach (Yan et al., 2022). A
newborn with a healthy gut will not have bacteria-producing vitamin K until approximately 1 week of life. In addition,
breast milk contains low quantities of vitamin K. All infants are therefore at high risk for vitamin K deficiency
bleeding (VKDB) until they start eating solid foods, which usually occurs at age 4-6 months (Araki & Shirahata,
2020). VKDB is a condition associated with uncontrolled bleeding due to lack of sufficient vitamin K to form blood
clots.

To prevent VKDB, the American Academy of Pediatrics (2022) recommends intramuscular (IM) vitamin K
prophylaxis as follows:

· Infant birth weight greater than 1500 g: 1 mg vitamin K IM within 6 hours of birth
· Infant birth weight less than 1500 g: 0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM within 6 hours of birth

This risk for VKDB is increased for the following infants:

· Premature infants
· Infants who did not receive vitamin K replacement shortly after birth
· Infants born to mothers with malabsorption or use of antiseizure drugs, antibiotics, warfarin, or antitubercular

   medications
· Infants with malabsorption, cholestasis (slowing or halt of bile flow from the liver), or liver disease

Table 10.3 outlines the three types of VKDB according to the time of presentation. Early and classic VKDB occur in 1
in 60 to 1 in 250 newborns whereas late VKDB occurs in 1 in 14,000 to 1 in 25,000 infants. Newborns who do not
receive a vitamin K injection are 81 times more likely to develop late VKDB (Hand et al., 2022).
194  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     Type   Timing                       Associated Factors
     Early  Within 24 hours after birth
                                           · Maternal malabsorption or maternal use of specific
                                               medications

                                           · A spectrum of symptoms from simple bruising to life-
                                               threatening cranial hemorrhage

     Classic Within 1 week after birth   · No prophylaxis was received or poorly feeding
                                         · Exclusively breastfed

     Late   Between 2 weeks and 6        · Peaks 2-8 weeks after birth
                                         · No prophylaxis was received and infant exclusively breastfed
            months after birth           · Infant malabsorption or cholestasis
                                         · Most life-threatening: cranial hemorrhage in 30-60%

     TABLE 10.3 Types of Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding (sources: Araki & Shirahata, 2020; CDC, 2023b)

     Childhood

     A variety of nutritional inadequacies exist among school-aged children (aged 5-12 years), ranging from overeating
     (caloric excess) to undereating, often due to food insecurity. Children who overeat or undereat are at risk for
     hematologic consequences from nutritional deficiencies. Iron deficiency is the most common micronutrient
     deficiency in school-aged children, although this age group has the lowest prevalence overall among all children.
     Anemia in school-aged children is highest among non-Hispanic Black children, and iron deficiency is explicitly
     highest among Mexican American children. The etiology of deficiency is mostly diet related, apart from children with
     malabsorption conditions (Jefferds et al., 2022).

     Iron plays an essential role in brain metabolism and neurotransmitter function, and deficiencies can lead to
     cognitive dysfunction (Pivina et al., 2019). School-aged children are undergoing steady linear growth and a high
     amount of cognitive processing. Iron deficiency with or without anemia can cause decreased school performance
     due to poor attention span, poor memory, and visual and auditory deficits, compromising "socioemotional
     development" (Rodríguez-Mañas et al., 2023). Children participating in extracurricular activities may have low
     energy, negatively impacting their physical performance. Signs and symptoms related to IDA often have a gradual
     onset in school-aged children and may not be easily detected. Research has shown a positive link between children
     with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and IDA. Therefore, children over 4 years of age demonstrating
     poor attention or impulsivity should be evaluated for ID (Mattiello et al., 2020). If it is detected, treatment and
     dietary changes are recommended to ensure intake of 3-6 mg/kg/day of elemental iron for 2-3 months.

     Vitamin D Deficiency
     Fat-soluble vitamin D is essential for calcium absorption, which takes place in the gastrointestinal tract. It is
     necessary for optimal bone growth; in addition, vitamin D modulates adaptive immunity, and deficiency is
     associated with an increased risk of infection (Giannini et al., 2022). The fortification of milk with vitamin D
     significantly decreased the prevalence of rickets, a softening and weakening of bones that can result in bone
     deformities. However, with fewer children playing outside and an increase in the use of sunscreen, vitamin D
     deficiency is once again a public health problem, affecting 15% of children aged 1-11 years (Porto & Abu-Alreesh,
     2022). Children at increased risk for vitamin D deficiency include those with:

       · Decreased dietary intake of vitamin D
       · Dark skin tones
       · Excess weight
       · Decreased sun exposure
       · Malabsorption diseases, including celiac disease, cystic fibrosis, pancreatic insufficiency, and short bowel

           syndrome

     The AAP recommends that all infants younger than 12 months old receive 400 units of supplemental vitamin D daily
     and that children older than 12 months old receive 600 units daily (Porto & Abu-Alreesh, 2022). Children with risks
     for deficiency or known deficiency will need higher doses.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                 195

Zinc Deficiency
Zinc is a mineral that is essential for growth in children. Deficiencies can impact hematopoiesis, resulting in poor
immunity and poor wound healing. Zinc deficiency affects approximately 31% of toddlers 1-3 years old in the
United States and up to 80% globally, usually due to poor diet or situations of food insecurity (Vreugdenhil et al.,
2021). Zinc is naturally found in meats, poultry, fish, dairy, eggs, and dry legumes, and in the United States, grains
and infant cereals are fortified with zinc. Strict vegetarians are at high risk for zinc deficiency because the body does
not readily absorb the zinc found in fruits, vegetables, and bread.

Adolescence

Adolescence is the second time in childhood when rapid growth and development occur. Physically, socially, and
psychologically, the energy and micronutrient demands are high. However, parental influence on food choices
diminishes during this time, often leading to nutritional deficiencies, most commonly iron.

Adolescence is a time of increased iron needs because of the expansion of blood volume and increase in muscle
mass. There are sex differences in ID without anemia in adolescents: 9-20% in females but less than 1% in males.
The prevalence of IDA in adolescent females who are not menstruating is 3% (Mattiello et al., 2020). Young females
are at particular risk for developing iron deficiency because of menstruation. Approximately 7% of menstruating
adolescents have IDA, and those who experience menorrhagia (heavy menstrual bleeding) are at increased risk
(Eiduson et al., 2021; Mattiello et.al., 2020). It is difficult to quantify heavy menstrual bleeding outside of clinical
trials; however, excessive menstrual blood loss that affects quality of life requires further evaluation and treatment
(Mansour et al., 2021). Counting how often sanitary pads or tampons are changed can aid in estimating the amount
of blood loss; for example, changing sanitary pads or tampons every 1-2 hours is consistent with heavy menstrual
bleeding (Fulton, 2022). Common signs and symptoms of ID and IDA in adolescents include:

  · Decreased psychomotor skills
  · Poor concentration
  · Decreased academic performance
  · Shortness of breath
  · Rapid heart rate
  · Headaches
  · Dizziness and fainting
  · Restless leg syndrome
  · Irritability
  · Mild weakness
  · Fatigue and the need to nap more frequently

Oral iron replacement is recommended as the first step for treating ID and IDA in adolescents, at a dosage of 3-6
mg/kg of elemental iron daily for 2-3 months (Miniero et al., 2019). Adolescents will also need counseling regarding
dietary modifications and ways to manage potential adverse effects of iron replacement. Long-term dietary changes
will be necessary for female adolescents with ID or IDA associated with menstruation. For therapy to be successful,
dietary modifications should reflect individual preferences. Vegetarian options may include legumes, beans, tofu,
rolled oats, and quinoa.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

The nurse prepares to assess Catalina for more details about her past medical history and current health concerns.
Catalina reports that prior to the past few months, she had felt great and had managed her grades and social life
well. She does not take any medications regularly, including daily vitamins. Her mother confirms that she has no
significant past medical issues, which makes her current symptoms more concerning. Catalina never complains and
has always prioritized her grades. Catalina and her mother confirm that nothing has changed in their social
196  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     circumstances, and Catalina denies symptoms of depression.

     The nurse is aware that adolescent females are at risk for anemia and ID once menstruation begins and therefore
     takes a detailed menstrual bleeding history. Catalina reports that she has had regular menstrual cycles lasting 5-7
     days since age 13 years but has noticed an increase in the heaviness of her flow this school year. She further says
     that her use of sanitary pads has increased, and she must change her pad every 1-2 hours during the day and night.
     The nurse recognizes this as a sign of heavy menstrual bleeding and notifies the health care provider of her concern
     that Catalina may be anemic and iron deficient.

         1. What is an expected dose of oral iron supplement for Catalina?
              a. 3 mg/kg/dose twice daily for 3 months
              b. 6 mg/kg/dose twice daily for 3 months
              c. 3-6 mg/kg/day for 6 months
              d. 3 mg/kg/day until anemia is resolved

         2. Which of the following strategies would be most effective when providing diet instruction to Catalina?
              a. Ask her to identify her food likes and dislikes.
              b. List the foods she must eat each week.
              c. Explain that she needs to make these changes on just a short-term basis until her anemia resolves.
              d. Explain that the iron supplement has side effects that she will have to tolerate if she is prescribed that
                   medication.

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       The Adolescent Athlete
       Adolescent athletes face unique challenges related to nutritional needs. They are already at risk for nutritional
       deficiencies because of rapid growth, unhealthy food choices, and high-risk behaviors. Adolescent athletes have
       a high nutritional demand due to the daily energy expenditure associated with training and having less time to
       make healthy food choices. Additionally, many athletes strive for a lean body composition for a competitive
       edge, setting them up for disordered eating patterns that can have lifelong effects on their overall health
       (Kontele & Vassilakou, 2021). Adolescent athletes who limit their intake of meat products are at even higher risk
       for iron imbalance. Because of increased iron needs combined with potentially low iron intake and increased
       blood loss from menstruation, ID and IDA are common problems among adolescent female athletes and can
       affect their physical endurance and cognitive performance. In males, ID is often associated with higher
       physiologic needs from excessive training rather than from diet alone (Desbrow, 2021).

       Iron deficiency can manifest as extreme fatigue, increased susceptibility to infection, impaired skeletal muscle
       function, and poor decision-making (Berg, 2019). Assessment for ID and IDA should be considered for both
       male and female athletes demonstrating these symptoms. Athletes at the highest risk for iron deficiency include
       those who are female; are underweight or undernourished; are vegetarian or consume limited amounts of iron-
       rich foods; have underlying malabsorption conditions; or compete in endurance sports.

     Adulthood

     As in other age groups, ID and IDA remain the highest cause of anemia in young and middle adults, although other
     nutrient deficiencies such as folate and vitamin B12 contribute (NIH, 2023). In adults ages 19-50, males require
     more zinc and vitamins C, K, and B complex, and menstruating females of the same age require more iron. Females
     are twice as likely as males to have nutritional anemia, and moderate to severe anemia is five times more common
     in nonpregnant females than in males. Race differences are prevalent, with the highest incidence in non-Hispanic
     Black adults, followed by Hispanic and White individuals (Malek et.al, 2019; Physicians Committee for Responsible
     Medicine, 2020a; Rodríguez-Mañas et al., 2023).

     Modern health care relies on healthy adults to maintain the blood supply. However, 25-35% of frequent blood
     donors will develop ID, which may not be detected if it is present without anemia (NIH, 2023). This raises concern
     for the frequent blood donor's health and the quality of blood they donate (Hod et al., 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                10.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Hematologic Wellness Across the Lifespan                197

Folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin K deficiencies in adults can also be secondary to chronic liver disease and
excessive alcohol intake. Middle adults in the United States consume less than the recommended daily
requirements for most essential micronutrients, leading to deficiencies that increase the risk for certain chronic
conditions. Chronic diseases are now increasingly common among young adults, often because of poor nutrition,
lack of physical activity, and smoking (Rodríguez-Mañas et al., 2023). Sixty percent of adults with chronic heart
failure have ID, and 17% of those have IDA. The etiology of this is multifactorial and may be related to:

  · Poor nutrition
  · Malabsorption
  · Defective mobilization of iron stores
  · Cardiac cachexia (unintentional severe weight loss caused by heart failure)
  · Use of aspirin or other anticoagulant medications that can lead to microscopic blood loss in the gastrointestinal

      tract

The economic burden on adults with IDA includes reduced physical productivity and work capacity due to
associated symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, and shortness of breath (Jefferds et al., 2022).

Later Adulthood

Aging naturally impacts physical changes, even in the healthiest adults, but healthy aging depends on proper
nutrition (Kaur et al., 2019). Although energy needs decrease with age, specific micronutrient needs increase. As
they age, adults become susceptible to nutrient-deficient blood abnormalities secondary to a decreased production
of hormones and red blood cells, as well as decreased appetite and food intake related to delayed gastric emptying
and declining oral health. In addition, older clients may experience nutritional challenges due to age- or disease-
related conditions associated with chewing, swallowing, digestion, and absorption of nutrients (Physicians
Committee for Responsible Medicine, 2020a). Malnutrition in this phase of life can result in lower physical function,
poor quality of life, a greater risk for loss of muscle mass, and a shorter lifespan (Kaur et al., 2019; Rodríguez-Mañas
et al., 2023).

Zinc deficiency occurs in approximately 60% of adults older than 70 years, leading to an increased risk for infection.
Decreased dietary zinc intake and the physiologic decline in gastrointestinal absorption are the most likely reasons
for this deficiency (Kaur et al., 2019).

Iron Deficiency
Older adults have the greatest incidence of nutritional anemia overall, with those aged 80-85 years having the
highest. This is the only age group in which males have a greater incidence of anemia than females--as much as two
times more. Older adults with anemia have increased hospitalization rates and mortality. Approximately 25-30% of
older adults with congestive heart failure have anemia, worsening functional capacity, and are at increased risk of
death (Ambrosy et al., 2019). With advancing age, iron stores diminish. This, along with decreased dietary intake of
iron-rich foods and increased incidence of gastrointestinal malabsorption and occult blood loss, contributes to ID
and IDA in older adults (Burton et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2019). The prevalence of IDA in older adults is detailed in
Table 10.4.

Age                                                     Male                         Female
                                                                                     10.2%
65-75 years                                             11%                          7-12%
                                                                                     17%
76-85 years                                             15%

Older than 85 years                                     30%

TABLE 10.4 Prevalence of Iron Deficiency Anemia in Older Adults (Kaur et al., 2019)

Signs and symptoms of IDA in older adults may include:

· Depression
· Fatigue
· Loss of muscle strength
· Decreased cognitive function

Iron-rich foods, such as fortified grains and cereals, and oral replacement are the first step once a deficiency is
198  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     confirmed; however, parenteral iron replacement may be required due to the frequency of gastrointestinal
     malabsorption in this population (Burton et al., 2020).

     Folate and Vitamin B Deficiencies
     Vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies among older adults remain a significant challenge. Approximately 10-30% of
     older adults are affected by atrophic gastritis, which can interfere with the absorption of vitamin B12 and folate
     (NIH, 2022). Additionally, the metabolic processes of each micronutrient are interconnected, so it is difficult to
     distinguish the source of physical manifestations (Socha et al., 2020). Signs and symptoms include:

       · Risk for cardiovascular disease
       · Cognitive impairment
       · Insomnia
       · Impaired mood
       · Decreased decision-making ability
       · Decreased physical performance, leading to increased risk for falls and fractures

     Folate deficiency is more likely to be related to decreased absorption and reduced dietary intake, whereas vitamin
     B12 deficiency is more often associated with diseases of malabsorption and polypharmacy. Mild vitamin B12
     deficiency occurs in 20% of adults older than 60, and severe deficiency occurs in 6% of adults older than 70 (NIH,
     2022). Nonhematologic symptoms range from vague and nonspecific to severe neurologic and neuropsychiatric
     disorders (Stauder et al., 2018). Folate deficiency is reported to occur in 5-20% of older adults and is more
     common in those who smoke, consume excessive amounts of alcohol, are obese, or live alone (Rotstein et al.,
     2022). Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is more likely to be associated with neurologic symptoms not seen in
     individuals with folate deficiency anemia (Stauder et al., 2018). Anemia associated with both of these deficiencies
     can be distinguished from IDA based on the size of red blood cells; iron deficiency anemia is microcytic, whereas
     folate and vitamin B12 deficiencies are macrocytic. Treatment is focused on nutrient replacement and diet
     modification.

     10.2 Nutrition and Chronic Hematologic Illness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 10.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on congenital hematologic disorders.
       · 10.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on cancers.

     Congenital Hematologic Disorders

     Sickle cell disease (SCD), a genetic hemoglobinopathy with chronic anemia, is the most common inherited blood
     disorder in the United States (McCaskill et al., 2018) and affects the shape of hemoglobin, resulting in blocked blood
     flow. Individuals with SCD are more prone to micronutrient and macronutrient (carbohydrate, fat, and protein)
     deficiencies related to hyperreactive hematopoiesis, the physiologic response caused by chronic anemia. Nutrient
     deficiencies (Table 10.5) further increase systemic oxidative stress (disturbance in the balance between the
     production of free radicals and antioxidant defenses) and contribute to severe and frequent sickle cell vaso-
     occlusive crises. These deficiencies can cause the following in people with SCD (Umeakunne & Hibbert, 2019):

       · Delayed growth and development
       · Decreased quality of life
       · Chronic inflammation
       · Painful vaso-occlusive crises
       · Increased occurrence of stroke, pulmonary hypertension, heart disease, and renal disease

     As with SCD, thalassemia is a genetic hemoglobinopathy, characterized by less oxygen-carrying protein and fewer
     red bloods cells. There are multiple genetic forms ranging in severity. Thalassemia carries the same nutritional risks
     as SCD does.

     Table 10.5 outlines additional micronutrient deficiencies and recommended interventions.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  10.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Hematologic Illness                     199

Micronutrient Deficiency  Recommended Foods/Interventions

Vitamin D*                Milk, yogurt, cheese

Vitamin A                 Carrots, sweet potatoes, kale, spinach

Vitamin C                 Kiwis, oranges

Vitamin E                 Mustard greens, sunflower seeds

Zinc                      Nuts, fish, whole grains, dairy products

Folic acid                1 mg daily supplement
                          Leafy green vegetables

Vitamin B12               Steamed shrimp, baked snapper, whole grain breads
Omega-3 fatty acids       Meats, beans, nuts, seeds, vegetable oils

  *Vitamin D deficiency is five times more likely to occur in children with SCD than in children without SCD and is
  associated with increased hospitalizations (McCaskill et al, 2018).

TABLE 10.5 Common Nutrient Deficiencies in Congenital Hematologic Disorders (source: Sickle-Cell.com, 2023)

Genetic Hemochromatosis
Genetic hemochromatosis causes excessive absorption of dietary iron secondary to decreased expression of the
peptide hormone hepcidin. It is the most common autosomal recessive disorder in White individuals, affecting one
in 300-500 people of northern European descent (Porter & Prashanth, 2023). It is twice as common in males as
females and can result in multiple organ dysfunction. Excessive intestinal dietary intake of heme and nonheme iron
is primarily managed by dietary modifications (Milman, 2021). These modifications are extensive and require
nutritional counseling and reinforcement by health care professionals:

· Consider a vegetarian or semivegetarian diet.
· Consume 21 oz of fruit and vegetables daily; fresh is best.
· Avoid red meat from mammals; instead, choose lean, white poultry.
· Avoid processed meat. Consume no more than 7 oz of meat from poultry per week. Consider additional protein

   sources such as fish, eggs, and legumes.
· Choose whole grains; avoid iron-enriched grains.
· Beverages should consist of water, green or black tea, coffee, and low-fat milk. Avoid alcoholic beverages.

Hemophilia
Hemophilia is an inherited X-linked blood disorder resulting in decreased levels of clotting factor VIII or IX.
Occurring in 1 in 5,000 male births, this deficiency results in spontaneous bleeding, often in joints, and severe
bleeding following injury or trauma (CDC, 2023a). Nutritional considerations include managing weight and
maintaining iron levels to avoid IDA. Obesity is common secondary to a sedentary lifestyle to avoid injury-induced
bleeding; however, consequences of decreased physical activity include more stress on the joints and muscle
strains that can result in musculoskeletal bleeding (Lim et al., 2020). A recommended diet includes iron-rich foods
such as lean red meat, leafy green vegetables, broccoli, dried beans, grains, and raisins. It is important to consume
foods containing vitamin C, such as orange juice, to enhance iron absorption.

EFFECT OF MISSHAPEN RED BLOOD CELLS ON BLOOD FLOW

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/10-2-nutrition-and-chronic-
hematologic-illness)
The American Society of Hematology (2009) offers a video that demonstrates how blood flow is affected by
misshapen red blood cells.

Impact of Cancer on Nutrition and Hematologic Function

Advanced age is a risk factor for nutritional deficiency; the addition of chronic diseases, including malignancy, can
quickly lead to malnourishment. These comorbidities can contribute to reduced tolerance of anticancer therapy,
impacting survival (Stauder et al., 2020).
200  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     The prevalence of anemia in cancer can exceed 90% across all ages and is generally considered to be related to
     medications, infections, or disorders of hematopoiesis. Common concerns are alterations in activities of daily living
     affecting quality of life, decreased productivity, and inability to work. Fatigue is reported as the most common
     troubling symptom of cancer and is directly linked to anemia (Gilreath & Rodgers, 2020). Fatigue and lack of
     appetite commonly coexist, resulting in an inability to prepare meals, further exacerbating anemia.

     Anemia was traditionally believed to be primarily related to the adverse effects of anticancer therapy; however,
     recent research has shown a direct correlation with chronic, low-grade inflammation. Functional iron deficiency
     (state in which iron is insufficiently incorporated into erythroid precursors even though body iron stores are
     apparently adequate), malnutrition, and anorexia contribute to cancer-associated anemia (Natalucci et al., 2021).
     See Table 10.6 for types of IDA in cancer. In contrast, iron overload can occur in clients with symptomatic anemia
     receiving red blood cell transfusions and can alter the function of effective hematopoiesis, contributing to anemia
     (Gilreath & Rodgers, 2020). Other micronutrient deficiencies affecting hematologic function in individuals with
     cancer include folate and vitamin B12.

     Approximately 50% of adults with colon cancer have anemia due to chronic blood loss from the gastrointestinal
     tract (Chardalias et al., 2023). The prevalence of anemia in other cancers ranges from 29-46%, mainly related to
     chronic disease, chemotherapy-induced anemia, nutrient-related anemia, chronic anorexia, and gastrointestinal
     adverse effects such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (Busti et.al., 2018).

     Iron Deficiency                  Etiology

     Absolute iron deficiency anemia  Associated with bleeding; total body iron stores diminish.

     Iron sequestration*              Inflammation results in iron being unavailable for erythropoiesis.

     Iron-restricted erythropoiesis*  Erythropoiesis therapy (epoetin) outpaces iron delivery from storage.

       *Functional iron deficiency anemia

     TABLE 10.6 Types of Iron Deficiency Anemia in Cancer

     Nutritional Interventions

     Chronic illness has a significant impact on nutrition and, consequently, hematologic wellness. Recommendations
     have evolved due to more emphasis on a holistic approach to caring for those with hemoglobinopathies and cancer.

     The Mediterranean diet has gained popularity in the United States as a way to manage weight, lower cholesterol,
     and stabilize blood sugar. Close investigation of the constituents of this eating lifestyle reveals significant anti-
     inflammatory properties that translate well to chronic hematologic illness. Extra-virgin olive oil is has been found to
     block the proinflammatory cascade (Natalucci et al., 2021).

     The following foods and substances rich in antioxidants contribute to anti-inflammatory and microbiota-modulating
     properties:

     · Phytochemical vitamins in red, orange, and yellow fruits and dark green leafy vegetables
     · Ginger
     · Green tea
     · Garlic
     · Black pepper
     · Turmeric

     To avoid severe nutritional deficiencies, a high-calorie, nutrient-rich diet is essential for people living with SCD and
     thalassemia. Increased oral hydration is vital in SCD to decrease the frequency of painful vaso-occlusive events.
     Additional recommendations include daily supplements of omega-3 fatty acids, folic acid, high-dose vitamin D, and
     a multivitamin without iron. For clients with thalassemia specifically, drinking black tea may decrease the
     gastrointestinal absorption of iron (Goldberg et al., 2018; Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, 2020b;
     Srichairatanakool et al., 2020).

     People with SCD and vitamin D deficiency consuming a diet rich in fish, milk, cheese, and eggs were found to have
     decreased hospital and emergency department visits (McCaskill et al., 2018). High-dose vitamin D replacement
     (greater than 3000 units per day) has been found to augment immune response and decrease the risk of respiratory

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                                                          201

infections in SCD (Umeakunne & Hibbert, 2019). Recent literature strongly correlates that vitamin D and chronic
inflammation play an important role in regulating iron homeostasis, which can improve anemia (Natalucci et al.,
2021).

Adults living with hemoglobinopathies should avoid drinking alcohol because it potentiates the oxidative damage
caused by iron overload (Milman, 2021).

10.3 Treatments and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 10.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments used for hematologic disorders.
  · 10.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      hematologic disorders.

Drug-Food Interactions with Treatments for Hematologic Disorders

Some treatments for hematologic disorders will not work as intended if taken with certain foods. Limiting groups of
foods during an already vulnerable state of nutritional need can lead to additional micronutrient deficiencies. For
example, individuals requiring iron replacement are instructed to avoid cereals, dietary fiber, tea, coffee, eggs, and
milk while taking iron supplements because these foods are known to decrease iron absorption (Moustarah, 2022).

Unlike individuals with other hematologic illnesses previously discussed, individuals with SCD and thalassemia are
at risk for iron overload rather than iron deficiency. The primary cause of iron overload is red blood cell transfusion
therapy. However, iron overload can occur in people with and without transfusion-dependent thalassemia because
of intestinal absorption of iron secondary to ineffective erythropoiesis (Srichairatanakool et al., 2020). These
individuals are therefore counseled to avoid iron-rich foods. The rate of iron accumulation varies and correlates with
the number of red blood cell transfusions received. Each unit of packed red blood cells contains 200-250 mg of
elemental iron, equating to 0.3-0.6 mg/kg/day of elemental iron, and most transfusion-dependent older children
and adults will receive 2-4 units of blood monthly. The symptoms and associated health risks from iron overload
depend on where the iron accumulates. The liver, heart, and endocrine glands are the most common initial sites
(Srichairatanakool et al., 2020). Frequent complications of iron overload in people living with hemoglobinopathies
include:

  · Increased risk for thrombosis
  · Pulmonary hypertension
  · Hypothyroidism
  · Hypogonadism
  · Osteoporosis

Nurses should ensure client rights regarding medication administration, which includes understanding any
contraindications and drug-food interactions. Equally important is a nutritional evaluation prior to the start of
treatment for hematologic disorders and the development of a plan to avoid further nutritional deficiencies that can
impact the desired response of treatment.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

Catalina's health care provider confirms that her physical exam is normal other than signs of pallor. A complete
blood count (CBC) and ferritin level are ordered to evaluate for ID and anemia. Catalina is also referred to a
gynecologist for further evaluation of her heavy menstrual bleeding.

Catalina's laboratory test results reveal a hemoglobin level of 7 g/dL (expected range: 12-15 g/dL) and a ferritin
level of 9 ng/mL (expected range: 12-150 ng/mL), confirming IDA. She is started on oral iron replacement and
202  10 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

     counseled on foods to avoid while taking oral iron for better absorption. She is also encouraged to add iron-rich
     foods to her diet daily and to return in 6 weeks.

     At her 6-week follow-up visit, Catalina reports that she is feeling less tired, and her shortness of breath has
     resolved. Her hemoglobin level at this visit is 10 g/dL. She has also been evaluated by a gynecologist and started on
     oral birth control pills to decrease her heavy menstrual bleeding. Catalina is instructed to continue oral iron therapy
     for at least 2 more months and then return for follow-up.

         3. The nurse should include which of the following in Catalina's discharge instructions regarding taking oral iron?
              a. Iron should be taken with milk or tea.
              b. If stomach discomfort occurs, take the iron with an antacid.
              c. If a dose is missed, double the dose for the next day.
              d. Iron should be taken with orange juice to enhance absorption.

         4. Which of the following may indicate that Catalina's iron dosage is not adequate or that the iron is not being
             fully absorbed?
              a. Constipation
              b. Increased appetite
              c. Weakness and dizziness
              d. Increased menstrual bleeding

     Treatments and Medications That Can Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

     Treatments for hematologic malignancies can lead to nutritional deficiencies due to decreased food intake that is
     secondary to adverse treatment effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mouth sores, and loss of appetite.
     Traditional chemotherapy and novel targeted therapy can affect taste and saliva production, further affecting the
     individual's interest in food.

     Several of the most frequent hematologic malignancies, such as myelodysplasia and multiple myeloma (a blood
     cancer affecting plasma cells found in bone marrow), occur in older adults. The average age at diagnosis for
     hematologic malignancies in adults is 70 years, and 40% already have reduced food intake. The prevalence of
     malnutrition in these individuals is approximately 30% and is more common in male clients (Stauder et al., 2020).
     Associated symptoms include a high systemic inflammatory score, alterations in mood and cognition, and moderate
     to severe fatigue. Decreased food intake, weight loss, low body mass index, and laboratory evidence of
     malnourishment have been associated with decreased survival rates in older adults with hematologic malignancies
     (Stauder et al., 2020). A complete nutritional assessment, timely intervention with micronutrient and macronutrient
     replacement, and dietary referral are essential.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           10 · Chapter Summary 203

Chapter Summary

· Common vitamin and mineral deficiencies that                associated with training and less time available to
   impact hematologic wellness across the lifespan            make healthy food choices, putting them at high
   include deficiencies of iron, vitamin B12, folate,         risk for iron deficiency and anemia.
   and vitamins A, C, D, and K.                            · Folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin K deficiencies
                                                              in adults can occur secondary to chronic liver
· Anemia affects approximately 1.8 billion                    disease and excessive alcohol intake.
   individuals worldwide, most often affecting young       · Individuals with SCD and thalassemia are more
   children, pregnant individuals, and older adults.          prone to micronutrient and macronutrient
                                                              deficiencies related to hyperreactive
· Non-Hispanic Black pregnant clients have the                hematopoiesis, the physiologic response to
   highest prevalence of IDA, particularly during their       chronic anemia.
   third trimester of pregnancy.

· Adolescent athletes have a high nutritional
   demand due to daily energy expenditure

Key Terms

anaerobic relating to the absence of oxygen                    (NHANES) a health-related program conducted by
cardiac cachexia unintentional severe weight loss              the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
                                                               National Center for Health Statistics designed to
    caused by heart failure                                    assess the health and nutritional status of adults
cholestasis the slowing or halt of bile flow from the          and children in the United States
                                                           oxidative stress disturbance in the balance between
    liver                                                      the production of reactive oxygen species (free
erythropoiesis the production of red blood cells               radicals) and antioxidant defenses
functional iron deficiency a state in which iron is        passive immunity a type of immunity conferred when
                                                               a person is given antibodies rather than making
    insufficiently incorporated into erythroid precursors      them via their own immune system
    even though body iron stores are apparently            primary health promotion an intervention to prevent
    adequate                                                   disease or injury before it occurs
hematopoiesis the formation of blood cellular              secondary health promotion an intervention that
    components                                                 emphasizes early disease detection through
hemoglobinopathy a group of disorders in which the             screening
    hemoglobin molecule has abnormal production or         sickle cell disease an inherited red blood cell
    structure                                                  disorder affecting the shape of hemoglobin,
hemostasis the usual reaction to a bleeding injury to          resulting in blocked blood flow
    stop the blood flow                                    thalassemia an inherited blood disorder
menorrhagia heavy menstrual bleeding lasting more              characterized by less oxygen-carrying protein
    than 7 days                                                (hemoglobin) and fewer red blood cells in the body
multiple myeloma a blood cancer affecting plasma           vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB) uncontrolled
    cells that are found in the bone marrow; abnormal          bleeding due to lack of sufficient vitamin K to form a
    plasma cells multiply rapidly, crowd out normal            blood clot
    blood-producing cells, and produce an abnormal
    protein that leaves the bone marrow and damages
    organs in the body
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey

Review Questions

1. Which of the following nutritional deficiencies can impact hematologic wellness across the lifespan?
     a. Vitamin C
     b. Vitamin B12
     c. Magnesium
     d. Calcium

2. Anemia affects which population the most often?
     a. Pregnant individuals
     b. School-aged children
204 10 · Review Questions

         c. Male and female adolescents
         d. Middle-aged females

    3. Infants and young children are at high risk for iron-deficient anemia related to which of the following?
         a. Inability to chew meat
         b. Rapid growth
         c. Frequent use of a bottle
         d. Little interest in food

    4. Which of the following statements by a parent can indicate that their child is at an increased risk for vitamin D
        deficiency?
         a. "My child prefers chocolate milk to plain milk."
         b. "I am careful to put sunscreen on my child every time we go outside."
         c. "My child has lost some weight since the last visit."
         d. "My child loves to eat tuna fish sandwiches."

    5. You are reviewing the chart of a 15-month-old toddler who was brought to the emergency department for
        fever for the fourth time this month. The child's father reports that the child was weaned off infant formula 3
        months ago and is allergic to eggs and lactose. You suspect this child may have a deficiency of which
        micronutrient?
         a. Vitamin K
         b. Zinc
         c. Folate
         d. Vitamin B12

    6. The nurse is teaching a client about sickle cell disease. Which of the following dietary strategies can decrease
        the risk of disease complications?
         a. Eating several small meals throughout the day
         b. Limiting carbohydrate intake
         c. Consuming dairy products and other sources of vitamin D
         d. Avoiding seafood

    7. Folate deficiency is more common in older adults who:
         a. Are underweight
         b. Follow a vegetarian diet
         c. Consume alcohol daily
         d. Eat at restaurants several times a week

    8. Which of the following blood disorders is associated with the most nutritional deficiencies?
         a. Thalassemia
         b. Sickle cell disease
         c. Aplasia
         d. Iron overload

    9. A client with thalassemia is being discharged after receiving a transfusion of packed red blood cells. Which of
        the following foods should the client be instructed to limit in their diet?
         a. Nuts
         b. Dairy products
         c. Apples
         d. Iron-fortified breakfast cereals

  10. Which of the following diets can be beneficial for people living with chronic illness and nutritional anemia?
         a. High-fat diet

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                10 · Suggested Reading 205

         b. High-protein diet
         c. Mediterranean diet
         d. Low-fat diet

Suggested Reading

Abdou, M. (September 29, 2019). Nutrition and Blood. https://askhematologist.com/nutrition-and-blood/
American Academy of Pediatrics Healthy Children Nutrition. (n.d.). Ages & Stages. https://www.healthychildren.org/

    English/ages-stages/baby/feeding-nutrition/Pages/default.aspx
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). What is Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding? https://www.cdc.gov/

    ncbddd/vitamink/facts.html
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. (March 2023). Iron. The Nutrition Source.

    https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/iron/
National Cancer Institute. (November 3, 2022). Side Effects of Cancer Treatment. https://www.cancer.gov/about-

    cancer/treatment/side-effects/appetite-loss/nutrition-hp-pdq
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS). (October 4, 2022). Zinc.

    https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Zinc-Consumer/#h3
206 10 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 11

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

FIGURE 11.1 Adding spices like garlic or curry powder to foods may improve heart health by reducing cholesterol and improving blood flow.
(credit: modification of work "Yay, Spices!" by Dennis Sylvester Hurd/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System
11.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness
11.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness
11.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness
INTRODUCTION Nutrition plays a key role in the proper development and maintenance of the cardiovascular
system. When disease exists in a client's cardiovascular system, the nurse should include nutritional considerations
in the client's care plan.
Consider this case: Mr. Jack Thompson, a 65-year-old White male, has no history of cardiovascular disease and
skips annual exams with his primary care provider because he's always felt healthy and takes good care of himself.
While he does have an extensive family history of heart disease, he watches his diet, exercises regularly, and has not
smoked in 20 years. He presents today with a personal problem that he refuses to discuss with anyone other than
the provider and nurse when he gets in the room.
208  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     11.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular
     System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 11.1.1 Recognize cues that indicate the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system.
       · 11.1.2 Analyze cues to determine the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system.

     Normal Function of the Cardiovascular System

     The cardiovascular system includes the heart, blood, blood vessels, lymph, lymphatic vessels, and glands that
     move blood and lymph through the body. Assessment of this system involves the mechanical and electrical
     functions of the heart and blood vessels and their effectiveness at circulating blood throughout the body.
     Assessment should also include an examination of a client's nutritional status.

     The cardiovascular system's primary role is to circulate blood throughout the body. The components of this system
     include the heart, known as the cardiac muscle, and blood vessels. The blood vessels include the arteries, which
     carry oxygenated blood from the heart to other parts of the body; veins, which carry deoxygenated blood from the
     body to the heart; and capillaries, tiny blood vessels with thin walls where arteries and veins exchange blood
     supply.

     The heart has two components--the electrical conduction system and the mechanical working component--that
     work together to effectively pump blood and maintain proper perfusion, or movement of blood, oxygen, and
     nutrients to tissues in the body. The electrical system sends an impulse to the excitable cardiac tissue cells and
     triggers them to mechanically contract in a specific pattern to push blood throughout the body.

     Nutrition can heavily impact the heart's ability to complete the task of pumping blood. Like other muscles in the
     body, the heart requires electrolytes to produce action-potential impulses in muscles. The electrical charge that
     sends an impulse to the heart to trigger contraction is highly dependent on the involuntary process of potassium and
     sodium ion exchange (Balchem, 2021). Likewise, muscles, including the heart, are dependent on calcium and
     magnesium ion exchange for physical contraction or movement (Balchem, 2021). Low levels of these electrolytes
     can result in dysrhythmias and ineffective cardiac output and perfusion.

     For the mechanical working component of the heart to function properly, the cardiac muscle must be supplied with
     oxygen and nutrients from the coronary arteries. The cardiac muscle must also be in good physical working
     condition and able to receive impulses from the heart's electrical conduction system. The mechanical working
     component is not necessary for the electrical conduction system to function; but, without the mechanical working
     component, no blood is pumped through the body--and if the electrical conduction system is functioning
     independently, there will only be pulseless electrical activity (PEA), or electrical conduction throughout the heart
     without physical movement of the heart muscle.

     Another consideration is the vascular portion of the cardiovascular system. While the heart requires electrolytes to
     create electrical impulses to trigger contractions strong enough to circulate blood throughout the body, it may still
     be unable to adequately perfuse the body if the vessels are blocked or become hardened, as in arteriosclerosis. The
     primary cause of this disease is a nutritional intake high in unhealthy fats and cholesterol. When low-density lipid
     (LDL) cholesterol levels are chronically high, fatty deposits known as plaques form in artery walls and reduce blood
     flow through that vessel (Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 2023). When the heart is forced to push against
     the increased pressure from the less-elastic and smaller diameter of the diseased vessels, it causes the heart
     muscle to continually be overworked. The heart muscle can become damaged, and the eventual result can be heart
     failure.

     The other consideration in normal function of the heart is the pressure it exerts against the vessel walls when
     contracting and relaxing, known as blood pressure. When blood pressure is chronically high, the client has an
     increased risk of heart failure. Blood pressure is largely regulated in the body by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
     system (RAAS) that utilizes fluid and electrolytes, especially sodium (Martyniak and Tomasik, 2022). This system
     works to change the sodium concentration in the blood to raise or lower blood pressure as needed by the body
     (Martyniak and Tomasik, 2022). When the concentration of sodium is chronically high due to excessive intake and is

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System                                            209

not able to be excreted by the kidneys, the RAAS system is unable to adequately control blood pressure.

There are two main circulatory systems of interconnected blood vessels that flow through the body: the systemic
circulatory system and the pulmonary circulatory system. The systemic system provides blood to the body's tissues,
organs, and cells, and the pulmonary system transports blood between the heart and lungs allowing for oxygen and
carbon dioxide exchange to occur (Sherrell, 2021).

Through the circulation of blood, the cardiovascular system performs several other functions. Blood is considered a
"fluid connective tissue" (Visible Body, 2023), and it supports, protects, and gives structure to the blood vessels.
Blood provides numerous other functions, including:

  · Clotting for tissue repair
  · Protection from infection
  · Transportation of body wastes to the kidneys for excretion
  · Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between body tissues
  · Regulating body temperature
  · Transporting nutrients and hormones throughout the body for use and functional regulation (American Society

      of Hematology, 2023)

Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Cardiovascular System

A thorough assessment of the nutritional status of a client's cardiovascular system involves examining each
component. Many diseases are associated with poor nutrition or malnutrition. The most effective method of
determining whether nutrition is a contributing factor is to evaluate each component individually. Note that the
electrical conduction system and the mechanical working component should be assessed separately.

Assessing Electrical Conduction System of the Heart
The normal electrical pattern of the heart (Figure 11.2) starts with the initiation of an impulse at the sinoatrial node
(SA node), the pacemaker of the heart. The impulse then travels through the atria, the top two heart chambers,
causing atrial contraction, down to the atrioventricular node (AV node), an electrical gatekeeper that controls a
delay between the atrial and ventricular impulse, allowing blood to fill the ventricle. From the AV node, the impulse
travels to the bundle of His, a bundle of conducting fibers that branch to each ventricle, then down both bundle
branches to the Purkinje fibers, or terminal-conducting fibers in the ventricles. This action causes the ventricles, or
bottom chambers of the heart, to contract (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2023b).
210  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     FIGURE 11.2 The heart muscle and systemic circulation are vital components that work together to deliver oxygen and nutrients to the
     body's tissues and organs while removing waste products. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     An Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) or telemetry can be used to evaluate the electrical conduction of the heart. An
     ECG is a recording of a heart's electrical activity through electrodes placed on the chest to capture signals.
     Telemetry is the continual measurement of a heart's ECG through a portable device that automatically transmits the
     reading to a monitor.
     A nurse should know several important measurement facts of a telemetry wave (Figure 11.3):

       · Each small square on the telemetry strip represents 0.04 seconds.
       · Each portion of the wave indicates a different part of the cardiac polarization (relaxation) and depolarization

           (contraction) cycle.
       · Each wave is expected to have a certain appearance or shape and specific deflection: positive being upward and

           negative being downward.

     FIGURE 11.3 Nurses are expected to be able to measure and interpret the points of a telemetry wave. (credit: modification of work from
     Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     For the heart to be in optimal health, the electrical conductivity should be a normal sinus rhythm (NSR). An NSR is
     a rhythm that originates from the sinus node and is characteristic of a healthy heart's cardiac rhythm. With an NSR,
     the wave tracing should be within normal measurements, and the deflections and appearances or shapes of all

     Access for free at openstax.org
                               11.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System               211

wave components should have a pulse that is calculated between 60 and 100 beats per minute. In addition, the
waves should be consistent and resemble each other. Table 11.1 outlines the telemetry wave components, normal
measurement, existence in the cardiac cycle, and the expected shape and deflection.

Wave/     Normal       Part of Cardiac Cycle             Wave/Segment Appearance/Shape and
Segment   Measurement                                    Deflection
          of Segment

P                      Atrial depolarization             Positive deflection/smooth hill shape

Q                      Start of ventricular              Negative deflection/sharp downstroke if

                       depolarization                    shown (Some normal telemetry readings do

                                                         not have a true Q wave.)

R                      Ventricular depolarization        Positive deflection/sharp mountain peak

                                                         upward

S                      Ventricular depolarization        Negative deflection/sharp downward end of

                                                         the mountain

T                      Ventricular repolarization        Positive deflection/ smooth hill shape

U                      Atrial repolarization: not an     Positive deflection/smooth hill shape (Most

                       expected finding on every         normal telemetry readings do not have a U

                       client                            wave.)

QRS       0.06-0.12    Ventricular depolarization        Cluster of QRS waves together
complex   seconds

PR        0.12-0.20    Beginning of atrial               P wave and segment between P wave and Q
interval  seconds      depolarization to beginning of    wave
                       ventricular depolarization

QT        0.40-0.44    Beginning of ventricular          QRS complex, ST segment, and to end of T
interval  seconds      depolarization through            wave
                       ventricular repolarization

ST        Isoelectric line, Time in-between ventricular  End of ST segment to beginning of T

segment not measured   depolarization and                wave--must be on isoelectric line, no

          separately   repolarization                    deflection

TABLE 11.1 Normal Telemetry Parameters (source: UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, 2023)

There are certain telemetry changes in which nutritional issues and electrolyte abnormalities are often the primary
cause. Common examples include:

· Long QT syndrome--when the QT interval is greater than 0.47 seconds in males and 0.48 seconds in females.
   This can lead to life-threatening dysrhythmias and can be caused by low levels of potassium, magnesium, or
   calcium.

· Torsades de pointes--a life-threatening dysrhythmia known as a multifocal ventricular tachycardia, caused by
   low levels of magnesium (Cohagan & Brandis, 2022).

· A peaked or mountain T wave illustrates hyperkalemia (high levels of potassium in the blood) (Bord, 2022).

Assessing the Mechanical Working Component of the Heart and the Blood Vessels
A healthy heart represents the flow of an adequate blood supply, proper stimulation through the electrical system,
and effectiveness at physically pumping blood through the body. Normal blood flow through the heart starts when
deoxygenated blood is returned to the heart from the body via the superior vena cava. It travels through the right
atrium, through the tricuspid valve, and into the right ventricle. The blood is then pumped through the pulmonary
valve and into the pulmonary artery to be re-oxygenated in the lungs (Figure 11.4). Once the blood has gone through
the exchanges needed and is oxygenated, it returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. It
will then travel through the mitral valve into the left ventricle, through the aortic valve into the aorta, and out to the
body for use (Pediatric Heart Specialists, 2023).
212  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     FIGURE 11.4 Normal blood flow starts when deoxygenated blood is returned to the heart via the superior vena cava. It travels through the
     right atrium, through the tricuspid valve, into the right ventricle, and is pumped through the pulmonary valve and into the pulmonary artery
     to be re-oxygenated in the lungs. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The oxygenated blood is returned to the body through two types of arteries. Elastic arteries are located closer to the
     heart and are more flexible than muscular arteries. Muscular arteries contain smoother muscle and are farther away
     from the heart. Both types of arteries must have strong walls, because arteries handle higher pressures from the
     blood being pumped out of the heart (Cleveland Clinic, 2023b). The main function of arteries is to distribute the
     oxygenated blood to all body organs and tissues, including the heart itself, through the coronary arteries. Refer to
     Figure 11.5 for a visual of the artery wall.

     FIGURE 11.5 The walls of elastic and muscular arteries must be both strong and flexible to properly handle high-pressure blood flow.
     (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     As blood travels through the body via the arteries, the arteries get smaller in diameter until they terminate into
     arterioles, the smallest arteries. These arterioles link with capillaries and then connect to venules, the smallest
     veins (Gupta and Shea, 2022). Capillaries are thin-walled vessels that connect arterioles and venules. As shown in
     Figure 11.6, they are the vehicle for the final exchange of oxygen and nutrients into tissues and wastes into the
     blood (Gupta & Shea, 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System                                                               213

FIGURE 11.6 Capillaries connect arterioles and venules, and are the vehicle for the final exchange of oxygen and nutrients into tissues and
waste into the blood. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

After passing through the capillaries and venules, blood continues into the veins on the way back to the heart. Veins
have thinner walls than arteries, because pressures are lower in this portion of the cardiovascular system. Veins also
dilate in response to fluid. Some veins, like the large veins in the legs, have valves in them to prevent backflow of
blood (Gupta & Shea, 2022). Once blood has traveled through the veins, it ends up in the heart to start the cycle all
over again.

Assessment
The nurse should complete a client's assessment by recording manual blood pressure and apical pulse (a pulse
point on the chest at the apex of the heart). In addition, the nurse should look for other signs and symptoms of
adequate perfusion, including:

  · Quality and rate of peripheral pulses (carotid auscultation and palpation, brachial, radial, ulnar, femoral,
      popliteal, and pedal)

  · Skin color check for pallor or cyanosis
  · Skin temperature for degree of warmth and presence of moisture (Malik & Goyal, 2022)
  · Skin turgor (elasticity) to check for edema and venous stasis sores or discoloration
  · Capillary refill, which should be less than 2 seconds

Abnormal findings and their relationship to specific nutritional deficiencies are discussed in the next section.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Mr. Thompson reports to the provider and nurse that he has had difficulty achieving and maintaining an erection and
has noticed worrisome leg swelling. He also states that he was told by a nurse at a health fair a month ago that he
should have his blood pressure checked, because it was 139/93 mm Hg. Today his blood pressure is 126/88 mm
Hg. The swelling in his legs appears to be dependent edema that is only present when his legs are downward for
periods of time and appears to be due to insufficiency of blood return in the lower extremities.

    1. Based on these findings, what would the nurse expect the provider to conclude?
214  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     a. The client has an elevated blood pressure, peripheral arterial disease, and erectile dysfunction.
     b. The client has hypertension, peripheral arterial disease, and erectile dysfunction.
     c. The client has hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, and erectile dysfunction.
     d. The client has elevated blood pressure, peripheral vascular disease, and erectile dysfunction.

     2. Which of the following tests would the nurse expect the provider to order initially to evaluate heart function?
          a. Electrocardiogram
          b. Echocardiogram
          c. Troponin
          d. Chest X-ray

     The provider orders an ECG that is done at bedside and shows no abnormalities. The provider also orders a fasting
     lipid panel (serum cholesterol levels) to help determine the client's risk for heart disease. Because Mr. Thompson is
     not fasting, the provider instructs him to return in the morning for a blood draw and to return in one week for follow-
     up. The provider also explains to Mr. Thompson that erectile dysfunction can be directly related to the decreased
     blood flow caused by hypertension. The client's hypertension will have to be managed before the erectile
     dysfunction can be fully evaluated for cause.

     (source: Antipolis, S. (2020). How to Treat High Blood Pressure Without Ruining Your Sex Life. European Society of
     Cardiology. Retrieved from https://www.escardio.org/The-ESC/Press-Office/Press-releases/how-to-treat-high-
     blood-pressure-without-ruining-your-sex-life)

     Analysis of Nutrition and the Cardiovascular System

     A client's nutritional status and needs can be identified with a physical assessment and lab results. Potassium,
     cholesterol, and sodium levels can be monitored to best track nutritional needs for cardiovascular health.

     Nutritional Analysis and the Impact on the Cardiovascular System
     Nutritional issues can lead to changes in the electrical conduction of the heart. As a result, the client's telemetry
     rhythm can become abnormal. Rhythm changes include atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, T-wave abnormalities, ST
     segment changes related to AMI, U-wave presence or prominence, torsades de pointes, prolonged QT interval, and
     supraventricular tachycardia. Rhythm changes can relate to one or more deficiencies. See Table 11.2 for a list of
     telemetry changes, the nutritional relation, and client symptoms.

     Telemetry            Nutritional Relation(s)                                      Client Symptom(s)
     Change
                            · Excessive caffeine or alcohol intake                       · Palpitations
     Atrial                 · High cholesterol levels                                    · Lightheadedness
     fibrillation/atrial    · High blood pressure                                        · Chest pain
     flutter                                                                             · Extreme fatigue
                                                                                         · Shortness of

                                                                                             breath

     Torsade de           · Primarily magnesium deficiency                             · Can start with
     pointes              · Can be related to calcium deficiency                          syncope
                          · Can be related to magnesium deficiency                        (fainting),
                          · Can be related to potassium deficiency                        palpations, and
                                                                                          dizziness

                                                                                       · Cardiac arrest

     TABLE 11.2 Nutritional Relationship to Rhythm Changes (sources: Akbar et al., 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022;
     Cleveland Clinic, 2022a; Cleveland Clinic, 2022c; Cohagan & Brandis, 2022; Kenny & Brown, 2022; Lee, et al., 2022; Mayo Clinic, 2023a-b;
     Morales-Brown, 2020; Teymouri, et. al., 2022)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                  11.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Cardiovascular System                                          215

Telemetry         Nutritional Relation(s)                                              Client Symptom(s)
Change
                    · Excessive caffeine or alcohol intake                               · Palpitations
Supraventricular    · Heart disease (high cholesterol, obesity, or blood pressure)       · Pounding
tachycardia
                                                                                             sensation in the
                                                                                             neck
                                                                                         · Weakness
                                                                                         · fatigue
                                                                                         · Chest pain
                                                                                         · Lightheadedness
                                                                                         · Shortness of
                                                                                             breath
                                                                                         · Sweating
                                                                                         · Dizziness
                                                                                         · Fainting

T-wave changes    · Inverted T waves can relate to cardiac ischemia from heart         · Symptomology
                     disease and/or past acute myocardial infarction (AMI) (triggered     related to cause
                     by high cholesterol and high blood pressure)                         and type of
                                                                                          change
                  · Peaked T waves can indicate hyperkalemia

U-wave            · Hypokalemia (low potassium levels) can cause tachycardia and       · No
presence/            U-wave prominence                                                    symptomology
prominence                                                                                unless it
                                                                                          interferes with
                                                                                          perfusion

ST segment        · AMI can result from high cholesterol, obesity, and old ischemia    · Chest pain
changes/AMI          damage to the heart                                               · Cardiac arrest
                                                                                       · Diaphoresis
                                                                                       · Shock
                                                                                       · Radiating pain to

                                                                                          left jaw and
                                                                                          shoulder
                                                                                       · Shortness of
                                                                                          breath
                                                                                       · Weakness
                                                                                       · Lightheadedness
                                                                                       · Syncope
                                                                                       · Pain in one or
                                                                                          both arms and/
                                                                                          or shoulders

TABLE 11.2 Nutritional Relationship to Rhythm Changes (sources: Akbar et al., 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022;
Cleveland Clinic, 2022a; Cleveland Clinic, 2022c; Cohagan & Brandis, 2022; Kenny & Brown, 2022; Lee, et al., 2022; Mayo Clinic, 2023a-b;
Morales-Brown, 2020; Teymouri, et. al., 2022)
216  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     Telemetry     Nutritional Relation(s)                                                 Client Symptom(s)
     Change          · Shortened QT intervals can indicate hyperkalemia
                                                                                             · Can trigger a
     QT interval                                                                                 lethal heart
                                                                                                 rhythm

     Many other    · Hyperkalemia can cause wide QRS complexes and hidden P                         · Symptomology
     rhythm           waves, prolonged PR interval, decreased P wave amplitude,                        related to cause
     disturbances     ventricular fibrillation, asystole, junctional rhythm, bradycardia,              and type of
                      ST depression, atrial fibrillation, in addition to other issues                  change
                      listed

                   · Hypoalbuminemia can cause low-voltage wave measurements
                      and abnormal QT interval measurements and has been
                      identified as a factor to increase mortality in AMI, atrial
                      fibrillation events, and heart failure

     TABLE 11.2 Nutritional Relationship to Rhythm Changes (sources: Akbar et al., 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022;
     Cleveland Clinic, 2022a; Cleveland Clinic, 2022c; Cohagan & Brandis, 2022; Kenny & Brown, 2022; Lee, et al., 2022; Mayo Clinic, 2023a-b;
     Morales-Brown, 2020; Teymouri, et. al., 2022)

     Numerous nutritional factors create or impact cardiovascular diseases such as coronary heart disease,
     cardiomyopathy (a disease of the heart muscle), and hypertension. Table 11.3 outlines a handful of cardiovascular
     diseases, the impact of nutrition, and the effect on the body.

     Disease                            Nutrition Impact             Effects on the Body

     Coronary artery disease (CAD)      Dietary intake that is high  Can lead to hypertension, cardiomyopathy,
     Peripheral vascular disease (PVD)  in cholesterol,              and AMI
                                        sodium, trans fats, added
     Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)  sugars, and low potassium    Slows return of blood to the heart, leading to
     Chronic heart failure (CHF)        and high                     pooling of deoxygenated blood in the lower
     Cardiomyopathy                     fluid intake (for CHF and    extremities
                                        cardiomyopathy
                                        and especially with          Slows flow of blood to the body causing
                                        increased sodium             ischemia
                                        specifically)
                                                                     Causes weakening of the heart muscle

                                                                     Causes enlargement and weakening of the
                                                                     heart muscle

     Hypertension                                                    Increases workload on the heart leading to

                                                                     cardiomyopathy and CHF

     TABLE 11.3 Cardiovascular Diseases (sources: Albakri, 2019; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022; Harvard University, 2023;
     Medline Plus, 2022)

     11.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 11.2.1 Prioritize hypotheses of nutritional habits that optimize cardiovascular wellness.
       · 11.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize cardiovascular wellness through nutritional habits.

     Planning Nutritional Goals

     Several body metrics can help the nurse evaluate the potential for cardiovascular disease development or to
     determine level of cardiovascular disease present. These metrics include food intake, body mass index (BMI), waist-
     to-hip ratio, blood pressure, and cholesterol. The primary goal is to utilize the best nutritional practices to prevent
     cardiovascular disease. If disease is present, nutrition is used to help control the condition and prevent worsening
     and exacerbation periods.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness                                                       217

Preventative Care Nutritional Planning
Preventative nutritional planning should focus on a client who does not yet have cardiovascular disease. Prevention
is always the highest priority for clients with a known risk of cardiovascular disease but should also be routine
education for all clients, as it affects a large portion of the population. Planning for disease prevention includes
monitoring weight and BMI, cholesterol levels, waist circumference, and intake of sodium, potassium, magnesium,
calcium, fluid, and fiber.

When educating the client on proper nutritional practices to reduce the risks of developing cardiovascular disease,
the client must first understand how to properly manage cholesterol levels and the differences in the types of fats
they ingest in relation to these levels. Three main types of fat are most often discussed in relation to cardiovascular
disease and its prevention--unsaturated fats, saturated fats, and trans fats, which are a form of unsaturated fat.
Saturated fats and trans fats are in semi-solid form at room temperature. Like all fats, they are made up of carbon,
oxygen, and hydrogen, but they have more hydrogen molecules than other forms of fat (Moll, 2022). Saturated fats
and trans fats are more likely to form deposits inside arteries and harden as plaques, making them forms of fat that
the client should limit to less than 6% of their daily intake (Moll, 2022). High intake of saturated and trans fats can
increase the client's levels of low-density lipid (LDL) cholesterol levels (Moll, 2022). This is typically referred to as
"bad" cholesterol in the body, as it is the type most likely to deposit and stick to artery walls. While not all LDL is
harmful and plaque forming, it still puts the client at higher risk when they consistently have higher LDL levels. High-
density lipid (HDL) cholesterol is referred to as "good" cholesterol because of its low risk of plaque depositing.
Unsaturated fats should make up the majority of the daily recommended 20-35% of daily fat intake (Moll, 2022).

Maintaining adequate fiber intake will help to prevent cardiovascular disease. Fiber has been shown to lower LDL
cholesterol levels, lower blood pressure, and create satiety (a feeling of fullness) to help in weight loss (Harvard
Health Publishing, 2020). When increasing fiber intake, it important to also increase fluid intake, particularly water
intake, to prevent constipation. Adequate fluid intake (particularly water) of at least 6-8 cups per day for women
and 8-12 cups per day for men is needed for many body processes, including proper blood vessel function, blood
circulation, effective cardiac pumping, and sodium level maintenance, which can help prevent heart disease risk if
maintained at 142 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) and below (Dmitrieva, Liu, Wu, & Boehm, 2022; National
Institutes of Health, 2022).

Another important piece of education for the client is the proper regulation of their daily sodium intake. Too much
daily intake can increase the risk of hypertension, which can lead to heart failure. Americans consume an average of
3400 mg/day of sodium, which is well above the recommended limit of 2300 mg/day for those without heart
disease (American Heart Association, 2023). This maximum is still not optimal as the AHA recommends that clients
without heart disease move toward a limit of 1500 mg/day and those with heart disease to 1000 mg/day. While this
is the current recommendation, there is some debate from new findings by the American College of Cardiology
(2023) that individuals with heart disease do not benefit from limiting their sodium any more than those without
heart disease.

The nurse should have a nutrition education discussion with the client that includes maintaining a proper diet for
healthy BMI, waist circumference, calcium, magnesium, and potassium levels. The nurse can discuss both the use
of the MyPlate and DASH diets to accomplish this. The nurse should keep in mind, however, that a fine balance must
be maintained between potassium, sodium, magnesium, and calcium for proper conduction and mechanic pumping
of the heart to take place. Most clients can maintain these three electrolytes through balanced nutrition, but if they
are deficient in any of these and are unable to regulate them through nutritional intake alone, supplementation
should be considered. The nurse should discuss types of foods the client should include and limit in their diet for
cardiovascular health (Table 11.4).
218  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     Nutrient   Foods High in the Nutrient
     Calcium
                  · Soybeans (edamame)
                  · Collard greens
                  · Spinach
                  · Turnip greens
                  · Bok choy
                  · Kale
                  · Broccoli
                  · Breakfast cereal
                  · Tofu
                  · Plant-based milks

     Potassium  · Beans
                · Lentils
                · Potatoes
                · Winter squash (acorn, butternut)
                · Spinach
                · Broccoli
                · Artichoke

     Sodium     · Smoked, cured, salted, or canned meat, fish, or poultry
                · Frozen breaded meats and dinners
                · Canned entrees
                · Salted nuts
                · Beans, canned with salt added

     Magnesium  · Soy products
                · Legumes and seeds
                · Nuts, peanuts, and peanut butter
                · Whole grain breads and cereals
                · Fruit
                · Vegetables, particularly dark green and leafy
                · Dried beans

     TABLE 11.4 Nutrient Education Table (sources: American Diabetes Association, 2023; Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health, 2023;
     University of California San Francisco, 2023; University of Rochester Medical Center, 2023; University of Washington, 2023; U.S.
     Department of Health and Human Services, 2023)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            11.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness                  219

Nutrient        Foods High in the Nutrient
Fiber
                  · Avocado
                  · Brussels sprouts
                  · Broccoli
                  · Split peas
                  · Artichokes
                  · Lentils
                  · Kale
                  · Turnip greens

Saturated fats  · Processed foods such as potato chips
                · Baked goods with hydrogenated oil or partially hydrogenated oil
                · Margarines
                · Shortening
                · Lard
                · Fatback and salt pork
                · High-fat meats
                · High-fat dairy products
                · Butter
                · Cream sauces
                · Gravy made with meat drippings
                · Poultry skin

TABLE 11.4 Nutrient Education Table (sources: American Diabetes Association, 2023; Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health, 2023;
University of California San Francisco, 2023; University of Rochester Medical Center, 2023; University of Washington, 2023; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2023)

Secondary Care Nutritional Planning
Two main diets have been shown to benefit clients with heart disease: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
(DASH) diet and the Mediterranean diet. The intent of these diets is to control weight and reduce cholesterol levels
and hypertension. This approach needs to be balanced with the client's need for protein, because malnourishment
and heart failure can lead to hypoalbuminemia, a condition in which the body does not produce enough albumin, a
protein that keeps fluids in blood vessels.

The nurse should consider BMI, which is calculated as weight in kilograms by height in meters squared (kg/m2) and
waist size values:

  · BMI--A healthy BMI is 18-24.9 kg/m2;; an overweight BMI is 25-29.9 kg/m2; and obesity is a BMI of 30 kg/m2
      or higher.

  · Waist size--A person who has a large waist size has a higher chance of developing cardiovascular disease, even
      with a normal BMI. Males should aim to keep their waist size below 40 inches (102 cm) and females should aim
      to keep their waist size below 35 inches (88 cm) (Harvard University, 2023).

BMI MEASUREMENT

The nurse should know a client's BMI before creating a nutritional plan because a high BMI increases
cardiovascular risks. For clients with a high BMI, weight loss should be included in the plan. Harvard Medical
School provides a useful BMI calculator (https://openstax.org/r/healthharvaed).

Another metric is blood pressure, which measures hypertension or the advancement of hypertension. Hypertension
is known as the silent killer, because many people often do not have symptoms. Blood pressure is measured in
millimeters of mercury, or mm Hg. A single high hypertension value may not indicate an issue, but two or more
consecutive high readings is considered hypertension (Mayo Clinic, 2023c). Blood pressure ranges and their
associated condition are listed in Table 11.5.
220  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     Blood Pressure                     Systolic                                           Diastolic

     Low                                < 90 mm Hg                                         Or < 60 mm Hg

     Normal                             < 120 mm Hg                                        And < 80 mm Hg

     Elevated                           120-129 mm Hg                                      Or < 80 mm Hg

     Hypertensive                       > 129 mm Hg                                        Or > 80 mm Hg

     TABLE 11.5 Blood Pressure Ranges (source: National Institute on Aging, 2022)

     Cholesterol levels are also critical. Excessive cholesterol levels can lead to the buildup of plaques along blood
     vessels, resulting in restricted blood flow and leading to hypertension, peripheral vascular and artery disease, and
     cardiomyopathies, and can cause embolizing events in the body. Table 11.6 outlines ranges of cholesterol
     measurements and their meanings (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2023a).

     Cholesterol Measurement            Near         Optimal                       Normal  Borderline     High   Very
                                        Optimal      mg/dL                         mg/dL   High           mg/dL  High
                                        mg/dL                                              mg/dL                 mg/dL

     Total cholesterol                                                             < 200 200-239          > 239

     Low-density lipids (LDL) ("bad"    100-129 < 100                                      130-159        160-189 > 189
     cholesterol)

     Triglycerides                                                                 < 150 150-199          200-499 > 499

     High-density lipids (HDL) ("good"               > 60                          > 40
     cholesterol)

     TABLE 11.6 Cholesterol Levels (source: Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2023a)

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Mr. Thompson has returned for his one-week follow-up. His cholesterol values are:

       · Total cholesterol: 269 mg/dL
       · LDL: 139 mg/dL
       · HDL: 130 mg/dL

     His blood pressure is 133/87 mm Hg, and his weight has increased by 2 lb. The nurse calculates his BMI to be 21
     kg/m2 and his waist size is 42 inches.

         3. Based on these results, what recommendations should the nurse include in Mr. Thompson's dietary
             education?
              a. Increase red meat intake.
              b. Decrease caffeine intake.
              c. Increase fiber intake.
              d. Decrease dairy consumption.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness                                                    221

    4. The nurse starts to discuss the diet and exercise recommendations with Mr. Thompson, but he insists he is
        following a heart-healthy diet and that the tests are wrong. What food selection in Mr. Thompson's 24-hour
        diet recall illustrates inaccuracy in his statement?
         a. Freshly squeezed orange juice
         b. Steamed broccoli
         c. Baked fish
         d. Grilled beef cheeseburger

The nurse discusses the dietary choices that Mr. Thompson can recall eating in the last few days and discovers that
he is not eating a heart-healthy diet. The nurse makes suggestions for other food choices, and the provider refers Mr.
Thompson to a dietitian for further education and nutritional management. He is asked to schedule a follow-up
appointment in 3 months. At that time, the provider will determine if these changes have been effective enough or if
medications will need to be added to his treatment plan.

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

Motivation, food security, financial resources, disability, and comprehension are additional factors that impact
cardiovascular health. Motivation is a significant factor because behavior changes may be needed, and the client
may need help maintaining their health plan. For example, the client may need to learn a new diet that includes food
they feel is lacking in taste, start exercising, or quit smoking. The client will have to truly desire to make changes.

The second major factor that can impact nutritional goals is access to the foods required in the nutritional plan
(meal plan) created for the client. Healthy foods like fresh fruits and vegetables cost more and do not last as long as
processed unhealthy food. This can be difficult for a client who is already financially or geographically challenged.
Frozen fruits and vegetables are another potential healthy source that will last longer than fresh varieties, but they
are still more expensive. These also require the client to have storage for these that they may not have, depending
on their living situation. Canned fruits and vegetables are the least expensive options they could add to their diet,
but they are also the least healthy. They may be prepared with large amounts of salt and sugar, and this will
outweigh the benefits the client will obtain from eating them. Even low-sodium and low-sugar options are higher in
salt and sugar than fresh options are.

A third major factor is the client's ability to understand the nutritional plan. The client must fully understand what
foods are on the diet plan, how to properly read food labels, and how to make appropriate substitutions and
measurements. If they do not have a firm understanding, they may struggle to follow the plan. It may be necessary
to refer the client to a registered dietician and follow up consistently to ensure the client both understands the
education given and is adhering to the recommendations.

Lastly, debilitating health can contribute to the challenge of cardiovascular health. In the later stages of many of
diseases, shortness of breath and fatigue can make eating very difficult. It also increases the difficulty level in food
preparation, making it easier for a client to revert to eating fast foods in favor of less effort. The registered dietician
can offer some solutions regarding food preparation to reduce fatigue, such as purchasing prechopped fruits and
vegetables, making sheet-pan meals, and using slow-cooker recipes. This will not alleviate the fatigue that clients
with breathing difficulties will have during the act of eating. The registered dietician can take this breathing issue
into account and help with the selection of more nutrient-dense foods, so that the client will have to eat less to meet
their needed requirements.

11.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 11.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
  · 11.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize cardiovascular wellness.

Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

An implementation strategy is necessary for success. To solidify plan compliance, the nurse should involve the client
in the creation of the plan, ensure that the client has a clear comprehension of the plan, and evaluate the holistic
222  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     needs of the client.

     Maintaining cardiovascular health when no disease is present is also critical. A first step to maintenance is to review
     diet plans. The MyPlate, DASH, and Mediterranean diets are well known and can be utilized to maintain
     cardiovascular health. In addition, reducing alcohol consumption, caffeine intake, red meats, saturated and trans
     fats, processed food consumptions, refined carbohydrates, sugary foods and drinks, and sodium have all been
     shown to be protective for cardiovascular health (Harvard University, 2023; Morales-Brown, 2020). Likewise,
     increasing the intake of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, fish, nuts, and poultry and using monounsaturated or
     polyunsaturated oils in place of saturated oils will help prevent cardiovascular disease (Harvard University, 2023).

     If the client wishes to prescribe to one of the recommended diets, the nurse should educate them on inclusions,
     exclusions, and reductions (Table 11.7).

     Diet Type      Inclusions or Increases                       Exclusions or Reductions
     Mediterranean
                      · High intake of olive oil, nuts,             · Restrict red meats, processed meats,
                          vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and         sweets, dairy products, and added sugars
                          cereals
                                                                    · Red wine consumed in moderation with
                      · Moderate intake of fish and poultry in          meals
                          place of red meats

     DASH           · Increase vegetables, fruits, and whole      · Decrease saturated fat, whole-fat dairy
                       grains                                        products, and tropical oils such as coconut,
                                                                     palm kernel, and palm oils
                    · Include fat-free or low-fat dairy
                       products, fish, poultry, beans, nuts, and  · Decrease sugary beverages and sweets
                       vegetable oils over other oils             · Decrease trans fats
                                                                  · Decrease sodium
                    · Increase food rich in potassium,
                       calcium, magnesium, fiber, and protein

     MyPlate        · 2 cups fruit daily*                         · Decrease added sugars to < 50 g/day
                    · 2.5 cups vegetables daily*                  · Decrease saturated fats to < 22 g/day
                    · 5-10 oz of total grains (preferably half    · Decrease sodium to < 2300 mg/day

                       of this being whole grains) daily*
                    · 5.5 oz lean protein/meat daily*
                    · 3 cups dairy per day--preferably low-

                       fat options*
                           * Note: These are averages, as sex
                           and age can change recommended
                           amounts.

     TABLE 11.7 Mediterranean, DASH, and MyPlate Diet Plan Inclusions, Increases, Exclusions, and Reductions (sources: Harvard University,
     2023; Hinzey & Chien, 2023; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2021; U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2020)

     Holistic care is critical to heart health and should include a review of other lifestyle habits that can contribute to
     cardiovascular disease. For example, smoking cessation is extremely important, as nicotine constricts blood vessels
     and reduces blood flow while increasing blood pressure (Srakocic, 2023).

     Physical activity is also paramount when reducing cardiovascular risks. Exercise helps with weight control, BMI, and
     waistline management, and reduces the risk for diabetes. Regular physical activity can also help manage stress and
     improve mood (Harvard University, 2023).

     Lastly, sleep is a key consideration. Maintaining an adequate sleep schedule contributes to cardiovascular risk
     reduction. Sleep has been shown to have an impact on factors that relate to cardiovascular health, such as dietary
     intake, weight, exercise, inflammation, and blood pressure (Harvard University, 2023).

     Client Teaching

     Teaching a client with cardiovascular disease can be challenging. Symptoms like chronic fatigue, weakness, chest
     pain, and shortness of breath can make it difficult to motivate the client to learn. For these reasons, the nurse

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness                                                  223

should include caretakers and family members whenever possible during education.

Teaching should include DASH, Mediterranean, and MyPlate diets. The nurse should help the client decide which
would be most appropriate for their lifestyle. The nurse may need to adjust the diet to accommodate specific
cultural and religious preferences and allergies, and to accommodate other comorbidities that require special
dietary considerations.

11.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Cardiovascular Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 11.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on cardiovascular wellness.
  · 11.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote cardiovascular wellness.

Evaluating Client Readiness to Follow a Nutritional Plan

Client readiness is an important metric in their desire to make necessary life and nutritional changes. The nurse
needs to work with the client to evaluate their desire to change. Most changes involve significant lifestyle
adjustments, and if the client isn't ready, diet changes alone may not be enough. If the client is willing to follow the
nutritional plan, the nurse should educate the client on diet modifications. This will help the client understand how
much needs to change and ensure they feel that they can follow the plan.

The nurse also needs to evaluate ableness. The nurse should evaluate the challenges and provide recommendations
on how to remove those challenges. The nurse must ensure the client is capable of comprehending the information
given to them and that they can make decisions on how best to follow the plan. One step to aid in this evaluation is
to ask that the client return with a documented meal plan and include appropriate substitutions for daily meals.

Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Nutritional Plan

Continual monitoring of lab values and blood pressure is the most effective way to evaluate a nutritional plan. The
client's LDL levels should trend downward along with total cholesterol levels, if they were not in normal or optimal
ranges. Their blood pressure reading should trend downward to a normal level if it was increased. Levels of
prealbumin (a protein produced by the liver) should increase to the normal range if they had been low. BMI should
trend downward if it was high. Overall, all values should slowly trend toward standard levels if the client adheres to
the nutritional plan and the plan is effective.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Mr. Thompson has returned for his 3-month follow-up. He claims to be compliant with all the required changes he
and the provider and nurse previously discussed, and he said he is feeling great. The nurse documents that his
blood pressure is 122/78 mm Hg, his BMI is 20 kg/m2 (a slight change), and his waist measurement is 38 inches.

    5. Based on these results, what would the nurse conclude about the dietary and exercise changes?
         a. They appear effective.
         b. They appear ineffective.
         c. They are not effective enough.
         d. This is not enough information to determine.

    6. When evaluating the client's caloric intake versus their activity level, what would the nurse document based
        on these findings?
         a. The client appears to be compliant.
         b. The client appears to be partially compliant.
         c. The client is not compliant.
224  11 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Cardiovascular Wellness

     d. There is not enough information to determine.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          11 · Chapter Summary 225

Chapter Summary

· The nurse should assess the cardiovascular                 the cardiovascular system include cholesterol,
   system, a life-sustaining system in the body              potassium, trans fats, saturated fats, sugars,
   containing the heart and blood vessels, by                magnesium, calcium, and sodium.
   checking both the mechanical (physical) function       · Dietary changes need to be implemented with
   and the electrical function of the heart, as well as      healthy lifestyle changes to see adequate
   assessing how effectively the vessels allow the           outcomes from nutritional plans.
   movement of blood around the body after it is          · When evaluating risk factors for cardiovascular
   pumped by the heart.                                      disease, BMI, waist size, and blood pressure are
                                                             major considerations, along with specific
· If the electrical conduction of the heart is not           comorbidities such as diabetes.
   working properly, the mechanical function will not     · Even those without cardiovascular disease should
   work at all.                                              have a heart-healthy diet.

· The biggest dietary considerations in the health of

Key Terms

arteries blood vessels that carry oxygenated blood            placed on the chest to capture signals
    from the heart to the body                            hypoalbuminemia a condition where the body does

arterioles arteries shrink to this smallest form and          not produce enough albumin, a protein that keeps
    link with capillaries                                     fluids in blood vessels
                                                          normal sinus rhythm (NSR) the heart's cardiac
atria the top two heart chambers                              rhythm that originates from the sinus node
atrioventricular (AV) node a second node in the           perfusion the movement of blood, oxygen, and
                                                              nutrients to tissues in the body
    heart that creates a delay in the electrical impulse  pulseless electrical activity (PEA) electrical
    from the SA node to the bundle of His to allow time       conduction throughout the heart without physical
    for ventricular filling                                   movement of the heart muscle
bundle of His a bundle of conducting fibers that          Purkinje fibers terminal-conducting fibers in the
    branch to each ventricle of the heart                     ventricles
capillaries the point at which arteries and veins         sinoatrial (SA) node the pacemaker of the heart
    exchange blood supply                                 telemetry the measurement of a heart's ECG through
cardiovascular system a system within the body that           a portable device that automatically transmits to a
    includes the heart, blood vessels, blood, lymph,          monitor
    lymphatic vessels, and glands that moves blood and    veins blood vessels that carry deoxygenated blood
    lymph through the body                                    from the body to the heart
circulatory systems interconnected blood vessels          ventricles the bottom chambers of the heart
    that flow through the body                            venules the smallest veins that link with capillaries
electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) a recording of a
    heart's electrical activity in which electrodes are

Review Questions

1. The nurse is educating a client with hypertension about the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)
    diet. Which statement by the client indicates the need for further teaching?
     a. "The DASH diet increases my sodium intake."
     b. "The DASH diet increases my vegetable intake."
     c. "The DASH diet increases my potassium intake."
     d. "The DASH diet decreases my sugar intake."

2. The nurse is reviewing a client's medical record and notes that the last two blood pressure readings were
    130/81 mm Hg and 122/99 mm Hg. Which diagnosis does the nurse anticipate for this client?
     a. Normal blood pressure
     b. Elevated blood pressure
     c. Low blood pressure
     d. Hypertensive blood pressure

3. The nurse is educating a client on ways to promote heart health. Which food modification would the nurse
226 11 · Review Questions

        recommend for a heart-healthy diet?
         a. Red meat at 2 meals a day
         b. Prepackaged meat products
         c. Pineapple slices
         d. Caffeinated unsweetened tea

    4. The nurse is evaluating a client at a follow-up appointment who reports following a heart-healthy nutritional
        plan for 3 months. Which objective data should the nurse utilize to support the client's statement?
         a. BMI change from 30 to 29 kg/m2
         b. LDL change from 100 to 110 mg/dL
         c. Blood pressure from 142/88 to 144/86 mm Hg
         d. Increased shortness of breath

    5. The nurse in the outpatient cardiology clinic is assessing a client who had an acute myocardial infarction 6
        months ago and has completed an outpatient cardiac rehabilitation program. Which cholesterol level
        indicates to the nurse that the client has achieved a desired level?
         a. Total cholesterol 202 mg/dL
         b. LDL 130 mg/dL
         c. HDL 48 mg/dL
         d. Triglycerides 242 mg/dL

    6. The nurse is caring for a client with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation. Which food should the nurse educate
        the client to avoid?
         a. Coffee
         b. Oranges
         c. Milk
         d. Fish

    7. The nurse is caring for a client with a history of cardiac arrest due to torsades de pointes. Which laboratory
        value is a priority for the nurse to monitor in this client?
         a. Total cholesterol
         b. Calcium levels
         c. Magnesium levels
         d. Potassium levels

    8. The nurse notes a very high and peaked T-wave abnormality on a client's electrocardiogram (ECG). Which
        laboratory value should the nurse expect the provider to order?
         a. Magnesium level
         b. Sodium level
         c. Calcium level
         d. Potassium level

    9. The nurse is caring for a client who has hyperlipidemia. Which food choice by the client is appropriate?
         a. Cake
         b. Oatmeal
         c. Fried chicken
         d. Hot dog

  10. The nurse is caring for a client who is prescribed the DASH diet to manage their high cholesterol levels. What
        food choice in the client's 72-hour diet recall requires further teaching?
         a. Whole milk
         b. Potatoes
         c. Oysters

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                11 · Suggested Reading 227

         d. Orange juice

Suggested Reading

American Heart Association. (2022). 2022 heart disease & stroke statistical update fact sheet: Global burden of
   disease. https://professional.heart.org/-/media/PHD-Files-2/Science-News/2/2022-Heart-and-Stroke-Stat-
    Update/2022-Stat-Update-factsheet-GIobal-Burden-of-Disease.pdf

American Heart Association. (2022). Diet change may make biggest impact on reducing heart risk in people with
   hypertension. https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2022/09/220907105458.htm

American Heart Association. (2022). FAQ: Hands-only CPR. https://cpr.heart.org/-/media/CPR-Files/Courses-and-
    Kits/Hands-Only-CPR/HandsOnly-CPR-FAQs-ucm_494175.pdf

American Heart Association. (2023). Hands-only CPR training. https://cpr.heart.org/en/cpr-courses-and-kits/hands-
    only-cpr

Gupta, N., Elnour, A., Sadeq, A., & Gupta, R. (2022). Diabetes and the heart: Coronary artery disease. E-Journal of
   Cardiology Practice, 22(10). https://www.escardio.org/Journals/E-Journal-of-Cardiology-Practice/Volume-22/
    diabetes-and-the-heart-coronary-artery-disease

LaMotte, S. (2022). Mediterranean diet named best for 2022. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2022/01/04/health/
    mediterranean-diet-2022-best-diet-wellness/index.html
228 11 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 12

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Cardiovascular Health

FIGURE 12.1 Fish is a good source of omega-3s and other nutrients that contribute to heart health. (credit: modification of work "Sashimi"
by Ocdp/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan
12.2 Nutrition and Long-Term Cardiovascular Illnesses
12.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION The cardiovascular system plays a significant role in the care of clients throughout their lifespan.
This chapter will look at important nutritional modifications that impact cardiac-related events.
Consider this case: Tara is a 42-year-old multigravida pregnant client who presents to her obstetrician's office
complaining of a severe headache, blurry vision, and edema to her legs. She is gravida 6, para 3 abortion 2 (meaning
the client is pregnant for the 6th time, 3 pregnancies have resulted in live births, and 2 pregnancies ended without a
live birth). The client is 25 weeks pregnant and has a history of hypertension and obesity. She was taking lisinopril
for hypertension prior to finding out she was pregnant and then changed to labetalol. In the office, Tara's blood
pressure is 220/115 mm Hg. The provider examines Tara and sends her to labor and delivery for laboratory work
and further monitoring.
230  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     12.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 12.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during pregnancy.
       · 12.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during infancy.
       · 12.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during childhood.
       · 12.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during adolescence.
       · 12.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during adulthood.
       · 12.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the cardiovascular system during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     During pregnancy, multiple changes occur within the cardiovascular system. As cardiac output increases, vascular
     volume increases, and there is a decrease in systemic vascular resistance and subsequent blood pressure. The
     vessels also dilate, which leads to lower blood pressure in the second trimester. After 20 weeks of gestation, blood
     pressure increases but typically remains near pre-pregnancy levels. These changes are designed to provide
     perfusion--the flow of blood to tissues and organs--to the fetus (Kepley, Bates, & Mohiuddin, 2023). To best support
     this growth and development of the fetus, the cardiovascular system of the client needs to be properly supported.

     The pregnant client should increase caloric intake by 340-450 calories daily during the second and third trimesters.
     Increasing folic acid, iron, and choline are important as well. Pregnant clients should avoid all alcohol, decrease or
     eliminate caffeine intake, and avoid uncooked meats and fish. Although for clients with a pre-existing condition such
     as hypertension (high blood pressure) and obesity, other measures will need to be incorporated into the nutritional
     plan (meal plan) to help prevent complications (Lu et al., 2018; Anderson-Villaluz & Quam, 2022).

     The food that the expectant client eats can also affect the fetus's growing organs. Nutritional recommendations
     include consuming skim or low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; healthy, lean proteins including oily fish; fresh fruits
     and vegetables; and whole grains to help the fetus's heart grow healthy. Pregnant clients are encouraged to avoid
     food high in fat, cholesterol, and sodium as this does not only affect the client, but the fetus as well (Advent Health,
     2021).

     Research shows that optimal nutrition during pregnancy is linked with other healthy behaviors such as an increase
     in physical activity and avoidance of smoking and alcohol.

     Impact on the Client's Health During Pregnancy
     The demands of pregnancy on the client significantly changes the physiological functioning of the cardiovascular
     system (Kepley, Bates, & Mohiuddin, 2023). The increase in metabolic demand promotes optimal uteroplacental
     circulation--the transfer of oxygen and nutrients from client to fetus through umbilical cord and placenta--that is
     needed by the fetus for growth and development. The increase in the cardiac output affects the client and the fetus
     by increasing pressure on the vena cava from the weight of the extra fluid within the placenta and the weight of the
     fetus. Vasodilation begins early in pregnancy, with a decrease in systemic vascular resistance. Maternal heart rate
     also increases. Other changes that occur to the cardiovascular system due to the developing fetus include rotation
     of the heart due to the pressure on the diaphragm, increase in heart rate, and mild hypertrophy due to the increase
     in vascular volume (Gersh, 2022).

     Maintaining healthy nutrition for heart health during pregnancy is important because it allows the heart to cope with
     the stress of pregnancy. Implementing healthy heart behaviors positively impacts pregnancy and can help during
     delivery and the postpartum period. Healthful measures that can be taken are using added salt sparingly, increasing
     water intake to at least 64 oz daily, increasing protein in the diet, decreasing the amount of fried foods, exercising,
     avoiding alcohol and caffeine, and elevating the feet during the day (American Pregnancy Association, 2023).

     Many symptoms--such as shortness of breath, increase in heart rate, and swelling--experienced during pregnancy
     are linked to cardiovascular changes. Decreased venous return to the head can cause the pregnant client to
     experience syncope in which the client loses consciousness for a brief time or near-syncope episodes where the
     client feels like they may pass out or have some lightheadedness or dizziness. The nurse should advise the client to
     change positions slowly to minimize the associated risks for falls if this happens. The client may experience

     Access for free at openstax.org
                      12.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan                    231

dyspnea or difficulty breathing with exertion and/or visible pulsations of the jugular veins, as well as edema of the
lower extremities. Research also shows that not only the mother's health is affected during pregnancy, but also the
developing fetus. The choices the mother makes nutritionally can affect the fetus's risk for heart disease, kidney
disease, and metabolic disease in adulthood (Cunningham & LaMarca, 2018). Consistent themes found in the
research to best promote cardiovascular health during pregnancy through nutrition focus on decreasing total
cholesterol levels, regulating fasting glucose levels, and maintaining normal blood pressure readings.

It is important to teach clients what food choices are best. Suggestions include educating clients on how to drink
water or milk and eat fresh fruits and vegetables. When choosing meats, choose meat that is grilled rather than fried
and avoid raw fish. Eating a plant-based or vegetarian diet during pregnancy has been associated with higher risks of
congenital heart defects in the neonate at birth (Yang et al., 2019). Salads are typically a good source of nutrition
but can have many hidden calories in the dressings and various toppings that can be included in the salad. Clients
should choose low-fat salad dressing and eat desserts sparingly (Howland, 2018).

The Client with Pre-existing Cardiovascular Disease
Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of complications in pregnant females (Cleveland Clinic, 2022a). The
pregnant client may be unaware of previous cardiovascular issues until they become pregnant. People with
previously undiagnosed cardiac issues may experience new cardiovascular-related health concerns and diagnoses
due to the increase in cardiac output and decreased systemic resistance. Heart murmurs, chest pain, and
generalized swelling should be evaluated by a health care provider (Gersh, 2022).

Clients with congenital heart disease can experience an exacerbation of related cardiovascular issues from
pregnancy-related physiological and hormonal changes (Ifitkhar & Biswas, 2023). There is an increased risk for both
maternal and fetal death associated with cardiovascular disease and pregnancy. Clients who have pre-existing
cardiovascular diseases need to be counseled about the additional risk factors that they could potentially encounter
during pregnancy, and they need to be counseled on ways to help keep their heart and their fetus's heart healthy.

The amount of weight that the client gains during pregnancy can impact cardiovascular health by increasing the
need for higher cardiac output. For the client who gains more weight than what is recommended, the baby can be
too big and lead to complications during delivery according to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC, 2022b). Studies
have shown that only about one-third of pregnant women gain the recommended weight during pregnancy. The
recommended weight gain varies according to the pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) and if the client is
pregnant with one or more fetuses (CDC, 2022). To help prevent cardiovascular disease, the client should try to
meet the expected weight gain during pregnancy by increasing calories during the second (340 additional calories)
and third trimester (450 additional calories). The nurse should track and monitor pregnancy weight gain and
encourage the client to eat a well-balanced diet to help prevent cardiovascular problems during pregnancy (CDC,
2022).

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Upon arrival at the labor and delivery department, Tara is placed on a fetal monitor, blood work and urine are
collected, and her vital signs are obtained.

  Temperature:       Vital Signs                                     Laboratory Results
  Blood pressure:               37.4ºC
  Heart rate:                   224/200 mm Hg   · Urine shows protein
  Respiratory rate:             92 beats/min    · Liver enzymes are slightly elevated
                                22 breaths/min
TABLE 12.1
232  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

                           Vital Signs                                  Laboratory Results
                                      96% on room air
       Oxygen saturation:

     TABLE 12.1

     Tara is started on a labetalol drip for blood pressure control. The fetal monitor shows no distress to the fetus, so she
     is transferred to the intensive care unit for blood pressure monitoring and labetalol infusion.

     Tara spends 4 days in the intensive care unit to get her blood pressure under control and to monitor her liver
     enzymes and kidney function. Her liver enzymes and kidney function normalize, and her blood pressure is now down
     to 120/76 mm Hg. She is converted to oral labetalol and will be ready to discharge home in the next day or two for a
     follow-up with the obstetrician within 3-4 days.

     The nurse is providing nutritional education to Tara since she has a history of hypertension and developed pre-
     eclampsia. They both understand that nutrition and lifestyle modifications play a significant role in controlling blood
     pressure and helping prevent Tara's blood pressure from spiking.

     1. Which part of Tara's assessment or history is concerning due to the possibility of complications during
         pregnancy?
          a. Respiratory rate of 22 per min
          b. Hypertension
          c. Heart rate of 92 beats per min
          d. Temperature of 37.4ºC

     2. Tara asks about going out to dinner since she has a busy schedule. Which foods would be the best for her to
         choose for her diet?
          a. Fried chicken fingers and fries
          b. Well-grilled chicken salad with full-fat cheddar cheese and ranch dressing
          c. Raw sushi and rice
          d. Well-grilled steak and steamed broccoli

     Impact on the Fetus
     The fetus of a client with cardiovascular disease is at an increased risk for morbidity, cardiovascular
     disorders--inherited and congenital--premature delivery, and a restriction in fetal growth and development (Russell,
     2022). Fetal growth and development restriction, related to inadequate placental perfusion, also increases the risk
     for fetal demise. Additionally, infants born to clients experiencing poorly controlled cardiovascular disease
     complications during pregnancy were noted to experience small gestational weight measurements and extreme
     prematurity. An infant who is preterm also has reduced cardiomyocyte proliferation, which affects the total number
     of cardiac cells they have. The decrease in myocytes affects the heart's ability to repair itself and can decrease the
     function of the heart (Bensley et al., 2018). Some cardiac problems that infants can develop from prematurity
     include, but are not limited to, patent ductus arteriosus (Figure 12.2) and low blood pressure (Mayo Clinic, 2023c).

     FIGURE 12.2 Patent ductus arteriosus is a common cardiac effect seen in premature fetuses. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy &
     Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Superior nutrition during pregnancy is important not only for the client but for the developing fetus. Those who have
     a limited intake of fruits, vegetables, fish, meats, and dairy can have infants who are stillborn or have a low birth

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan                                            233

weight; the fetus could also have developmental delays. Those who lack nutrients such as iodine, folate, calcium,
and zinc can have complications during pregnancy that could potentially result in material death (UNICEF, 2023).
Research shows that if a pregnant person has gestational diabetes, there are cellular changes that occur within the
developing heart of the fetus. It is important to monitor the client's blood glucose and if they do have diabetes,
make sure the glucose is under control. Cellular changes that occur during the development of the heart of the fetus
have been linked to high glucose levels in the pregnant client (Garg, 2020).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

Tara is at an advanced maternal age. As an already busy mom and working full-time, she regularly has a very hectic
schedule. Meals are often whatever she can pick up quickly. Tara has gained more weight in the second trimester
than her obstetrician recommends; the doctor is concerned about her elevated blood pressure, cholesterol and
glucose levels, heartburn, and lower leg edema.

Upon examination, fundal height is appropriate for gestation and fetal heart tones are normal. Considering Tara's
busy schedule and the three children she is already caring for, Tara is concerned about how to feed her family and
keep herself healthy.

    3. While preparing education for Tara, which information does the nurse need to include in the educational
        packet to help keep Tara and her fetus healthy?
         a. Decrease food intake
         b. Exercise 60 minutes daily
         c. Increase fruits and vegetables
         d. Increase salt in the diet

    4. Which finding in Tara would be the most concerning for premature birth?
         a. Busy schedule
         b. High blood pressure
         c. Fundal height
         d. Pregnant with one fetus

Infancy

For healthy infants born without cardiovascular disorders, research data indicates that breastfeeding for the first 6
months is best because it provides the infant with optimal nutrition. The goal is to breastfeed infants for a full year
while introducing solid foods (CDC, 2023e). Infants who are breastfed have a decreased risk for subsequent
cardiovascular-related diseases such as obesity and type 1 diabetes. Commercially made formulas are developed to
mimic breast milk. Infant formulas must meet the nutritional requirements that are set by the federal government
(FDA, 2023). The FDA recommends that formula preparations include calcium, fats, folate, iron, protein and
carbohydrates in the appropriate amounts for infants. Additionally, micronutrients of zinc, vitamins A, C, D, E, K, and
B vitamins are included in the recommendations (Watson, 2022). To ensure the infant receives the correct amount
of these macro and micronutrients, it is important to provide the formula as prepared or reconstitute as directed.
Watering down the formula will not provide the infant with the nutrients needed to support growth and
development.

Complementary foods can be added to the diet after the infant is 6 months old. Complementary foods include iron-
fortified infant cereals, pureed vegetables, and fruits. As more food is introduced to the infant, food choices should
include fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and whole milks, such as pumpkin, apples, pears, carrots, peas, and
pureed lean meats. Commercially prepared infant foods are available in various stages of infant development.
Home-prepared foods should be pureed to a consistency that is easy for the baby to eat with all peelings and seeds
removed (Advent Health, 2021) or cut into small pieces to avoid choking.
234  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

     Foods and Drinks to Avoid with Infants
     Specific food items should be avoided until 12 months of age. Infants under 12 months should avoid honey, due
     to the potential for botulism, unpasteurized drinks/foods, foods high in salt or sugar, caffeinated drinks, cow's
     milk, and fish high in mercury (CDC, 2023b). Other foods that should be avoided that could potentially cause
     harm are nuts, sunflower seeds, cherries with pits, raw carrots, popcorn, hard candy, raw apples and pears,
     grapes, cheese cubes, and hot dogs or sausage because these have the potential to lodge in the infant's trachea
     and block the airway. Peanut butter and chewing gum can also make the mouth sticky and get lodged in the
     airway (Nemours Children's Health, 2023).

     Infants with congenital heart disease require additional calories to support growth and development (Royal
     Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, 2021). Babies with congenital heart disease may experience fatigue and typically
     require more calories daily than the average infant. Many of these babies cannot eat or drink enough to meet their
     caloric needs. The pediatrician can recommend supplementing breast milk or prescribe a high calorie formula. Baby
     foods that are higher in calories are bananas with tapioca, mango with tapioca, prunes and rice, mixed vegetables,
     and sweet potatoes. Many others can be obtained from the grocery store in the baby food aisle (American Heart
     Association, 2023; Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, 2021). Formulas that the provider can prescribe
     include Infatrini and Similac High Energy with 100 calories and 2.6 g of protein per 100 mLs, in comparison to the
     standard formula, which has 70 calories and 1.5 g of protein per 100 mLs (Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals,
     2021). Infants who have heart issues also may require nasogastric tube feeds to help keep up with their nutritional
     needs.

     Feeding during infancy is an opportunity to introduce infants to a heart-healthy diet and encourage food likes that
     will extend throughout their lifecycle. Promoting a rainbow of foods and allowing the infant to explore a variety of
     textures and consistencies will promote a healthy relationship with food as a fuel source that will encourage and
     sustain growth and development. Limiting processed, high-fat, high-sugar, and high-sodium foods in infancy will
     develop a pattern of utilizing nutrient-dense foods for fuel across the lifespan.

     Childhood

     The heart healthy eating behaviors of infancy should also be followed in childhood, including calorie consumption
     that supports the growth and developmental needs of the child. As these needs fluctuate, children should take the
     lead on how much food they consume; parents and caregivers can allow then to stop eating when they are full
     rather than promoting a clean plate (American Heart Association, 2018). Foods low in added sugar, saturated fats,
     cholesterol, and salt should be the focus of a healthy childhood diet. A childhood diet should be rich in a variety of
     colorful foods; 30-35% of daily caloric intake should be mono- or polyunsaturated fats from olive oil or canola oil.
     See Table 12.2 for the nutritional needs of an average 3-year-old.

     Nutritional Needs                Measurements

     Dairy                            2 cups

     Lean meats and beans             2 oz

     Vegetables                       1 cup

     Fruits                           1 cup

     Grains                           3 oz (with half of that from whole grains)

     TABLE 12.2 Daily Nutritional Needs for a 3-Year-Old (source: AHA, 2010)

     Developing a meal-time routine as a family--where the child is involved in the meal preparation--helps to build life-
     long healthy eating habits. Including children in the preparation of food and teaching them to make healthy
     nutritional choices is something parents can incorporate into their meals each day. Kids can help by washing the
     fruits and vegetables, setting the table, and helping prepare things that are at their cognitive and coordination levels.
     Involving children in meal preparation makes them feel they have choices in what they eat, and with the parents'
     help they are making healthier choices. When eating fast food children can learn to choose healthy options such as

     Access for free at openstax.org
                           12.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan                   235

carrot sticks instead of French fries, yogurt instead of hashbrowns or other sides that are fried in grease, and fresh
fruit instead of baked goods high in added sugar.

Childhood is the optimal time to develop and reinforce heart-healthy dietary eating behaviors that support growth
and development throughout life. Heart-healthy nutritional patterns such as watching portion sizes, eating low-fat
dairy, limiting saturated fats, and increasing fruits and vegetables in the diet can help decrease the likelihood of
obesity, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension in childhood and later as an adult (Cleveland Clinic, 2022c).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Tara's 3-year-old son, Carter, attends preschool Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. until 5:30 p.m. Other than
several upper respiratory tract viral infections and several rounds of otitis media, Carter is relatively healthy. At his
latest well-child visit, the health care provider was concerned with Carter's high weight due to subsequent health
issues related to childhood obesity.

When discussing a normal 24-hour diet for Carter, Tara shares that he typically eats breakfast, lunch, and a snack at
preschool. They typically pick up food for dinner on the way home from work/preschool. As Tara often works from
home on the weekends, she admits that Carter tends to get more screen time than she would like.

    5. With Carter's height charted at 36 inches and weight at 54 lb, calculate his BMI and indicate his BMI category.
        You may use this BMI calculator: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/bmi/calculator.html.
         a. 29.3; severe obesity
         b. 19.2; healthy weight
         c. 16.2; underweight
         d. 32.2; severe obesity

6. While teaching Tara about healthy food choices for Carter, which statement is most appropriate?
     a. "Make sure Carter eats all of his food at each meal and that his plate is clean."
     b. "Let Carter help you prepare meals in the kitchen while you are cooking."
     c. "Since you are busy, Carter can have a cheeseburger and fries daily to help you."
     d. "Screen time is good for Carter since you work and need to keep him occupied."

Adolescence

Some important modifiable risk factors for cardiovascular disease in adolescents include poor dietary quality and
obesity, which can lead to early-onset atherosclerosis (Raeside, 2019). Preventing the occurrence of cardiovascular
disease in adolescents reduces the risk for early death from cardiovascular disease in later life. Although the
information presented previously focuses on nutrient-dense, heart-healthy foods is equally applicable to
adolescents, it is also imperative to integrate teaching strategies in ways meaningful for this age group.

To decrease the risk for long-term cardiovascular disease, preventing or delaying the occurrence of negative,
modifiable risk factors is essential (Dahm et al., 2016). Promoting the high consumption of fruits and vegetables, as
well as whole grains, lean meats, and fish, while minimizing the intake of processed foods, sodium, and artificial
trans fats during adolescence has been shown to decrease the incidence of cardiovascular disease in adulthood.
Refer to Table 12.3 for the daily nutritional needs of adolescents.

Foods       Female - 1,800 Calories  Male - 2,200 Calories

Dairy       3 cups                   3 cups

Lean meats and beans 5 oz            6 oz

Vegetables  2.5 cups                 3 cups

TABLE 12.3 Daily Nutritional Needs for the Average, Healthy 15-Year-Old (source: AHA, 2018)
236  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     Foods                            Female - 1,800 Calories           Male - 2,200 Calories

     Fruits                           1.5 cups                          2 cups

     Grains                           6 oz (with half of that from whole grains) 7 oz (with half of that from whole grains)

     TABLE 12.3 Daily Nutritional Needs for the Average, Healthy 15-Year-Old (source: AHA, 2018)

     Although many aspects of social media are not viewed positively, social media can provide information about heart-
     healthy behavior in a way that positively impacts adolescent behaviors (Mayo Clinic, 2022a). The use of digital
     media has been noted to be effective in providing adolescents with information when and where they seek it (Mayo
     Clinic, 2022a). Additionally, utilizing social media assists teens in establishing a feeling of connection with their
     peers, which can foster healthy behaviors (Anderson et al., 2022). Social media also reduces barriers to information,
     increasing the accessibility of heart-healthy information available to this age group. Parents and nurses can balance
     the positive implications with an awareness of the negative implications of social media. Research has indicated one
     of the best ways to help alleviate negative impacts that social media can play on the teen is for parents and
     guardians to have open communication with their teens.

     Eating disorders, such as purging, binging, or limiting food/not eating certain foods, are more prevalent among
     female adolescents than males. In the U.S. it is estimated that 10 in 100 young women have an eating disorder
     (American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 2018). Teens can become withdrawn, and family may
     recognize weight loss in individuals suffering from eating disorders. Recognizing these symptoms is crucial to the
     health of the teenager.

     In addition to diminished mental health, eating disorders lead to diminished physical health: electrolyte imbalances,
     such as hypokalemia and hyponatremia; increased liver enzymes; increased bilirubin levels; anemia; and
     leukopenia. These changes can affect the electrocardiogram by prolonging QT intervals, causing bradycardia, and
     ventricular tachycardia. The effects of these disorders can decrease the blood pressure and cause a higher risk for
     heart problems, such as cardiomyopathy, by causing the larger walls of the heart to become thicker and lose their
     ability to pump blood (Sarder et al., 2015). Clients with anorexia typically have an amino acid deficiency because
     they do not consume enough protein, which is essential for bodily function. Without enough protein, the body will
     use the available protein for vital functions and the other nonessential functions will shut down. Nails become
     brittle, menstruation ceases, muscles begin to thin and waste, and the essential functions that help to regulate the
     heart become altered. Heart abnormalities are commonly seen in severe anorexia due to cardiac muscle cell death
     (Comprehensive Psychiatric Resources, 2023).

     Adulthood

     Cardiovascular disease is occurring in younger adults more often because other diseases that can cause
     cardiovascular disease are happening at younger ages. Risk factors for developing heart disease include
     hypertension, hyperlipidemia, smoking, obesity, diabetes, sedentary lifestyle, and poor dietary choices (CDC,
     2023c).

     Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a broad category, but includes four subtypes: coronary heart disease, stroke,
     peripheral artery disease, and aortic disease. Table 12.4 includes a complete description of each.

     Disease Subtype                  Description

     Coronary heart disease           Plaque builds up on the walls of the arteries that supply blood to the heart, which
     (CHD)                            decreases blood flow to the heart. This causes angina, which is chest pain from the
                                      lack of oxygen delivery to the heart.

     Transient ischemic               The temporary period of symptoms that are like a stroke and is caused by the
     attack (TIAs)                    occlusion of the arteries leading to the brain. TIAs typically only last a few minutes
                                      and the client usually recovers without any permanent damage.

     Stroke                           The vessels leading up to the brain are blocked, stopping blood from flowing to the

                                      brain. Brain cells are damaged or possibly die, which can lead to long-term

                                      disability.

     TABLE 12.4 Subtypes of Cardiovascular Disease (sources: CDC, 2023f; Mayo Clinic, 2022c)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                        12.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Cardiovascular Wellness Across the Lifespan                     237

Disease Subtype            Description

Peripheral artery disease  A blockage in the arteries to the extremity, usually the leg. This can produce pain in
(PAD)                      the legs while walking.

Aortic disease             This is a broad category for any condition that impacts the ability of the aorta to

                           function correctly. The most common type is aortic aneurysm.

TABLE 12.4 Subtypes of Cardiovascular Disease (sources: CDC, 2023f; Mayo Clinic, 2022c)

When arteries become built up with plaque, it causes a narrowing of the artery (National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, 2022), which impacts blood flow away from the area of stenosis (narrowing). Nutritional intake, along with
lifestyle choices and heredity, can affect a client's risk for developing atherosclerosis. See Figure 12.3 for a graphic
depiction of normal versus abnormal blood flow due to atherosclerosis.

FIGURE 12.3 Atherosclerosis is due to plaque buildup which causes a narrowing of the artery and impacts blood flow distal to the area of
stenosis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Risks for heart disease include high cholesterol and high triglyceride levels, high blood pressure, and a diet high in
saturated fats (Mayo Clinic, 2023d). There are two types of blood cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Health care providers commonly refer to LDL as bad
cholesterol because it contributes to the development of plaque deposits in arteries; HDL is referred to as good
cholesterol as it provides some protection against heart disease (CDC, 2023d). Table 12.5 outlines cholesterol
levels in the desirable, borderline, and high ranges.

Laboratory Test            Desirable       Borderline Risk                               High Risk

Total cholesterol          < 200 mg/dL     200-239 mg/dL                                 > 240 mg/dL

LDL cholesterol            < 100 mg/dL     100-159 mg/dL                                 > 160 mg/dL

HDL (varies dependent      > 60 mg/dL      40-59 mg/dL                                   < 40 mg/dL
on sex)

Triglycerides              < 150 mg/dL     150-199 mg/dL                                 200-499 mg/dL

Blood pressure             < 120/80 mm Hg  120-129/< 80 mm Hg                            > 130/80 mm Hg

TABLE 12.5 Normal Cholesterol Levels (sources: CDC, 2021; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2023; National Library of Medicine,
2022)

The use of the heart-healthy diet has been shown to help lower bad cholesterol (LDL) and increase good cholesterol
(HDL). Additionally, avoiding or minimizing processed foods and high-sugar foods and drinks has a positive impact
on heart health. Foods, such as red meats and high-fat dairy products that are high in saturated fat, should be
reduced to help lower LDL levels. Adding whey protein to the diet can help decrease LDL and total cholesterol
(Amirani et al., 2020). Increasing intake of omega-3--by increasing foods such as salmon, mackerel, and
walnuts--can reduce blood pressure. Clients can increase soluble fiber in the diet by eating oatmeal, kidney beans,
and apples, which can help decrease the absorption of cholesterol in the body leading to overall changes in
cholesterol levels. Exercise and quitting smoking can also help improve HDL levels (Mayo Clinic, 2023b). Adhering to
these dietary patterns can impact individual cholesterol levels to decrease the risk for developing atherosclerosis
and further cardiovascular diseases.

Alcohol consumption has been shown to have negative effects on cardiovascular health, leading to hypertension,
heart failure, and stroke. Drinking excessively--women more than 4 drinks per day and men more than 5 drinks per
day--can also lead to cardiomyopathy, which affects the ability of the heart to pump effectively (Johns Hopkins
238  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     Medicine, 2023). An alcoholic drink is defined as 0.6 of fluid ethanol per drink (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
     and Alcoholism, 2022). In a study that consisted of 371,463 participants, Biddinger et al (2022), showed an
     increased risk for hypertension and coronary artery disease with alcohol consumption.

     In addition to educating clients on controlling cholesterol, triglyceride, and blood pressure levels and avoiding
     alcohol, nurses should inform clients about appropriate nutritional plans to combat cardiovascular disease.
     Nutritional plans should be low in processed food, sugary drinks, saturated fats, fatty dairy products, and sodium
     (Mayo Clinic, 2023e). The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet is an appropriate recommendation
     because it includes a diet high in fruits and vegetables, unsaturated fats, whole grains, fish, legumes, and low-fat
     dairy. Refer to Table 12.6 for the daily nutritional needs of adults.

     Food                             1,800 Calories                    2,200 Calories

     Dairy                            3 cups                            3 cups

     Lean meats and beans 5 oz                                          6 oz

     Vegetables                       2.5 cups                          3 cups

     Fruits                           1.5 cups                          2 cups

     Grains                           6 oz (with half of that from whole grains) 7 oz (with half of that from whole grains)

     TABLE 12.6 Daily Nutritional Needs for the Average Healthy Adult (source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, n.d.)

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part D

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
     Case Study Parts A, B, and C.

     Tara is a busy mother who typically does not like to cook. She does have 4 children ranging from ages 12 years to 2
     weeks. While her husband's parents help care for the children, it is typically Tara who cares for them daily. Tara's
     husband is usually away on business 3-4 nights a week leaving Tara to care for the children herself.

     At her last annual physical, her blood pressure was 148/84 mm Hg; total cholesterol was 248 mg/dL and
     triglycerides showed 173 mg/dL. Her health care provider discussed risk factors associated with cardiovascular
     disease.

     Because school provides breakfast, lunch and a snack for Carter, Tara typically drinks several cups of coffee for
     breakfast, grabs lunch at work and picks up dinner on the way home from picking up her children from her in-law's
     house. She works at home on the weekends, but believes she has time to make positive changes in their normal
     eating routine to include heart healthy meals.

         7. Which would be the best choice for Tara to include in her dietary menu planning?
              a. Macaroni and cheese
              b. Fried chicken
              c. Pork sausage
              d. Apples

         8. What are ways in which Tara could decrease her cholesterol instead of being placed on medication?
              a. Increase fiber in her diet
              b. Drink more sodas
              c. Increase intake of fatty meats
              d. Eat more processed foods

     Later Adulthood

     Later adulthood can be further broken down as youngest-old adults between 65 and 74, middle-old adults between
     75 and 84, with oldest-old age 85 and older (Lee et al., 2018). Although preventative care fostering a healthy

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            12.2 · Nutrition and Long-Term Cardiovascular Illnesses                          239

cardiovascular system is the optimal desire, research indicates that there is an increase in cardiovascular disease as
people age. The incidence of cardiovascular disease increases from approximately 40% in adults ages 40-59 to
75% from ages 60-79, and approximately 86% in those above age 80 (Rodgers et al., 2019). Depending on the
activity level of the client, the older adult typically needs about 2000 calories daily. Additionally, healthy older adults
need increased dietary fiber, calcium, vitamin D, and potassium; healthy older adults should decrease their
consumption of saturated fats, sodium, and added sugars (FDA, 2022a). See Table 12.7 for the recommended
nutritional needs for later adulthood.

Nutrient        Recommended Daily Amount

Dietary fiber   28 g

Calcium         1000 mg

Vitamin D       600 IU

Potassium       3400 mg

Saturated fats  < 10% daily caloric intake

Sodium          < 2300 mg

Added sugars    < 10% daily caloric intake

TABLE 12.7 Daily Nutritional Needs for Later Adulthood (source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2020a)

As people age, many age-related changes occur that can affect nutritional needs. Many adults experience heart
complications from coronary artery disease, valvular disease, high cholesterol, heart failure, and arrhythmias. These
clients are typically placed on multiple medications to treat their condition. However, the nurse can educate clients
on nutrition and other lifestyle strategies to help clients manage their symptoms. Nutritional needs for a healthy
heart include eating a variety of fruits and vegetables; eating whole grains; choosing healthy proteins such as nuts,
fish, and seafood; decreasing intake of highly processed foods; minimizing intake of added sugars; using herbs
instead of salt for seasoning or choosing low-sodium foods; and limiting alcohol intake. The nurse should also
instruct clients on the importance of smoking cessation (American Heart Association, 2021). Another consideration
is how nutrition can interact with medications clients take to treat their heart disease.

12.2 Nutrition and Long-Term Cardiovascular Illnesses

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 12.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on cardiovascular illness.

Cardiovascular Diseases

The American Heart Association defines cardiovascular disease as any disease of the heart and blood vessels, many
of which are related to atherosclerosis (2017). Although some cardiovascular problems are congenital, meaning the
client was born with it, most cardiovascular diseases develop over the lifespan. Cardiovascular diseases that
develop over the lifespan are often linked with atherosclerosis (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 2022).

Cardiovascular heart disease indicates a decrease in the amount of blood, and therefore oxygen, available to the
heart muscle (American Heart Association, 2017). CVD is often the result of narrowed cardiovascular arteries due to
the buildup of cholesterol plaque or atherosclerosis. Lipids--LDL, HDL, and triglycerides--are components of cell
membranes; they assist with energy movement and storage, production of hormones, and vitamin absorption.
However, having too much LDL or triglycerides or too little HDL negatively impacts the body (Cleveland Clinic,
2022b). For this reason, a heart-healthy diet seeks to control high cholesterol (hyperlipidemia) (American Heart
Association, 2020).

When clients have hyperlipidemia, consider what happens in their vascular system over time. As the buildup of
cholesterol begins to form plaques, the vascular system becomes constricted or narrowed. This narrowing causes
the heart to pump more forcefully to push blood throughout the cardiovascular system, resulting in hypertension
and, potentially heart failure, if the cardiac muscle becomes fatigued. Additionally, when the plaque area leading to
the cardiovascular arteries supplying blood and oxygen to the heart muscle continues to narrow until it eventually
becomes too stenosed for blood to flow through it, a myocardial infarction will occur.
240  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     Optimally, individuals will adopt a heart-healthy diet early in life that minimizes hyperlipidemia. This eating style
     provides the nutrients needed to fuel the body while minimizing foods and food preparation styles that increase
     cholesterol levels. Heart-healthy diets reduce saturated and trans fat by limiting red meat and whole milk dairy
     products. Additionally, food is prepared by grilling or baking instead of by frying; healthy oils, such as olive oil, are
     used, when cooking. Heart-healthy diets focus on fruits, vegetables, poultry, fish--especially fish that contains
     omega-3 such as salmon (Medical News Today, 2021)--whole grains, and nuts. Sodium intake for clients on a
     healthy heart diet should be limited to 2300 mg/day (FDA, 2022b; American Heart Association, 2020).

     Hypertension

     Hypertension, or high blood pressure is when the pressure needed to push blood throughout the body's circulation
     is consistently high and reads over 130/80 mm Hg (CDC, 2023a). The formation of plaques can cause constriction or
     narrowing of the arteries (Figure 12.4). If left untreated, hypertension can increase the risk for cardiovascular
     diseases. Heart healthy diets are designed to decrease cholesterol levels, decrease blood pressure, and reduce risk
     for developing congestive heart failure. In addition, hypertensive clients may also follow a low-sodium diet. One of
     the most effective diets to lower blood pressure is the DASH diet (Mayo Clinic, 2021). In addition to limiting the
     intake of sodium to 2300 mg/day, the DASH diet also includes foods high in potassium, calcium, and magnesium.
     The DASH diet encourages limiting saturated fats and sugars (Table 12.8).

     FIGURE 12.4 Atherosclerosis is a primary cause of hypertension. (credit: "Hypertension (High Blood Pressure)" by Blausen.com staff
     (2014). "Medical gallery of Blausen Medical 2014"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

     Food Types                       Serving Size                       Recommended Foods
     Grains                           6-8 servings daily
                                                                         1 slice of whole grain bread
     Vegetables                       4-5 servings daily                 1 oz of dry cereal
                                                                         ½ cup of cooked rice or pasta
     Fruits                           4-5 servings daily
                                                                         1 cup of raw leafy green vegetables
                                                                         ½ cup raw or cooked vegetables
                                                                         ½ cup vegetable juice

                                                                         1 medium fruit
                                                                         ½ cup fresh
                                                                         frozen or canned fruit
                                                                         ½ cup fruit juice

     TABLE 12.8 DASH Diet Recommended Foods (source: Mayo Clinic, 2021)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    12.2 · Nutrition and Long-Term Cardiovascular Illnesses  241

Food Types              Serving Size                                Recommended Foods
Low-fat/no-fat dairy    2-3 servings daily
                                                                    1 cup milk or yogurt
Lean meat/poultry/fish  6 servings daily                            1½ oz cheese

Fats/oils               2-3 servings daily                          Each serving = 1 oz
                                                                    Cooked meat, poultry, fish, or egg
Nuts, seeds, legumes    4-5 servings weekly
                                                                    1 tsp butter substitute or vegetable oil
Sweets/added sugars     5 or fewer servings weekly                  1 tbsp mayonnaise
                                                                    2 tbsp salad dressing

                                                                     cup nuts
                                                                    2 tbsp nut butter
                                                                    2 tbsp seeds

                                                                    1 tbsp sugar, jelly, or jam
                                                                    1 cup sweetened lemonade or tea

TABLE 12.8 DASH Diet Recommended Foods (source: Mayo Clinic, 2021)

Holistic Assessment of Cultural Considerations

A holistic assessment of the client extends beyond a physical assessment and a nutritional assessment. The nurse
should examine which individual characteristics, aspects of medical history, challenges to maintaining health,
interest in wellness promotion and family, community, and cultural aspects impact the client's ability to develop and
adhere to a nutritional plan designed to optimize cardiovascular function. For the cardiovascular client, the nurse
should focus attention on providing education to decrease cholesterol levels and hypertension, while providing a
nutrient-dense eating plan that fuels the body.

What are the client's personal characteristics related to food that may impact their ability to adhere to a healthy
heart eating plan? For example, the nurse should consider if there are issues related to food enjoyment, food
intolerances, and likes and dislikes of certain foods. The nurse can do the following to get a better picture of how to
help the client achieve success in developing and adhering to a heart-healthy meal plan:

· Determine if the client likes to engage in the cooking process--plan, prepare, and cook meals--in lieu of eating
   ready-made processed meals.

· Consider aspects of the client's overall health history, paying specific attention to cardiovascular-related issues.
· Identify if there are long-term cardiovascular issues or if the issue is an acute exacerbation. If the medical issue

   is long-term, determine what issues in the past have helped or hindered the client to identify and maintain a
   heart-healthy diet. Incorporate pertinent family members into this assessment.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Risks for Heart Disease Vary by Ethnicity
The risk for heart disease varies across different ethnic groups. Black women are more likely to have a heart
attack, whereas Black men are more likely to die from having a heart attack. Asian people typically have less
coronary artery disease than other ethnic groups, although Asian Indian men and Filipino men and women do
have a higher risk in comparison to White people. Hispanic women who are young and have a heart attack are at
greater risk for dying than young Hispanic men, young Black adults, and young White adults. (Cleveland Clinic,
2023). In the United States, heart disease is the leading cause of death for people in most ethnic groups (CDC,
2023d).

Planning a heart-healthy menu using the cuisines of diverse cultures can improve adherence as well as provide
variety. Table 12.9 outlines different cultures and food choices that would be appropriate for heart health.
242  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

     Culture                          Healthy Food Choices
     Mexican
                                        · Grilled shrimp, chicken, or fish
                                        · Black or pinto beans
                                        · Salsa, pico de gallo, cilantro, black olives, jalapeno peppers
                                        · Guacamole, fat-free sour cream
                                        · Onions, peppers, mushrooms, tomatoes
                                        · Whole grain brown rice, corn tortillas

     Asian                            · Steamed rice
     (Chinese, Thai, Japanese)        · Vegetables such as bok choy, napa cabbage, bean sprouts, daikon, bamboo

                                         shoots, and watercress
                                      · Mung bean
                                      · Rice noodles
                                      · Low-sodium soy sauce, chili sauce, oyster sauce, and fish sauce
                                      · Curry paste
                                      · Curry such as Thai, Japanese, Chinese, or Malaysian curries
                                      · Lemongrass
                                      · Rice vinegar
                                      · Cilantro, mint, ginger, galangal, and green onion
                                      · Tofu and bean curd
                                      · Edamame

     Indian                           · Berries such as strawberries, blackberries, and blueberries
                                      · Avocado
                                      · Fish and fish oil
                                      · Whole grains such as whole wheat, barley, oats, millet, brown rice, and high

                                         fiber cereal
                                      · Legumes such as lentils, mung beans, and kidney beans
                                      · Seeds and nuts
                                      · Chia seeds
                                      · Spinach
                                      · Collard and mustard greens
                                      · Curry

     Italian                          · Chicken or turkey (grilled, or baked)
                                      · Low-fat ricotta cheese
                                      · Farro or whole grain rice
                                      · Tomatoes and bell peppers
                                      · Whole wheat pastas
                                      · Olive oil
                                      · Low-sodium marinara sauce
                                      · Grilled vegetables such as zucchini, eggplant, and radicchio
                                      · Mussels, octopus, squid

     Soul food/traditional            · Roasted vegetables such as okra and bell bepper
     southern cooking                 · Berries and stone fruits
                                      · Baked chicken without skin
                                      · Baked sweet potato
                                      · Roasted turkey or pork
                                      · Brown rice
                                      · Cauliflower pasta
                                      · Collard, mustard, and turnip greens

     TABLE 12.9 Culturally Appropriate Food Choices for a Heart Healthy Diet Among Cuisines Popular in the United States (sources: Cleveland
     Clinic, 2020a; Cleveland Clinic, 2020b; Patiala Heart Institute, 2023; Martin, 2023; WebMD, 2022; National Lipid Association, 2020)

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                                                             243

12.3 Treatments and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 12.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments utilized for cardiovascular disorders.
  · 12.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      cardiovascular disorders.

Drug-Food Interactions with Treatments for Cardiovascular Disorders

Nurses should be aware of the drug and food interactions that can occur with cardiac medications. This section will
discuss some of the most common.

Warfarin and Vitamin K
Warfarin keeps blood from coagulating too quickly and is used for treatment of venous thromboembolism and for
stroke prevention for certain conditions like atrial fibrillation or mechanical heart valves. Vitamin K works to assist in
coagulation. Warfarin and vitamin K work in opposite ways, so the client must be aware that their normal, daily
consumption of vitamin K should be consistent. Women typically need about 90 mcg of vitamin K daily; men
typically need about 120 mcg. Green, leafy vegetables, Brussels sprouts, broccoli, asparagus, and green tea are all
high in vitamin K (Mayo Clinic, 2022b). The clients can eat leafy greens, but they need to eat them in a consistent
amount. When a client's consumption of leafy greens fluctuates, it can cause fluctuations in the effects of warfarin.

Diuretics and Electrolytes
There are a variety of diuretics used for heart failure and a few for hypertension; the most common are the loop
diuretics such as furosemide. Diuretic medications decrease the workload of the heart muscle and rid the body of
excess fluid, which can cause fluctuations in electrolyte levels, particularly potassium. The nurse should assess the
client for (and instruct the client to note signs of) hypokalemia--potassium levels less than 3.5 mEq/L. Symptoms of
hypokalemia include constipation, muscle cramps, heart palpitations, and fatigue (Mayo Clinic, 2023a).

Although the loop diuretics are the most common diuretics that are associated with electrolyte imbalances, the
clients who are taking other types of diuretics such as potassium-sparing diuretics need to be aware of the risk for
hyperkalemia that can develop from the use of these medications (Knott, 2020). Hyperkalemia, or elevated
potassium levels, can cause muscle fatigue, paralysis, arrhythmias, and nausea.

Since diuretics help the body to get rid of excess water, there is a risk that sodium--also an electrolyte--can be
reduced too much and cause hyponatremia. The nurse should inform clients of signs and symptoms of
hyponatremia: nausea and vomiting, weakness, and changes in level of consciousness; extremely low levels of
sodium can cause seizures (Sterns, 2022).

Treatments and Medications That Can Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

Clients with cardiovascular disease frequently take one or more prescribed medications that can potentially cause
nutritional deficiencies. Diuretics, for example, are used by clients with hypertension, heart-failure, and other
cardiac-related conditions. Deficiencies of water-soluble vitamins are related to the use of diuretic therapy which
causes increased excretion of these nutrients (Lennie et al., 2018). Other cardiovascular medications associated
with nutrient deficiencies include statin medications used to treat hyperlipidemia. Studies have shown that levels of
serum CoQ10, important for converting food into energy, decrease with the use of atorvastatin and similar
medications (Chong et al., 2021).

Traditionally, sodium has been the focus of research examining the role of nutrition in the management of heart
failure (Lennie et al., 2018). However, recent research has expanded the search for nutritional factors that influence
the management of clients with heart failure and other cardiovascular diseases. Researchers have found that clients
with heart failure frequently experience calcium, folate, magnesium, zinc, and vitamins C, D, E, and K deficiencies
(Lennie et al., 2018). These deficiencies can be related not only to medication use, but also other factors. Another
related factor to nutritional deficiencies among clients with heart failure is the lack of diet variety (Lennie et al.,
2018). These clients frequently experience loss of appetite, feel full after eating only a small amount, and have
limited energy to prepare and eat food. They are more likely to eat the same foods repeatedly, limiting their
potential to consume a variety of needed nutrients (Lennie et al., 2018).
244  12 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part E

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
     Case Study Parts A, B, C, and D.

     Recently, Tara has noticed her legs are swelling and she has experienced some shortness of breath with activity, so
     she schedules an appointment with her primary care provider.

     At Tara's appointment, her provider takes her vital signs and finds her blood pressure is 165/85 mm Hg and her
     heart rate is 72 beats per minute. She is experiencing crackles in the base of her lungs and 2+ pitting edema to
     bilateral lower extremities.

     The provider is concerned that Tara has developed heart failure and wants the nurse to educate Tara on healthy food
     choices. The provider places Tara on the diuretic furosemide to decrease Tara's swelling and a potassium
     supplement. The provider orders laboratory work that includes a comprehensive metabolic panel and B-type
     natriuretic peptide.

         9. The nurse is educating Tara on nutritional considerations related to her condition. Which education statement
             would be appropriate for the nurse to tell Tara?
              a. "You need to increase your intake of potassium-rich foods."
              b. "You need to increase the amount of sodium in your diet."
              c. "You need to identify a small list of foods that you can easily prepare and eat several times a week."
              d. "You may need a vitamin supplement if you are unable to eat a variety of foods."

       10. The nurse is giving Tara an example of a healthy meal for her heart. Which meal would be the most
             appropriate for the nurse to share with Tara?
              a. Fried chicken, green beans, and tea
              b. Grilled fish, steamed vegetables, and water
              c. Hamburger, chips, and water
              d. Baked chicken, rice, and white roll

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        12 · Chapter Summary 245

Chapter Summary

· Proper nutrition is essential for maintaining a       · Childhood dietary habits can impact adult health,
   healthy heart through the lifespan and is important     so it is important to establish habits like eating
   for overall health.                                     whole grains, vegetables and fruits, utilizing low-
                                                           fat or non-fat dairy foods, and selecting fish and
· Physical activity, at least 150 min weekly, is an        lean meats, as well as avoiding or minimizing
   important aspect of all stages of life.                 processed foods and high-sugar foods and drinks.

· As a person ages, it is important to have routine     · Older adulthood diseases can affect heart health.
   checkups which include monitoring cholesterol,
   triglycerides, and blood pressure.

Key Terms

angina chest pain caused by inadequate blood supply     near syncope feeling of loss of consciousness
    to the heart                                        plaque fatty deposits of cholesterol on inner lining of

atherosclerosis plaque buildup within the vascular          artery
    system                                              stenosis narrowing and hardening in diameter
                                                        stroke loss of oxygen to cerebral tissue
dyspnea difficult or labored breathing                  syncope loss of consciousness for a short period of
heart failure inability of heart to pump blood
                                                            time
    effectively to keep up with body demands            transient ischemic attack (TIA) temporary loss of
hyperlipidemia excess of lipids or fats in the blood
hypertension consistent blood pressure readings             oxygen to cerebral tissue without permanent
                                                            damage
    above 130/80                                        triglycerides fatty substance circulating in the
lipids fatty acids insoluble in water; lipids in the        cardiovascular system
                                                        uteroplacental transfer of oxygen and nutrients from
    blood are LDL, HDL, and triglycerides                   client to fetus through umbilical cord and placenta
myocardial infarction death of heart muscle due to

    lack of blood flow and oxygen

Review Questions

1. A client who has a pre-existing heart condition consults her provider to plan for her next pregnancy. Which
    statement would the provider need to include in the teaching for a client who has a normal BMI?
     a. "You are able to gain as much weight as you need."
     b. "You need to increase your caloric intake by 340 calories daily in the second trimester."
     c. "You need to drink whole milk to help the fetus's bones develop."
     d. "You need to refrain from exercising."

2. When educating a new client about nutrition for their child to promote heart health, which statement should
    be included?
     a. "Use only breast milk for the first 6 months of life."
     b. "At six months, pureed vegetables can be added to the infant's diet."
     c. "You can give your infant 100% fruit juice."
     d. "Healthy eating habits cannot start until later."

3. When teaching a client about healthy snack choices for their child to promote heart health, which snack
    choice would be the most appropriate?
     a. Fruit flavored snacks
     b. Whole milk
     c. Banana
     d. Ice cream

4. For a client who is following a heart healthy diet, what is the recommended sodium intake?
     a. < 1500 mg/day
     b. < 2300 mg/day
     c. < 3000 mg/day
246 12 · Suggested Reading

         d. < 4000 g/day

    5. Which factor can influence teenagers' nutritional intake but may not have as strong an influence in other age
        groups?
         a. Social media
         b. Parental guidance
         c. Income level
         d. Availability of food

    6. A teenager comes to the clinic with her parents for concerns about eating disorders. Which long-term
        complication is associated with eating disorders?
         a. Aortic stenosis
         b. Diverticulitis
         c. Hypokalemia and hyponatremia
         d. Rheumatoid arthritis

    7. A nurse is providing education to a client with a total cholesterol of 240 mg/dL. Which of the following diet
        strategies needs to be included?
         a. Continue to consume 5-7 alcoholic beverages each week
         b. Decrease intake of red meat and full-fat dairy products
         c. Decrease intake of oatmeal, lentils, and other sources of fiber
         d. Continue the current diet plan-- this cholesterol level is within the accepted range

    8. Which of the following would be an example of a DASH diet meal?
         a. Sliced ham, canned corn, and a cup of milk
         b. Fried eggs, bacon, and coffee
         c. Grilled shrimp with whole grain rice and mixed vegetables
         d. Oatmeal, sausage, and apple juice

    9. A client is taking warfarin for a valve replacement. Which food should the nurse include in the teaching that
        the client should consistently consume?
         a. Asparagus
         b. Potatoes
         c. Water
         d. Protein

  10. The nurse is educating a client on how to eat heart healthy. The client tells the nurse that their typical meal
        consists of traditional Mexican foods. Which meal chosen would indicate the client understands the
        instruction?
         a. Beef enchilada with cheese sauce and refried beans
         b. Nachos covered with grilled chicken, cheese, sour cream, and lettuce
         c. Quesadilla with fried shrimp, black beans, and pico de gallo
         d. Grilled chicken, onions, green peppers, and avocado with corn tortillas

Suggested Reading

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2022, March 24). Choose Heart-Healthy Foods.
    https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/heart-healthy-living/healthy-foods

Nemours Children's Health. (2018, June). Eating During Pregnancy. https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/eating-
    pregnancy.html

Office of Disease Prevention and Healthy Promotion. (2023, September 19). Heart-Healthy Foods: Shopping List.
    https://health.gov/myhealthfinder/health-conditions/heart-health/heart-healthy-foods-shopping-list

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                12 · Suggested Reading 247

Pathways to Population Health Equity. https://www.publichealthequity.org/
Rice, A. (2023, November 16). 15 Incredibly Heart-Healthy Foods. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/

    heart-healthy-foods
WebMD. (n.d.). 21 Foods That Can Save Your Heart. https://www.webmd.com/heart-disease/ss/slideshow-foods-to-

    save-your-heart
248 12 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 13

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

FIGURE 13.1 Selection, portion, and balance of food choices leverage nutrition as a modifiable risk factor to improve pulmonary health.
(credit: modification of work "Cheese, wine and bread in Cafe Vavin, 18 Rue Vavin, 75006 Paris" by Joe deSousa/Wikimedia Commons, CC0
1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System
13.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness
13.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness
13.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness
INTRODUCTION The pulmonary system is a set of organs that, in conjunction with the cardiovascular system,
provide life to the rest of the body through oxygenation. Numerous nutritional factors support, or prevent, full
function of the pulmonary system. When the pulmonary system is impaired by acute disease (cold, flu, pneumonia,
etc.) or chronic conditions (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], asthma, cystic fibrosis, etc.), nutritional
support and considerations assist clients in healing. Additionally, obesity and chronic inflammation increase risks for
and worsen outcomes in lung disease through altered surfactant function, impaired vascular homeostasis, and
increased susceptibility to acute injury (Kokoszynska et al., 2021). Nurses' understanding of nutrition and their
ability to apply the nursing process creates nutritional impact for optimal client health.
Consider this case: Katrice is an 11-year-old Black female who is overweight but active in school activities and
sports. Her past medical history includes seasonal allergies and diagnosis of asthma 1 year ago. Family history
includes three older siblings with seasonal and food allergies, eczema, and asthma. Her parents report "trying to
ensure a healthy diet" despite the need to eat prepared meals and fast food frequently because of the family's busy
250  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     schedule. They present today for an asthma follow-up appointment for Katrice.

     13.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 13.1.1 Describe the normal function of the pulmonary system.
       · 13.1.2 Identify cues of nutritional impact on the pulmonary system.
       · 13.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the pulmonary system.

     Development of the pulmonary system spans from its initiation in the first trimester of pregnancy through to early
     adulthood (Arigliani et al., 2018). To assess and analyze the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system, the nurse
     must understand the system's normal function. The pulmonary or respiratory system comprises the upper and lower
     airways (passageways through which air moves), along with the lungs and alveolar sacs. The primary function of the
     pulmonary system is to ensure adequate oxygenation throughout the body. This occurs with gas exchange, which
     involves transporting oxygen to the cells and transporting carbon dioxide away from the cells. This process happens
     through ventilation, diffusion, and perfusion. Ventilation is the movement of atmospheric air that is higher in oxygen
     into the lungs and the removal of carbon dioxide. Ventilation is the number-one function of the respiratory system.
     Respiratory diffusion occurs when gases move down the concentration gradient across the alveolar sacs and
     capillaries. Perfusion is the process of the arterial blood moving through the tissue to the entire body. Adequate gas
     exchange is essential for all systems of the body. If the pulmonary system is inadequate, total health and well-being
     can be affected (Norris, 2019).

     Normal Function of the Pulmonary System

     The normal function of the pulmonary system is best understood when divided into the upper and lower respiratory
     tract. The respiratory system plays a significant role in ensuring all body systems adequately receive gas exchange
     for tissue perfusion (Figure 13.2).

     FIGURE 13.2 The major respiratory structures span from the nasal cavity to the diaphragm. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and
     Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Upper Respiratory Tract
     The upper respiratory system is responsible for inhalation and exhalation and also influences speech and the sense
     of smell. The upper respiratory tract is comprised of the:

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System                                                 251

  · Nose--responsible for smell, which occurs via receptors from the olfactory nerve located in the upper areas of
      the nose

  · Sinuses--give a fullness to speech and act as shock absorbers if facial trauma occurs
  · Pharynx (throat)--a passageway for the respiratory and digestive tracts
  · Larynx (voice box)--houses the vocal cords, which are responsible for speech

Lower Respiratory Tract
The lower respiratory tract is comprised of the airways, lungs, and accessory muscles of respiration. The lower
respiratory system is responsible for gas exchange and perfusion.

The lower respiratory tract consists of the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. Gases move to
and from the lungs through the airways. The airways only allow for movement of gases, not gas exchange, because
the airways are too thick to allow for diffusion. The actual respiratory gas exchange occurs in alveolar sacs that arise
from the ducts and contain groups of alveoli. Surfactant is a fatty protein that lines the alveoli and reduces surface
tension. Without surfactant, atelectasis, which is the collapse of the alveolar, will occur and gas exchange cannot
happen, because the collapse causes a reduction of the alveolar area.

The lower airways consist of two elastic lungs located in the pleural cavity of the chest. The two lungs are not equal
in size or gas exchange. The right lung is larger and consists of three lobes; the left lung has two lobes. Most of the
function (55-60%) occurs in the right lung. If the client's right lung is compromised, it will interfere with gas
exchange and perfusion to a greater extent than a compromised left lung.

Respirations occur when changes in size of and pressure within the chest cavity take place. The diaphragm and
chest muscles contract and relax to cause these changes. When the work of breathing is increased, back and
abdominal muscles may be used in addition to chest muscles. When back and abdominal muscles are used, the
client is said to be using accessory muscles to breathe.

Humans breath in and out approximately 22,000 times a day (Canadian Lung Association, n.d.). While environmental
or contaminant factors impact pulmonary function, a natural degradation of function over time also occurs. The
following Special Considerations box describes respiratory changes that occur with aging. Respiratory changes in
older adults can be related to normal aging or respiratory disease. Age-related changes in the muscles and the
cardiovascular system may also cause abnormal respirations (Schneider et al., 2021).

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Age-Related Changes in the Respiratory System
  As individuals age, changes to the musculoskeletal, vascular, and respiratory systems that alter function and
  may require nursing interventions, as outlined in Table 13.1.
252  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     Changes                                           Nursing Implications

     · Alveolar surface area decreases.                · Encourage vigorous pulmonary hygiene (i.e.,
     · Diffusion capacity decreases.                      client to turn, cough, and deep breathe) and use
     · Elastic recoil decreases.                          of incentive spirometry, especially if the client is
     · Bronchioles calcify and become rigid.              confined to bed or has had surgery, to reduce
     · Alveolar ducts dilate.                             the risk for infectious respiratory or mechanical
     · Ability to cough decreases.                        complications.

                                                       · Encourage upright position to minimize
                                                          ventilation-perfusion mismatching; slumped
                                                          and supine positioning allows the abdomen to
                                                          compress the diaphragm and may limit full lung
                                                          expansion.

     · Residual volume increases.                      · Include inspection, palpation, percussion, and
     · Vital capacity decreases.                          auscultation in lung assessments to detect
     · Efficiency of oxygen and carbon dioxide            normal age-related changes.

        exchange decreases.                            · Assess client's respirations for abnormal
     · Elasticity decreases.                              breathing patterns; Cheyne-Stokes respiration
                                                          may occur in older adults without pathology.

                                                       · Encourage frequent oral hygiene to aid in the
                                                          removal of secretions.

                                                       · Help the client actively maintain health and
                                                          fitness to keep losses in respiratory functioning
                                                          to a minimum.

     · Muscles atrophy.                                · Have face-to-face conversations with the client
     · Laryngeal muscles lose elasticity.                 when possible because the client's voice may be
     · Vascular resistance in the pulmonary system        soft and difficult to understand.

        increases.                                     · Assess a client's level of consciousness and
     · Pulmonary capillary blood volume decreases.        cognition, because hypoxia from acute
     · Risk for hypoxia increases.                        respiratory conditions can cause the client to
                                                          become confused.

     · The body's compensatory measures to avoid       · Assess subtle manifestations of hypoxia to

     hypoxia and hypercarbia decrease.                 prevent complications.

     · Respiratory muscle strength, especially in the  · Encourage pulmonary hygiene and help clients

     diaphragm and intercostals, decreases.            actively maintain health and fitness to promote

                                                       maximal respiratory system functioning and

                                                       prevent respiratory illnesses.

     TABLE 13.1 Expected Changes in Respiratory Symptoms for Older Clients (sources: Dezube, R., 2023; Schneider et al., 2021; Sun et
     al., 2021)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                         13.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System                253

Changes                                          Nursing Implications

· Effectiveness of the cilia decreases.          · Encourage pulmonary hygiene and help clients
· Alveolar macrophages are altered.                 actively maintain health and fitness to promote
· Immunoglobulin A decreases.                       maximal functioning of the respiratory system
                                                    and prevent respiratory illnesses.

· Anteroposterior diameter increases.            · Discuss the normal changes of aging to help

· Progressive kyphoscoliosis occurs.             reduce anxiety about symptoms.

· Chest wall compliance (elasticity) decreases.  · Discuss the need for increased rest periods

· Mobility of chest wall may decrease.           during exercise, because exercise tolerance

                                                 decreases with age.

                                                 · Osteoporosis is possible, leading to chest wall

                                                 abnormalities.

                                                 · Encourage adequate calcium and vitamin D

                                                 intake (especially during a client's

                                                 premenopausal phase) to help prevent or

                                                 reduce later osteoporosis.

TABLE 13.1 Expected Changes in Respiratory Symptoms for Older Clients (sources: Dezube, R., 2023; Schneider et al., 2021; Sun et
al., 2021)

Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Pulmonary System

The nurse should complete an accurate assessment of the pulmonary system to identify the type and severity of
breathing problems that may interfere with gas exchange and be positively impacted by nutritional support. This
assessment should include a nutritional history and habits, fluid assessment, and barriers to nutritional goals. This
assessment will provide cues to direct the client's care and enable optimal nutritional intake.

Client History
Accurate client information is important to identify how food intake may interfere with pulmonary function. The
nurse should be aware that age, gender, and race may affect nutritional needs and risks related to the respiratory
system. The client history should include allergies (food and environment), dietary habits, special dietary needs and
food sensitivities, food access and/or insecurity, smoking (tobacco and vaping), alcohol, illegal drug use (particularly
inhaled substances), travel and environmental exposures, and residential conditions. The history should specifically
include:

  · Allergies--Include documentation of food, dust, pollen, bee stings, and medications. Document the onset of
      allergy and the specific allergic response, such as wheezing, difficulty breathing, cough, rhinitis, hives, swollen
      lips, or anaphylaxis. If the client identifies allergies, inquire as to number of prior reactions, treatments utilized,
      response to treatment, hospitalizations, and if the client has been prescribed and/or carries epinephrine. Food
      allergies are a risk factor for asthma along with asthma morbidity (daytime symptoms, increased rescue
      therapy, hospitalization, ventilator use, unplanned health care utilization) and mortality (Sherenian et al., 2018).

  · Dietary habits--Assess initially with a 24-hour food recall, in which a client reports all their food and fluid
      intake on the last day (Figure 13.3). The 24-hour recall is used most often in dietary surveys and has been
      adapted and validated for use by adolescents and adults, as well as by adults in reporting their child's intake
      (Arsenault et al., 2020). While not completely accurate for micronutrient evaluation, the 24-hour food recall can
      be reviewed and discussed to determine if the reported food intake is typical for the client's normal routine. For
      example, if a client typically skips breakfast, eats mostly processed foods or fast food, drinks sugary beverages,
      and/or eats high-sodium food such as packaged and processed items, this information will assist the nurse in
      identifying areas for nutrition education.

  · Special dietary needs--Include specific dietary preferences, religious requirements, or medically indicated
      restrictions, such as gluten free, diabetic diet, low salt, avoidance of tree nuts or peanuts, kosher, halal, or pork
      free. Dietary restrictions may put clients at increased risk for nutrient deficiency (vitamin E, magnesium,
      sodium, potassium, and calcium), resulting in increased presence of respiratory symptoms such as wheezing
      and airway hyperreactivity (Sherenian et al., 2018).

  · Social determinants of health (SDOH)--Include conditions in the home, school, work, place of worship, and
254  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

        social environments that affect health, quality of life, and risks for illness (Office of Disease Prevention and
        Health Promotion [ODPHP], 2020). Economic and social conditions may limit or create uncertain access to
        adequate food, known as food insecurity. Restrictions may result from insufficient monetary resources, social
        support (for example, lack of school lunch during school breaks), or shortage of full-service supermarkets. Food
        insecurity is associated with increased obesity, asthma, COPD, and cancer(ODPHP, 2020).
     · Smoking--Include status as a current smoker, having ever smoked, the age when the client started, and the
        number of cigarettes smoked daily. This should be recorded as pack-years, calculated as the number of packs
        smoked per day multiplied by number of years smoked. The nurse should also assess for use of chewing
        tobacco, hookah smoking, and vaping, including the product the client uses, such as nicotine or
        tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). For pediatric clients, any exposure to smokers should document relationship,
        frequency, location (home, car, or other) and duration of smoke exposure. According to the CDC (2022a),
        smoking is the leading cause of preventable death and is associated with increased risk for asthma, COPD, and
        immune-system damage or dysfunction. It is the primary cause of lung cancer, with 9 out of 10 lung cancer
        deaths caused by smoking or secondhand smoke exposure.
     · Alcohol intake--Include the number of drinks in a single event in a day and the cumulative total per week. The
        Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (2022b) recommends that women have no more than 1 drink per day and
        that men have no more than 2 drinks per day; they further define binge drinking as consumption of 4 or more
        drinks during a single event for women and 5 or more during a single event for men. Alcohol use disorder affects
        the respiratory system and increases the incidence and associated risks of asthma, COPD, lung infection,
        aspiration pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Arvers, 2018).
     · Illegal drug use--Include questions regarding any substance the client inhales, snorts, chews (edibles), or
        injects. This includes paint, markers, bleach, cleaning supplies, marijuana, cocaine, opioids (heroin and
        fentanyl), methamphetamines, gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), hallucinogens (ketamine, LSD, PCP, magic
        mushrooms), MDMA (ecstasy and Molly), and flunitrazepam (Rohypnol). Impact of drug use on the respiratory
        system involves respiratory sedation, risk of respiratory arrest, and immune-system suppression, increasing the
        potential for respiratory infections (Plein & Rittner, 2018).
     · Prescription medications--Document the medication name, dose, frequency, and compliance; this will include
        medications taken for breathing problems and all other conditions. The nurse should be aware that clients may
        need prompting for the inclusion of medical cannabis in their medication list, as the number of states allowing
        for medical prescribing is increasing. Also assess the use of over-the-counter medications and herbal remedies.
        Certain medications may affect the respiratory system. For example, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
        inhibitors to treat hypertension may cause a dry nighttime cough. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-
        inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) induce bronchospasm and should be avoided in clients with a history of
        sensitivity to these medications.
     · Travel, geographic location, and environmental exposure--Assess to reveal exposure to diseases and
        pathogens found in certain areas that increase the risk for infection. Environmental exposures such as forest
        fires, pollution (often more common in lower socioeconomic or dense urban areas), gasoline fumes, or
        aerosolized chemicals (i.e., chlorine) increase upper and lower respiratory tract irritation and may worsen
        chronic respiratory conditions (Lee et al., 2021). Residential conditions influence the health of individuals; for
        example, substandard housing materials and overcrowding, along with biologic (molds, mites, roaches),
        chemical (lead, carbon monoxide), and physical (temperature, fine particles) hazards lead to respiratory
        disease (OASH, 2020). The nurse should document type of housing (single-family home, apartment, mobile
        home), setting (rural, suburban, urban), number of occupants, number of bedrooms, and any hazards or
        contributors to disease.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System                                                             255

FIGURE 13.3 A 24-hour food diary provides clues about nutrients and how they may be impacting wellness. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     CLINICAL TIP

 Allergies

  The nurse should document any known allergies, especially to medications. The specific type of response the
  client experienced and what was done to correct it should be documented in a prominent place in the client's
  medical record.

When conducting an assessment, the nurse should obtain a family history of respiratory disorders. This provides
information regarding diseases that have genetic components, such as cystic fibrosis or emphysema. A family
medical history of allergies is often present in clients with asthma. The nurse should ask about infectious diseases
such as tuberculosis, because families have similar environmental exposures.

A client's complete medical history including current conditions and diagnoses that impact the client's health should
be documented. In addition, the primary complaint or reason for the current health intervention (office visit or
hospitalization) is necessary; this is often collected using the acronym OLD CARTS, referring to:

  · Onset
  · Location
  · Duration
  · Character
  · Associated symptoms or aggravating factors
  · Relieving factors
  · Timing
  · Severity or scale

In pulmonary diagnoses, primary concerns may include cough, wheezing, chest tightness, or shortness of breath.
Examples include:

  · Cough--A potential sign of lung disease. Questions that the nurse might ask include: Is it the same, better, or
      worse than when it started? Is the cough dry or does it produce sputum? Does anyone else you spend time with
      have a cough?

  · Sputum--A large cue in the respiratory assessment. The nurse should note the color, consistency, and amount.
      The nurse should also ask about a time of day when coughing is more prevalent (in the morning, during or after
      meals, etc.). Sputum can indicate infection, pulmonary edema, or cancer.
256  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

       · Wheezing--A sign of airway restriction. Does it occur with exercise or activity, or also at rest? Do you hear it
           while breathing in, breathing out, or both?

       · Shortness of breath--May indicate different types of lung problems. The nurse should note dyspnea, difficulty
           breathing, or breathlessness. Another factor that should be determined is orthopnea, shortness of breath that
           occurs when lying down and is relieved by sitting up. These findings often occur with chronic lung disease.

     To assess further, the nurse should ask if the complaint or problem has ever occurred before, if there are known
     triggers, and what treatments have been used to make it better (Dezube, 2023).

     A client history provides awareness of risks and conditions that may shape nutritional interventions. This could
     include:

       · Childhood illnesses--asthma, pneumonia, communicable diseases, hay fever, allergies, eczema, frequent colds,
           croup, and cystic fibrosis

       · Adult illnesses--pneumonia, sinusitis, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, COPD, emphysema, sarcoidosis, obesity,
           obstructive sleep apnea, diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, influenza, and COVID-19

       · Vaccinations--pneumococcal vaccine (PCV 13, PCV 15, and PPSV 23) influenza vaccine, COVID-19 vaccine, and
           bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine

       · Past surgical history--surgeries of the upper or lower respiratory tract
       · Injuries, hospitalizations, and tests--injuries to the upper or lower respiratory tract, hospitalizations related to

           pulmonary conditions, and dates of last chest x-ray, pulmonary function test, tuberculin test, or other diagnostic
           tests and their results
       · Indications of infectious disease (tuberculosis)--recent weight loss, night sweats, sleep disturbances
       · Travel, occupation, hobbies, and social history--geographic areas of risk for infection or pollutants, occupational
           hazards (aerosols or chemicals), tobacco, vaping, or other inhalants (Dezube, 2023)

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     In this visit with Katrice and her parents, the health care team wants to collect a complete client history including
     Katrice's medical and social history, family history, and current asthma symptoms. Katrice reports utilizing her
     asthma inhaler before exercise but has rarely needed the inhaler outside of exercise. They deny audible wheezing,
     nighttime cough, or asthma attacks that have required hospitalization. They are pleased overall with her asthma
     control. The provider notices on exam that Katrice's body mass index (BMI) has increased since her last visit, taking
     her from overweight to obese.

         1. Which statement indicates Katrice and her parents understand the normal function of the pulmonary system?
              a. "It's ok if I wheeze every day; as long as I use the inhaler, my lung function will stay the same for my
                   whole life."
              b. "The pulmonary system goes from my mouth through to the bottom of my lungs; it's how my body gets
                   oxygen."
              c. "Wheezing is a sign that my airways have expanded too much, and air is moving through them too fast."
              d. "Secondhand smoke doesn't affect the lung tissue."

         2. What additional history information would signal the need for additional intervention by the nurse?
              a. The family of five living in a four-bedroom single-family home
              b. Wearing masks and playing inside when visiting family who live near a factory in a high-pollution area
              c. Wheezing sometimes associated with taking NSAIDS before exercise
              d. Having grandma smoke outside, away from the house, and covering her clothing with a "smoking jacket"

     Physical Assessment
     Physical assessment begins with vital signs. Blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, pulse oximetry, height,

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System                                                      257

weight, and BMI provide foundational information regarding respiratory effort, cardiovascular workload,
oxygenation, and nutritional status (underweight or overweight). The respiratory tract exam should include the nose
and sinuses; pharynx, trachea, and larynx; and lungs and thorax. Pulmonary assessment should include:

  · Skin for color (cyanosis), pallor, and nail clubbing. These signs may indicate poor oxygenation from respiratory
      disorders.

  · Visual inspection of the nose and sinuses for deformities, swelling, lesions, pain to palpation, and the presence
      of drainage or bleeding.

  · Visual inspection of the mouth and throat. The health care provider should note the size and condition of the
      tonsils, erythema, postnasal drainage, symmetry of the neck, shape and size of the lymph nodes, and position
      of the trachea. Specific measures that may be documented are Mallampati score (an airway assessment scale
      to classify the visibility of the oropharyngeal structures) and neck circumference, both of which contribute to
      evaluation for obstructive sleep apnea. A specialist should examine the larynx if continued hoarseness is noted.

  · Inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation of the lungs and thorax.

     CLINICAL TIP

 Assessing Airway Sounds

  If the client is having difficulty breathing with secretions present in the upper airway, respirations would be loud
  and gurgling. Secretions may be present due to infection, allergies, or other issues. The nurse should instruct the
  client to clear their throat before proceeding with the assessment.

With inspection of the thorax, the nurse should visually observe the rate, rhythm, depth of inspiration, and symmetry
of the chest. The adult respiratory rate at rest is 12-16 breaths per minute (Dezube, 2023). The nurse should also
note the type of breathing, intercostal retractions, and the use of accessory muscles. Also, the nurse should observe
the comparison of lateral or transverse diameter to anteroposterior diameter; the normal ratio is 2:1. These cues
indicate lung disease such as COPD and advanced aging.

With palpation, the nurse should examine by touch and note for any abnormalities found, such as tenderness or
swelling. The nurse might note crepitus (air trapped in and under the skin), which is typically felt as crackling. This
should be reported to the health care provider. The nurse should also note fremitus (a vibration in the chest wall as
the client speaks) during palpation.

Percussion is systematic tapping over the intercostal spaces, moving through the anterior, lateral, and posterior
thorax. With percussion, the presence of abnormal fluid or air in the lungs may be detected, as noted by different
sounds. Resonance is expected over lung areas; hyperresonance, dullness, or flat sounds may indicate concerning
respiratory findings (Dezube, 2023).

With auscultation, the nurse should listen with a stethoscope for normal breath sounds, abnormal sounds, and
voice sounds. These sounds provide information about the flow of air through the lungs and trachea, which help to
identify fluid, mucus, or obstruction in the respiratory system (Dezube, 2023). Figure 13.4 shows the proper
sequence for auscultation. The nurse should begin at the apex of the lung, moving from side to side in a systematic
approach ending at the long bases.

FIGURE 13.4 Auscultation should be done posterior and anterior. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
258  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     AUSCULTATING LUNGS

     Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/13-1-assess-and-analyze-the-impact-
     of-nutrition-on-the-pulmonary-system)
     The proper way to auscultate lungs, including the correct locations, can be seen in this video. This is of great
     importance to ensure that respiratory issues will not be missed and will be effectively monitored throughout the
     course of disease.

     Psychosocial Assessment
     A psychosocial assessment is important to determine how the client is coping with respiratory distress, either acute
     or chronic. The client's emotions and responses may be based on concerns for normalcy, fitting in, bullying, cost of
     medications and health care, missed time from work or school, access to and cost of proper nutrition, safety, and
     support systems. In addition, the physical manifestations of disease may cause psychosocial symptom
     manifestation. A client with a high fever may be disorientated, a client with COPD may be depressed due to lack of
     cure, or a client with breathing difficulty may have anxiety caused by the sensation of not getting enough air.

     The nurse should encourage clients to express their feelings and fears, allowing the health care provider to address
     their anxiety, depression, stress, or other concerns. The nurse should discuss coping mechanisms to enable the
     client to better handle the emotions and promote optimum disease and symptom management. The nurse may
     educate the client on coping mechanisms such as deep breathing, relaxation, and other techniques that decrease
     anxiety. Referrals to social, financial, educational, occupational, or mental health resources may be appropriate.

     Diagnostic Assessment
     The diagnostic assessment should include a laboratory assessment, imaging, and other noninvasive diagnostic
     tests. The laboratory assessment may include blood studies and arterial blood gases. Arterial blood gases are the
     best way to determine adequate oxygenation in hospitalized or unstable clients. An initial evaluation of albumin may
     indicate concern for dehydration or malnutrition. Prealbumin provides a valid evaluation of protein-calorie
     malnutrition. The example laboratory profile in Table 13.2 shows normal ranges and possible reasons for abnormal
     ranges.

     Test         Normal Ranges (SI        Significance of Changes from Normal

                  Units)                     · Elevated levels (polycythemia): excessive production of
                                                 erythropoietin in response to a chronic hypoxic state
     Complete Blood Count
                                             · Decreased levels: possible anemia, hemorrhage, or hemolysis
     Red blood    · 4.2-5.9 × 1012

     cells        cells/L

     Hemoglobin,  · Females:               · Same as for red blood cells
     total           120-160g/dL           · Based on hemoglobin and hematocrit levels, follow-up labs may
                     (12-16 g/dL
                     conventional units)      include serum ferritin, iron, folate, and B12

                  · Males: 140-170 g/
                     dL (14-17 g/dL
                     conventional units)

     Hematocrit   · Females: 37-47%        · Same as for red blood cells
                     (conventional units)  · Based on hemoglobin and hematocrit levels, follow-up labs may

                  · Males: 41-51%             include serum ferritin, iron, folate, and B12
                     (conventional units)

     TABLE 13.2 Pulmonary Laboratory Assessment Indications of Nutritional Concerns (sources: Castro et al., 2022; Padilla & Abadie, 2022;
     Pagana & Pagana, 2018)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                     13.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Pulmonary System                         259

Test         Normal Ranges (SI       Significance of Changes from Normal
             Units)
WBC count                              · Elevated levels: possible acute infection or inflammation
(leukocyte     · Total:4.5-11 × 109    · Decreased levels: an overwhelming infection, an autoimmune
count,             cells/L)
WBC count)                                 disorder, or immunosuppressant therapy

Differential White Blood Cell (Leukocyte) Count

Neutrophils  · 2.6-8.5 × 109         · Elevated levels: possible acute bacterial infection (pneumonia),

             cells/L                 COPD, or inflammatory conditions (smoking)

                                     · Decreased levels: possible viral disease (influenza)

Eosinophils  · 0-0.55 × 109          · Elevated levels: possible COPD, asthma, or allergies
                cells/L              · Decreased levels: pyogenic infections

Basophils    · 0-0.22 × 109          · Elevated levels: possible inflammation; seen in chronic sinusitis
                cells/L                 and hypersensitivity reactions

                                     · Decreased levels: possible in an acute infection

Lymphocytes  · 0.77-4.5 × 109        · Elevated levels: possible viral infection, pertussis, and infectious
                cells/L                 mononucleosis

                                     · Decreased levels: possible during corticosteroid therapy

Monocytes    · 0.14-1.3 × 109        · Elevated levels: See lymphocytes; also may indicate active
                cells/L                 tuberculosis

                                     · Decreased levels: See lymphocytes

Albumin      · 35-54 g/L (3.5-5.4    · Elevated levels: dehydration
                g/dL                 · Decreased levels: chronic disease, malabsorption, malnutrition
                conventional units)
                                        with low protein, or dilution by IV fluids
                                     · Follow-up diagnostics: prealbumin, blood urea nitrogen, or zinc

                                        (deficiency increases risk for pneumonia [Keller, 2019])

Prealbumin   · 180-450 mg/L          · Elevated levels: chronic kidney disease, steroid use, or alcohol
                (18-45 mg/dL            use disorder
                conventional units)
                                     · Decreased levels: malnutrition, liver disease, infection, or
                                        inflammation

                                     · Follow-up diagnostics: nutritional assessment, hemoglobin, and
                                        anemia evaluation (iron, transferrin, folate, and vitamin B12)

Arterial Blood Gases

PaO2         · 75-100 mm Hg          · Older adults: Values may be lower
                                     · Elevated levels: possible excessive oxygen administration
                                     · Decreased levels: possible COPD, asthma, chronic bronchitis,

                                        cancer of the bronchi and lungs, cystic fibrosis, respiratory
                                        distress syndrome, anemias, atelectasis, or any other cause of
                                        hypoxia

PaCO 2       · 35-45 mm Hg           · Elevated levels: possible COPD, asthma, pneumonia, anesthesia
                                        effects, or use of opioids (respiratory acidosis)

                                     · Decreased levels: hyperventilation/respiratory alkalosis

TABLE 13.2 Pulmonary Laboratory Assessment Indications of Nutritional Concerns (sources: Castro et al., 2022; Padilla & Abadie, 2022;
Pagana & Pagana, 2018)
260  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     Test  Normal Ranges (SI          Significance of Changes from Normal

           Units)

     pH    · 7.35-7.45                · Elevated levels: metabolic or respiratory alkalosis

                                      · Decreased levels: metabolic or respiratory acidosis

     HCO3  · 22-26 mEq/L              · Elevated levels: possible respiratory acidosis as compensation
                                         for primary metabolic alkalosis

                                      · Decreased levels: possible respiratory alkalosis as
                                         compensation for a primary metabolic acidosis

     SpO2  · 95-100%                  · Older adults: Values may be slightly lower
                                      · Decreased levels: possible impaired ability of hemoglobin to

                                         release oxygen to tissues

     TABLE 13.2 Pulmonary Laboratory Assessment Indications of Nutritional Concerns (sources: Castro et al., 2022; Padilla & Abadie, 2022;
     Pagana & Pagana, 2018)

     The imaging assessment should include a chest x-ray and possibly a computed tomography (CT) scan. Chest x-ray is
     used to evaluate and assess the lungs. The x-ray may detect pneumonia, atelectasis, pneumothorax, and a tumor. If
     further evaluation is needed, a CT can be ordered, used in cases where suspicious lesions or clots are thought to be
     present. The CT will verify these findings.

     Pulse oximetry, capnography, and pulmonary function tests are noninvasive tests that provide information about gas
     exchange in the client (Wood, 2022). Pulse oximetry identifies hemoglobin saturation with oxygen; the range should
     be 95-100%. A range below 91% in a client with no chronic respiratory problems is an emergency. The
     capnography measures carbon dioxide, and the pulmonary function test assesses breathing problems and lung
     function; they are utilized in both diagnosis and management of COPD and asthma.

     Analysis of Nutrition and the Pulmonary System

     With a complete pulmonary assessment, the provider must note any abnormal cues and analyze these findings. The
     abnormal findings typically are related to nutritional requirements and deficits. Depending on the indications from
     the initial 24-hour food recall, follow-up or repeated assessments would assist in determining any repeated calorie
     excesses or deficits. A focus on types of food intake, portions, meal patterns, and knowledge of nutrient content
     provide the initial clues for the physical exam findings that may be present in clients with pulmonary conditions.

     A cursory consideration of weight and BMI may not be the best indication of the nutritional status and overall health
     for a client. In fact, a low BMI is linked to increased mortality for COPD clients due to the physiologic consequences
     of diaphragmatic weakness, decreased lung function, and systemic inflammation (McDonald et al., 2019).
     Malnutrition may result in clients with COPD or other chronic diseases from their increased energy expenditures,
     causing fatigue, less activity, muscle loss, and poor appetite. Weight loss can worsen with each exacerbation
     (McDonald et al., 2019). Diminished muscle mass is a sign of exercise intolerance and sedentary lifestyle for clients
     with chronic pulmonary disease. Malnutrition is a negative factor in the prognosis of COPD.

     Obesity is a well-established health factor, recognized by the World Health Organization (2023) as a leading public
     health issue, with estimates in the 2016 data that 41 million children under age 5 and 240 million children ages
     5-19 are overweight or obese. These children typically remain overweight or obese in adulthood. Obesity is a factor
     for increased asthma risk through its role in inflammation and pulmonary overreaction to environmental triggers
     (Calcaterra et al., 2021). Obesity alters the mechanics of the pulmonary system, leading to dyspnea, wheezing, and
     airway hyperresponsiveness (Dixon & Peters, 2018). Excessive weight reduces pulmonary and chest wall
     compliance, contributing to increased work of breathing in adults and children, but the inflammatory
     immunomodulatory impact of high-fat, high-sugar, and low-nutrient "Western" diets is the predominant obesity
     impact in children with asthma (Calcaterra et al., 2021). These physiologic responses are exacerbated by the low
     activity levels that are a natural consequence of pulmonary symptoms.

     Table 13.3 lists key nutritional physical exam findings in clients with chronic pulmonary conditions.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   13.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness                      261

Physical Exam Finding        Effect

Generalized nutrient           · Low BMI
deficiency                     · Obesity or central obesity

Protein energy malnutrition  · Poor physical performance in activities
                             · Lack of muscle strength
                             · Dull/dry hair or hair loss
                             · Banding of nails
                             · Bilateral edema

Anemia                       · Fatigue
                             · Decreased activity/exercise tolerance
                             · Weakness
                             · Palpitations
                             · Irritability
                             · Headaches
                             · Paresthesia
                             · Sore tongue
                             · Brittle nails or spoon-shaped nails
                             · Pallor
                             · Pica (ice, starch, clay)

Dehydration                  · Dry skin and mucous membranes
                             · Poor turgor
                             · Sunken eyes
                             · Decreased urine output
                             · Change in neurologic status

Poor oxygenation             · Muscle retractions
                             · Tripod breathing
                             · Clubbing of nails

Micronutrient deficiency     · Dim-light vision (vitamin A)
                             · Glossitis or inflammation of the tongue (iron, zinc, or riboflavin)
                             · Poor tooth health
                             · Lack of muscle strength; falls or fractures (vitamin D, calcium,

                                magnesium)
                             · Excessive bruising or bleeding (vitamin K)
                             · Dermatitis and diarrhea (niacin)
                             · Muscle cramps (vitamin C or magnesium)

TABLE 13.3 Nutritional Physical Exam Findings in Clients with Chronic Pulmonary Conditions (sources: Esquivel, 2018; Gea et al., 2018;
Rolo; Silvestri et al., 2022)

13.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 13.2.1 Identify nutritional habits that optimize pulmonary wellness.
  · 13.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize pulmonary wellness utilizing nutritional habits.

Poor dietary habits are a modifiable risk factor and treatment target for clients with both acute and chronic illness. A
client with a cold, influenza, or pneumonia may need immune support (vitamin C and zinc), while a client with
chronic conditions needs a comprehensive approach to nutritional intervention. Healthy People 2030, the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services' public health initiative, identifies health behaviors focused specifically
on nutrition and food. The healthy-eating objectives include increasing fruit, vegetable, and whole-grain
262  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     consumption, decreasing intake of sugary drinks and sodium, reducing food insecurity, increasing intake of vitamins
     and minerals, increasing number of infants breastfeeding, and reductions in obesity. MyPlate utilizes evidence-
     based data from the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 and is a pictorial representation of the types and
     quantities of food that should be consumed at meals.

     Table 13.4 identifies some specific nutrition recommendations to impact pulmonary health. These principles
     designed to promote general health are particularly useful for clients with chronic pulmonary conditions. Additional
     strategies may include a focus on protein-rich foods that are easily digested.

     Nutrient             Food Source                                             Consideration
                            · Fruits and vegetables                               Reduce inflammation, strengthen the
     Antioxidants                                                                 immune system, support lung function,
     (vitamin C, vitamin    · Fortified foods such as cereal, orange              and reduce asthma symptoms
     E, and beta                juice, and yogurt
     carotene)                                                                    Supports lung function and reduces
                            · Naturally occurring in salmon, tuna,                upper respiratory infections
     Vitamin D                  mushrooms, egg yolks, and cheese

     Antioxidants         · Apples, berries, grapes, seafood, meat,               Anti-inflammatory benefits and promote
     (flavonoids) and        and eggs                                             normal lung tissue
     selenium
                          · Whole oats, whole-wheat pasta and                     May reduce asthma symptoms promote
     Whole grains            bread, buckwheat, and bulgur wheat, in               better asthma control
                             addition to being a part of a healthy diet

     Sulfites             · Dried fruits and vegetables, pickled                  May be an allergen for some clients and
     (preservative)          foods, shrimp, wine/beer                             trigger reactions or asthma attacks

     TABLE 13.4 Nutrition Recommendations for Pulmonary Wellness (sources: Andrianasolo et al., 2018; Nutrition for lung health and COPD,
     2023; Vezina & Cantin, 2018; Vlieg-Boerstra et al, 2021; Tinsley & Lewsley, 2023)

     The following nutritional supports and actions are available to optimize function and health in pulmonary conditions
     for infancy through adulthood:

       · Infants-Breast milk (Figure 13.5) is best in the first year, supporting optimal nutrition (vitamin A) and
           development of immune system, and is associated with less allergic disease and as a protective mechanism in
           later childhood against illness (wheezing, asthma, and viral illness). As an alternative, formula in the first year is
           acceptable, although not protective against atopic disease or asthma. Cow's milk and soy milk should be
           avoided in the first year (CDC, 2022c); they are difficult for an infant to digest, and cow's milk can cause for iron
           deficiency and iron deficiency anemia (Calcaterra et al., 2021).

       · Children-Combine preferences with a balanced diet plan. Consider finger foods; establish an eating routine
           (i.e., sitting for meals, focused mealtime, pleasant environment for eating); educate on nutrition content,
           balanced diet, MyPlate, and reading labels; create games that make nutrition fun; avoid sugary drinks;
           encourage exercise and active play. Apples, kiwi fruit, spinach, garlic, avocados, broccoli and bananas are easy
           to eat or add to other dishes; these are excellent fruits and vegetables for children with asthma due to the
           nutrient content (minerals, vitamin C, vitamin E, and antioxidants) and the anti-inflammatory properties.

       · Adolescents-Combine preferences with balanced diet plan. Educate about nutritional needs for growth and on
           how to choose healthy options when eating out. Convenience foods that are easy to grab on the go and may
           appeal to adolescents but that also contain antioxidants include oranges, strawberries, carrots, nuts, and
           sunflower seeds.

       · Adults-Educate on the impact of diet on health conditions, meal planning, and use of Mediterranean diet,
           MyPlate, or nutrient dense meals.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness                                                                           263

FIGURE 13.5 Breastfeeding in the first 12 months provides optimal nutrition for infants. (credit: U.S. Department of Agriculture/Flickr,
Public Domain)

Pulmonary rehabilitation assists in reducing respiratory symptoms, improving function, and increasing emotional
and physical participation in activities that promote quality of life. The rehabilitation team will vary based on the
facility but often includes physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, and dietitian along with
the client's health care provider. Instruction on nutrition, breathing techniques, and exercise assist in maximizing
energy.

For clients with dyspnea, frequent coughing, or fatigue, the following additional instructions and guidance from the
American Lung Association (2023) may be useful in supporting the opportunity for improved nutrition:

  · Take smaller bites of food and eat slowly.
  · Sit upright while eating.
  · Take a break between bites and practice deep breathing exercises.
  · Eat more food early in the morning if too tired to eat later in the day.
  · Avoid foods that cause gas or bloating, which tend to make breathing more difficult.
  · Eat 4-6 small meals a day to enable the diaphragm to move freely and let the lungs fill with air and empty out

      more easily.
  · Limit liquids with meals or drink after meals if drinking liquids causes a feeling of fullness, but continue to strive

      for 6-8 glasses of water daily.
  · Consider adding a nutritional supplement at night to avoid feeling full during the day.

Planning Nutritional Goals

The goal of nutrition therapy for pulmonary wellness is to maintain adequate respiratory function to decrease or
prevent malnutrition and obesity. Avoiding malnutrition will help preserve muscle strength and help maintain the
integrity of the immune system. Adequate and proper nutrition is the primary goal in pulmonary wellness; this
involves achieving a total daily caloric intake that meets the client's metabolic needs with foods from a variety of
food groups and an emphasis on including antioxidants. If mucus overproduction and/or retention is problematic, as
with COPD, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, cystic fibrosis, and asthma, reducing foods high in histamine (such as
processed meat, aged cheese, legumes) is advised. Clients should avoid empty calories (calories lacking nutritional
value).

     TRENDING TODAY

 Pulmonary Wellness Through Holistic Care Strategies

 As you work through this Trending Today feature, recall that nurses should rely on evidence-based practice
264  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

      (EBP), which uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal evidence, to inform their practice and care of clients.
      Nurses should encourage clients to evaluate nutritional information on social media with the same scrutiny.

       Holistic care is a prevailing trend for nutritional venues promoting pulmonary wellness. Focusing on the
       apothecary found through herbs, @healingartsapothecary promotes a variety of nutritional components that
       assist with bronchial drainage, liquefying mucus, and minimizing lung secretions. These herbs, from oregano oil
       to wild cherry bark tea, can promote lung health year round but may be especially helpful during seasons that
       exacerbate respiratory issues. Facebook followers can visit LUNGevity Foundation, which promotes the use of
       specific foods to minimize treatment side effects encountered by individuals diagnosed and living with lung
       cancer.

       Take some time to review the following social media content and think critically about the information provided
       and its appeal to clients.

         · @healingartsapothecary (https://openstax.org/r/healingartsapothecary) (TikTok)
         · LUNGevity Foundation (https://openstax.org/r/lungevity) (Facebook)

       Now answer the following questions:

       1. Which account did you prefer when viewing or reading? Explain.
       2. What is the purpose of the content you viewed or read?
       3. How would you evaluate these sources for use of EBP, and which sources used EBP?
       4. If a client came to you with this information, how would you educate them to critically use these sources?
       5. What alternative sources would you recommend to clients to educate them about this topic?

     Carbohydrates, Fiber, Proteins, and Fats
     The nurse should advise clients to choose complex carbohydrates, such as whole-grain bread and pasta, fresh
     fruits, and vegetables, and to limit simple carbohydrates such as table sugar, candy, cake, and soft drinks and sugary
     beverages. Women should aim for about 25 g/day of fiber; men should aim for 38 g/day (or 14 g for every 1000
     calories) (Larson, 2021). Fiber is contained in bread, pasta, nuts, seeds, fruits, and vegetables. For clients prone to
     gas or bloating, it can make breathing more difficult, so avoiding beans, legumes, and gas-producing vegetables,
     such as Brussels sprouts, broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage, may be necessary.

     Proteins play a major role in preventing malnutrition and the integrity of the immune system. Protein requirements
     increase according to illness severity ranging from 0.8-1.2 g/kg of protein per day for mild or moderate illness up to
     1.2-1.5 g/kg of protein per day for clients with severe illness (Deer & Volpi, 2018). Good sources of protein include
     milk, eggs, cheese, meat, fish, poultry, nuts, and peas. Clients who are malnourished should choose protein with a
     higher fat content, while clients who are overweight or obese should choose low-fat or leaner options. To increase
     protein intake, add peanut butter, whey, or soy (vegan) protein powder during food preparation, or add a protein
     drink or shake as a supplement.

     The client should choose healthier unsaturated fats from plant sources such as canola and olive oils, which do not
     contain cholesterol and are liquid at room temperature. To reduce inflammation and support cellular rebuilding, the
     client should choose omega-3 fatty acids and other healthy fats that are found in nuts, eggs, avocados, and fish. The
     client should avoid artificial trans fats and saturated fats. Adding healthy fats to protein-based meals is a way to add
     extra calories to food for undernourished clients who need them. To lose weight, clients will want to limit fat intake.

     Vitamins, Minerals, and Antioxidants
     Multivitamins will likely help support overall nutrient balance. Additionally, older clients or those with chronic
     pulmonary illness requiring corticosteroid use may also benefit from calcium carbonate or calcium citrate and
     vitamin D supplements for general bone health and the prevention of osteoporosis. All use of supplements should
     be discussed with the health care provider.

     Too much sodium may cause edema and impact blood pressure and fluid volume (American Lung Association,
     2023). Processed and prepared foods, such as food that comes in cans, bottles, jars, or frozen packaging, may have
     high sodium content. Clients should look for packages marked as low sodium. During food preparation, spices and
     herbs can season foods instead of additional salt. They should also avoid adding salt to food after it is prepared.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness                                                          265

Clients with COPD and hypoxemia will benefit from a lycopene-enriched diet. Fruit, vegetables, whole grains, and
nuts are rich in antioxidants and encouraged.

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

The client will face numerous challenges that make achieving nutritional goals challenging, if not impossible.
Challenges based on normal physiologic changes occurring with age, such as decreased taste and smell, may be
improved by utilizing spices, herbs, colorful foods, and preferred foods or those with pleasant food memories.
Fatigue, particularly in clients with dyspnea or increased work in breathing, will be best addressed through small
frequent meals and increased functional status. The involvement of physical therapy, occupational therapy, and
opportunities for strength building is essential. Increased energy requirements for clients who are underweight or
malnourished will require frequent calorie-dense meals, snacks, and likely nutritional supplementation with whey or
soy (vegan) protein drinks. Protein drinks provide high protein amounts in low-volume portions and may provide the
nutritional components necessary for muscle synthesis and improved muscle strength (Ahmadi et al., 2020).

The health care provider must develop strategies to improve or overcome these challenges to ensure the client
consumes adequate and proper nutrition for pulmonary wellness. The involvement of a registered dietitian for a
consult and for maintenance support will emphasize the importance of nutrition. Continued nutritional support and
individualized nutritional intervention by a dietitian over the course of 6 months lowers mortality in polymorbid older
adults after hospital discharge (Gomes et al., 2018).

Clients with limited function and impaired health due to significant pulmonary disease, obesity, or lack of strength
and energy secondary to malnutrition may struggle with isolation, depression, and anxiety. These may produce fear,
food avoidance, reliance on highly processed foods due to convenience, or various other barriers to quality nutrition.
Optimum management of pulmonary conditions is an excellent initial step in managing the associated mental health
conditions. Additional nutritional considerations may be the Mediterranean-style diet and the Mediterranean-DASH
Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) diet, which have cognitive and neurotransmitter benefits, reduce
stress and anxiety, increase energy, and lower the change of depression and psychological distress (Grajek et al.,
2022).

Financial limitations, access to resources, and religious or cultural barriers may also exist. Clients may need
considerations for social support and referrals (government or charitable resources), such as financial assistance or
meal-delivery programs. The Congregate Nutrition Program and the Home-Delivered Nutrition Program provide
meals to low-income and older adults, while the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is the largest
hunger safety net in the U.S., assisting with the purchase of food items. Unfortunately, additional barriers exist in
accessing these programs due to lack of awareness, confusion about eligibility, application challenges, lack of
transportation to a meal site, and stigma due to the desire for autonomy and independence (Burris et al., 2021).
Social services offices at the organizational, city, or county level, along with non-profits (senior centers and
community groups), provide some individualized support in addressing these barriers and accessing essential
resources.

Religious and cultural barriers may exist related to locating and understanding how to select nutritious items that
are kosher or halal. Maximizing nutrition in shorter periods of time may be a challenge that clients face during
periods of fasting observed by Muslims during Ramadan, and Catholics, Protestants, Greek Orthodox, or those of
Jewish faith during religious holidays or selected periods of spiritual discipline. Involvement of community groups,
specialized websites, and members of faith communities, as well as provider and dietitian support, can assist a
client to address these barriers.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

Katrice is in today for a routine asthma follow-up. The provider collects and reviews the 24-hour food recall with
266  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     Katrice and her parents, praising the few high-quality food choices and providing education about MyPlate as a
     guide for the types and quantities of food that will better support Katrice's nutrition. Katrice admits to having donuts
     or other sweet items for breakfast because they are "easy to grab and have in the car." She also has candy daily and
     fast-food meals at least 4-5 times a week. The provider explains the physiologic changes associated with obesity
     and increased BMI, which can worsen Katrice's asthma and impact her health during sports and play. Katrice and
     her parents verbalize understanding. They will implement the new knowledge over the next 2 weeks, and return for
     follow-up, bringing a food log with them and any questions. The provider also discusses a referral to physical
     therapy for assessment and post-exercise stretches to support less pain and need for medication. The provider
     educates about the risks of bronchospasm with NSAID use and recommends acetaminophen instead. Katrice's
     parents verbalize understanding and are receptive to education.

         3. Which of the following statements by the client indicates additional diet instruction is needed?
              a. "I will try to cut back on the amount of fast food I eat."
              b. "I am going to get some deli meat so I can make sandwiches to eat at school."
              c. "I'm going to try to eat sandwiches made with whole grain tortillas."
              d. "I will try to eat baked chicken instead of fried."

         4. Which of the following breakfast options is the best choice for the client?
              a. A whey protein shake
              b. Two strawberry toaster tarts
              c. Pancakes and bacon
              d. Whole grain toast

     13.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 13.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
       · 13.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize pulmonary wellness.

     Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

     Holistic assessment is should take into consideration the overall health of the client, including their physical,
     psychological, social, and spiritual well-being.

     Social
     As described earlier, holistic nursing assessment must look at a client's overall health. Discussed were physical and
     psychological assessments that need to consider the impact of social engagement in clients related to nutrition and
     pulmonary wellness. The fatigue and malnutrition caused by the disease process will impact the client's ability to
     continue to engage in their normal social settings. This causes the client to experience depression and anxiety. The
     health care provider will need to educate the client on ways to conserve energy and increase their caloric intake so
     they might continue their normal activities.

     Spiritual Well-Being
     The health care provider must assess the client's spiritual beliefs in a holistic assessment. This is important in
     understanding the client's nutritional intake, because certain spiritual and cultural practices do not allow the client
     to eat certain foods. This information will be important if the client is experiencing malnutrition and will enable the
     health care provider to help the client select foods high in caloric intake and value that do not go against their
     beliefs.

     Client Teaching

     The nurse should assess teaching needs and the client and family's learning ability. Deficits that may interfere with
     learning, such as language barriers, literacy, numeracy, hearing, and educational levels, must be determined.
     Appropriate accommodation provides the best opportunity for success and will allow the client to be educated to
     the fullest. A balanced diet, energy expenditure, adequate protein, higher intake of iron, and small meals are
     important topics to add to the client's education so nutritional goals are met. Key summative points for the client

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness                                                      267

include:

  · During respiratory distress or illness exacerbation, small frequent meals support increased functional status.
  · Dietary changes or supplementation is an important modifiable risk factor and treatment component for clients

      with both acute and chronic illness.
  · Obesity alters the mechanics of the pulmonary system, leading to dyspnea, wheezing, airway

      hyperresponsiveness, and increased work of breathing.
  · Energy expenditure is typically elevated in clients with COPD due to increased efforts to breathe; adequate

      protein stimulates the ventilatory drive. Clients benefit from protein-rich meals. Foods that are high in protein
      include milk, eggs, cheese, meat, fish, poultry, and nuts.
  · A balanced diet with high protein, complex carbohydrates, and healthy fats is used with differing volumes and
      portions to support both clients who are malnourished and those who need to reduce weight.
  · A healthy diet will increase the client's likelihood of access to vital nutrients. The need for supplemental drinks,
      multivitamins, and micronutrient supplements should be discussed with a registered dietitian.
  · Control sodium intake by choosing fresh versus packaged food. High sodium levels will cause edema and
      interfere with breathing, increasing the workload and causing a greater risk of malnutrition.

Implementing the following ideas from the American Lung Association (2023) and the COPD Foundation (2021) can
make mealtimes easier and more nutritious by increasing energy and protein without increasing food volume:

  · General principles:
      Consume small, frequent meals.
      Eat a large meal when well rested, such as the first meal of the day.
      Encourage the use of high-calorie, high-protein supplements.
      Swallow as little air as possible when eating.
      Use easily prepared or nutritious snacks (fruits, carrots, nuts, hard-boiled eggs) to decrease fatigue.

  · Clinical and home health care settings:
      Eat high-calorie foods first.
      Try more frequent meals and snacks.
      Add low-sodium margarine or butter, mayonnaise, sauces, gravies, and peanut butter to foods.
      Limit liquids at mealtimes.
      Try cold foods, which give less sense of fullness than hot foods.
      Rest before meals.

  · At home:
      Keep favorite, nutrient-dense foods and snacks on hand.
      Keep ready-prepared meals available for periods of increased shortness of breath.
      Eat larger meals when you are not as tired.
      Avoid foods that cause gas.
      Add skim milk powder (2 tbsp) or whey protein powder to regular milk (8 oz) to increase protein and calories.
      Use milk or half-and-half instead of water when making soups, cereals, instant puddings, cocoa, or canned
          soups.
      Add low-sodium grated cheese to sauces, vegetables, soups, and casseroles.
      Choose dessert recipes that contain egg, such as sponge cake, angel food cake, egg custard, bread pudding,
          and rice pudding.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Katrice and her mother return after 2 weeks, bringing the food log from the past 2 weeks. They report that they used
the MyPlate website and games to help the whole family understand a healthier diet. They have not been as
268  13 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary Wellness

     compliant with the healthy eating principles as they would like due to "already having food at home that still needed
     to be eaten." However, Katrice's mother reports that during their grocery shopping yesterday, they used the MyPlate
     guidelines to focus on fresh food, complex carbohydrates, high-protein snacks, and limiting nonwater beverages to
     low-sugar or sugar-free options.

         5. Which snack item demonstrates Katrice's understanding of healthy eating when choosing food for pre-game
             energy?
              a. Low-fat string cheese and a handful of almonds
              b. Canned peaches and crackers
              c. Peanut butter cookies
              d. Pudding and a bag of chips

         6. Which statement explains the correlation of Katrice's obesity and her pulmonary health?
              a. Obesity is a nonmodifiable risk factor and shouldn't be the focus for asthma clients.
              b. Obesity increases a client's likelihood of access to vital nutrients.
              c. Obesity alters the mechanics of the pulmonary system, leading to wheezing and airway
                   hyperresponsiveness.
              d. Obesity can be reversed by eating the largest meal of the day right before bed.

     13.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 13.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on pulmonary wellness.
       · 13.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote pulmonary wellness.

     Evaluating the Client's Compliance with the Meal Plan

     Evaluation of nutritional strategies is imperative to verify a meal plan's effectiveness and help the client achieve
     pulmonary wellness. An evaluation aims to measure understanding of the intervention and progress made for the
     specific interventions. Many clients cannot process large volumes of new medical information on the first exposure,
     and they only remember a minimal amount of what has been taught (Timmers et al., 2020). Clients and families will
     likely have questions requiring additional education and interval evaluation of each nutrition intervention. Each time
     the impact of a nutritional intervention is evaluated, education reinforcement should occur. Nursing nutrition
     interventions and evaluations vary based on organizational protocols and often involve a multidisciplinary approach.

     Frequent tools used in the approach to evaluation of nutritional interventions include screening and diagnostic tools
     and anthropometric measures (skin-fold measurement, arm circumference, height, weight, BMI, and patterns of
     loss/gain), nutritional plan outcomes (appetite, eating difficulties, self-management strategies, pain with eating,
     oral/dental status, physical activity, and quality of life), diagnostics (labs and tests), and physical findings
     (appearance, muscle strength and function, muscle or fat wasting, swallow function, and affect) (van den Berg et al.,
     2021). When evaluating nutritional strategies and interventions with this approach, nurses can compare current
     findings with the previously recorded status to evaluate the success of the intervention on the client's health and
     outcomes.

     The Ability to Obtain Adequate Nutrition
     The health care provider must determine the ability to adhere to a meal plan. Questions to consider:

       · Can the client afford the recommended food items?
       · Is nutritious food available and accessible to the client?
       · Do the foods in the meal plan go against the client's culture or religious beliefs?

     These are all things that must be determined so the client can be adherent and avoid worsening obesity and
     exacerbated pulmonary illness. If the client's answers present barriers to adequate nutrition or a source of possible
     nonadherence, attention must be given to supporting the client with adjusted recommendations, resources, or
     referrals to enable the client to follow the dietary guidelines and meal plan.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Pulmonary Wellness                                                  269

Case Study Conclusion
As noted in the case study, the client's BMI was increasing, and she had moved from overweight to obese. The client
needed instruction to achieve proper nutrition including:

  · Understanding the physiologic changes associated with obesity that can worsen asthma and impact health
      during sports and play

  · Using MyPlate as a model for adjusting food intake
  · Focusing on a low-fat and high-protein diet with teaching about what foods fall into each food category
  · Keeping a food log for review and education
  · Removing medication (NSAID) use that would worsen asthma

The health care provider can give these instructions, enabling the client to adhere with the meal plan and optimal
respiratory health.
270 13 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· Nutrition is a key factor in promoting pulmonary           · Any nutritional implementation by the client will
   wellness and supporting the function of the                  likely have barriers or challenges. Recognition of
   pulmonary system.                                            the barriers and considering client preferences,
                                                                religious beliefs, cultural norms, and social
· A systematic approach to assessment, physical                 determinants of health in the design of
   exam, diagnostic tests, and nutritional intervention         interventions provides a holistic approach when
   is essential in supporting the nutritional needs of          planning goals and implementation strategies.
   clients with pulmonary disease.
                                                             · Education about and implementation of nutritional
· Dietary choices including high protein, complex               health require follow-up care and reinforcement to
   carbs, and healthy fats give nutritional support to          achieve the client's desired benefits.
   clients and provide a mechanism for improved
   function despite chronic respiratory conditions.

Key Terms

airways passageways through which gases move to              pack-years the number of cigarettes or other smoke
    and from the lungs                                           packs smoked per day multiplied by number of
                                                                 years smoked
atelectasis the collapse of the alveoli
auscultation listening with a stethoscope for normal         percussion a systematic tapping over the intercostal
                                                                 spaces, moving through the anterior, lateral, and
    breath sounds, abnormal sounds, and voice sounds             posterior thorax
crepitus air trapped in and under the skin, typically
                                                             perfusion the process of the arterial blood moving
    felt as crackling                                            through tissues throughout the entire body
dyspnea difficulty breathing, or breathlessness
fremitus a vibration in the chest wall as the client         respiratory diffusion occurs when gases move down
                                                                 the concentration gradient across the alveolar sacs
    speaks                                                       and capillaries
gas exchange oxygen being transported to the cells
                                                             surfactant a fatty protein that lines the alveoli and
    and carbon dioxide being transported away from the           reduces surface tension
    cells
Mallampati score an airway assessment scale to               ventilation the movement of atmospheric air that is
    classify the visibility of the oropharyngeal structures      higher in oxygen into the lungs and removal of
orthopnea shortness of breath that occurs when lying             carbon dioxide
    down and is relieved by sitting up

Review Questions

1. Which disease-related alteration can potentially place an older client with chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease (COPD) at risk for altered nutrition?
     a. Altered taste
     b. Decreased energy requirements
     c. Fatigue
     d. Altered smell

2. On initial laboratory tests, an adult client's albumin level is below 3.5 g/dL. Which additional test could
    potentially be utilized to gather additional information about nutritional risk for malnutrition?
     a. Hemoglobin A1C
     b. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
     c. Prealbumin
     d. Chest x-ray

3. What is the process for carbon dioxide and oxygen exchange?
     a. Ventilation
     b. Gas exchange
     c. Perfusion
     d. Diffusion

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                13 · Suggested Reading 271

    4. The nurse is instructing an older client on the importance of adequate calcium and vitamin D intake. Which of
        the following age-related changes would this intervention affect?
         a. Decreased lung capacity
         b. Increased muscle atrophy
         c. Decreased elasticity
         d. Increased vascular resistance

    5. For the client with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which dietary teaching should be
        incorporated?
         a. High-fat food choices
         b. Simple carbohydrates as primary food choice
         c. High-protein, calorie-dense food choices
         d. Low-fiber food choices

    6. Which of the following is a primary goal of nutrition therapy for a client with chronic obstructive pulmonary
        disease (COPD)?
         a. Maintaining a healthy body weight
         b. Improving oxygenation status
         c. Preventing muscle wasting
         d. Lowering CO2 levels

    7. The nurse is instructing a client with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on strategies to maximize
        food intake. Which of the following responses by the client indicates additional education is needed?
         a. "I will treat myself to cake or pudding for dessert."
         b. "I will eat add cheese to my food whenever possible."
         c. "I will eat more cold foods rather than hot meals."
         d. "I will try to eat as much as I can during the evening before I go to bed."

    8. A client with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is being assessed by a nurse. With palpitation,
        the nurse feels crackling. What does the crackling most likely indicate?
         a. Fremitus
         b. Orthopnea
         c. Crepitus
         d. Tuberculosis

    9. Which of the following findings is the best indicator that the client has followed the prescribed nutritional plan
        to maintain a healthy weight?
         a. The client can verbalize why obesity is detrimental to pulmonary health.
         b. The client can describe the MyPlate approach to food selection.
         c. The client's food log demonstrates adherence to healthy nutritional plan.
         d. The client has reached their recommended weight range.

  10. A client states that they are experiencing a nighttime cough. Which medication could explain this symptom?
         a. Acetaminophen
         b. Ibuprofen
         c. Beta-2 agonist
         d. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors

Suggested Reading

American Lung Association. (2023). COPD Action plan & management tools. Lung health & disease.
    https://www.lung.org/lung-health-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/copd/living-with-copd/copd-management-
    tools
272 13 · Suggested Reading

Berger, M. M., Shenkin, A., Schweinlin, A., Amrein, K., Augsburger, M., Biesalski, H. K., Bischoff, S. C., Casaer, M. P.,
    Gundogan, K., Lepp, H. L., deMan, A. M., Muscogiuri, G., Pietka, M., Pironi, L., Rezzi, S., & Cuerda, C. (2022).
   ESPEN micronutrient guideline. Clinical Nutrition, 41(6), 1357-1424.

Espirito Santo, C., Caseiro, C., Martins, M. J., Monteiro, R., & Brandão, I. (2021). Gut microbiota, in the halfway
   between nutrition and lung function. Nutrients, 13(5), 1716.

Sørensen, D., Wieghorst, A. R., Elbek, J. A., & Mousing, C. A. (2020). Mealtime challenges in clients with chronic
   obstructive pulmonary disease: Who is responsible? Journal of Clinical Nursing, 29(23-24), 4583-4593.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.15491

Tramontano, A., & Palange, P. (2023). Nutritional State and COPD: Effects on dyspnoea and exercise tolerance.
   Nutrients, 15(7), 1786.

Walker, J. (2019). Enabling good nutritional care for clients with COPD. Journal of Community Nursing, 33(4).

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 14

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Pulmonary Health

FIGURE 14.1 Red bell peppers contain vitamin E, which can help stop oxidative damage and lung inflammation. (credit: modification of
work "Chicken and rice wok, Mazatlán. Date: April 4,2023" by El Nuevo Doge/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan
14.2 Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses
14.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION Nurses begin with assessments, including across-the-room (inspection) or head-to-toe
(palpation, percussion, and auscultation) assessments, as part of the nursing process. As breathing and oxygen are
vital to life, the pulmonary evaluation must take priority as it represents a significant initial part of every holistic
client assessment. Any dysfunction in the respiratory system compromises vital gas exchange and poses a potential
medical emergency and respiratory failure (National Institute of Health [NIH], 2022e). Respiratory problems lead to
life-threatening consequences if not identified and managed promptly.
Consider this case: Kai is a 55-year-old Pacific Islander with a 30-year history of smoking. Kai works as a
construction worker on the island of Kauai. He worked his way up to foreman and finds he works long hours, making
fast food his main food option in the morning and evenings. During his time on the construction sites, he picked up
the habit of smoking, which he has adamantly vowed to stop but has yet to succeed at. Kai is 6 feet tall and weighs
280 lb. When Kai was younger, he ate traditional Hawaiian foods that contained fish, rice, pork, and poultry with a
wide variety of fresh fruits and vegetables.
274  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     14.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 14.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during pregnancy.
       · 14.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during infancy.
       · 14.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during childhood.
       · 14.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during adolescence.
       · 14.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during adulthood.
       · 14.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the pulmonary system during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     Nurses must be skilled in assessing the holistic aspects of client care across the lifespan. One of the critical aspects
     often overlooked but of incredible value is the nutritional intake of clients. Nurses must comprehend the pulmonary
     system from pregnancy and infancy to older age, as they assess the dietary aspect and provide education and
     advocacy for the clients they treat.

     As clients progress through the reactions and lifestyle modifications that occur during pregnancy, considering
     nutrition and how it impacts the pulmonary system is yet another area of importance. Pregnancy elicits various
     responses from the pregnant client (Dokuhaki et al., 2021). The body undergoes various physiological changes to
     adapt to the introduction and adjusts to a growing fetus. The pregnant client's nutritional needs transform to
     accommodate the developing fetus and consider the client's physiological changes (Widysanto & Mathew, 2022).
     Maternal nutritional needs and deficiencies are vital to fetal lung development and prevention of fetal and childhood
     complications (Arigliani et al., 2018; Baiz et al., 2019; Fandino et al., 2019; Rocha et al., 2021).

     Physiological Changes to the Pulmonary System During Pregnancy
     Upper-airway changes that occur during pregnancy include nasal congestion, called rhinitis, because of hyperemia,
     edema, plasma leakage into the stroma, glandular hypersecretion, increased phagocytic activity, and increased
     mucopolysaccharide content. Hyperemia occurs as a result of a higher-than-normal blood flow. The exact etiology
     of rhinitis during pregnancy is unknown but is thought to be related to increased blood volume and hormonal
     fluctuations. Complications of rhinitis in pregnancy include snoring and sleep-disordered breathing, both related to
     hypertension and preeclampsia.

     The chest wall structurally adapts in pregnancy to anticipate the growing uterus and maternal weight gain as the
     subcostal angle of the rib cage widens between 68.5° and 103.5° and the circumference of the lower chest wall
     increases by 5-7 cm in girth while the diaphragm shifts upward. With pregnancy, total body blood volume increases
     40% (Sanghavi & Rutherford, 2014; Soma-Pillay et al., 2016). The rise in the relaxin hormone initiates relaxation
     and loosening of ligament attachments in the lower ribs.

     Nutritional Needs and Deficiencies Related to Pulmonary System During Pregnancy
     Pregnant clients have additional specialized dietary needs that support the physiological changes of the client and
     growth of the fetus. A balance in macronutrients such as protein are vital for healthy pregnancies and babies
     (Herring et al., 2018). Baiz et al. (2019) recommend consuming eggs and raw or cooked vegetables to limit the
     effects of allergic rhinitis during pregnancy.

     Under- or overnutrition of a pregnant client causes imbalances of nutrients such as amino acids and increases blood
     cortisol levels and oxidative stress (Herring et al., 2018). If malnutrition prevails during pregnancy, the results
     equate to "impairment of offspring growth and development, maternal insulin resistance, cretinism, IUGR
     [intrauterine growth restriction], birth defects, cognitive and behavioral defects, postpartum complications,
     preeclampsia, eclampsia, anemia, preterm birth, maternal hemorrhaging, and additional long-term effects for both
     mother and offspring" (Herring et al., 2018).

     Maternal needs and nutritional deficiencies related to malnutrition negatively impact the pulmonary system during
     pregnancy. Undernutrition in a pregnant client alters hormones that disrupt the lung maturation of the fetus
     (Fandino et al., 2019). Macronutrient and micronutrient recommendations are discussed further in the next section.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                                  275

Maternal Nutritional Impact on the Fetus
Adequate maternal nutrition prevents intrauterine complications such as intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and
lung development in the growing fetus (Bendix et al., 2020; Fandino et al., 2019; Voraphani et al., 2022). See Figure
14.2 for the stages of lung development. IUGR results from below-average fetal development and equates to babies
that are small for gestational age and have an abnormal growth trajectory; it is linked with placental dysfunction and
malnutrition. The term IUGR is often interchanged with small for gestational age (SGA), but the terms vary in that
SGA means the fetus is small for gestational age but has an average growth trajectory. The clinical definition of IUGR
is a baby weighing less than two standard deviations below the mean or remaining below the tenth percentile at a
specified gestational age (Bendix et al., 2020). Infants with IUGR are at risk for complications such as asphyxia,
hypothermia, hypoglycemia, and polycythemia. Long-term complications include growth limitations,
neurodevelopmental handicaps, and disease processes linked to the cardiovascular, renal, and immunological
systems. Even if the growth occurs in incremental units, the fetus may experience IUGR or meet poor outcomes
from maternal malnutrition (Arigliani et al., 2018; Fandino et al., 2019; Rocha et al., 2021).

FIGURE 14.2 Fetal lung development occurs in distinct phases during different weeks of gestation. When development is complete the
fetus is prepared for breathing that takes place outside of the womb. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

If a pregnant client has inadequate nutrition, the infant with IUGR is at a higher risk for reduced nutrient availability
and oxygen related to placental insufficiency. Undernutrition during pregnancy leads to impaired alveolarization and
suppressed surfactant protein expression, diminished pulmonary vascular development, lower alveolar surface
area, increased extracellular matrix, and thickened blood-gas barrier, limiting compliance and capacity. Causes of
IUGR include severe maternal starvation and suppressed pregnancy weight gain, high altitude, maternal hypoxia,
diabetes, and infections such as tuberculosis. Inadequate protein intake during pregnancy leads to embryonic
losses, IUGR, and reduced postnatal growth, leading to a deficiency in amino acids critical for cellular metabolism
and function (Herring et al., 2018). In contrast, high protein intake during pregnancy may also cause IUGR and
embryonic death related to amino acid excess and ammonia toxicity (Herring et al., 2018). Nurses must assess and
educate the pregnant client on the importance of moderate protein consumption. The recommended protein intake
for the first trimester is 46 g/day and increases to 71 g/day during the second and final trimesters (Murphy et al.,
2021).

Infancy

Infancy is a stage that begins the lifespan. It follows pregnancy and birth and is characterized by rapid growth,
development, and adaptations. During infancy, the baby experiences rapid weight and height gains. Generally,
276  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     depending on the source, babies are considered infants from birth up to age 1. Cognitive development during
     infancy includes exploration, attention, memory, inquisitiveness, and communication acquisition. An infant's
     milestones include holding their head up, rolling over, sitting with support, crawling, standing, and walking. Infants
     form bonds with their caregivers that are shared through eye contact, touch, responsive care, and body language.
     Infants rely on their parents or caregivers for full support.

     The pulmonary system undergoes significant adaptations to support the transition between the in-utero and outside
     world. The fundamental pulmonary changes include the lungs' transition from fluid-filled to breathing outside air
     (Arigliani et al., 2018; Fandino et al., 2019; Rocha et al., 2021). Surfactant production increases late in pregnancy
     and continues through development and maturation during the first few weeks of life. The lungs can expand and
     stretch, allowing for growing volume capacity. The airways continue to grow and mature. Infants obtain antibodies
     through breast milk in colostrum (in the first few days of life) and immunoglobulin A (after the first few days) to help
     infants fight infection and support their immune systems.

     Nutritional Impact During Infancy
     Nutrition is crucial in lung growth, development, and repair in fetuses, preterm infants, infants, and children
     (Arigliani et al., 2018; Bendix et al., 2020; Fandino et al., 2019; Rocha et al., 2021). One of the primary systems to
     develop in a fetus is the respiratory system, which begins on day 22 after conception. Although the process begins
     early with the trachea, lungs, bronchi, and alveoli, complete development does not occur until around age 8
     (Rehman & Bacha, 2022). If a child is born with IUGR or SGA, health care providers must assess nutritional aspects
     to determine if undernutrition or malnutrition contributes to stunted growth. Micronutrients that play a role in lung
     maturation include vitamins A, D, E, selenium, and omega-3 fatty acids (Arigliani et al., 2018).

     Childhood

     Alveolarization continues from infancy through approximately 8 years of age. Even if pulmonary development and
     function is normal at birth, insulting exposures can cause setbacks. Some scientists have traced poor lung function
     from infancy through childhood to identify potential events associated with decreasing optimal pulmonary
     development and capacity. A child born without any difficulty in pulmonary function but exposed to second-hand
     smoke may experience stunted growth (Schultz et al., 2018). According to Schultz et al. (2018), in the same study,
     when individuals demonstrated limitations at age 8 in lung function, they maintained these lower levels of function
     even when retested at age 16. When 8-year-old children have developmental limitations and are exposed to
     second-hand smoke, their lung function diminishes. Maternal smoking habits throughout pregnancy also play a role
     in decreased lung development. Schultz et al. (2018) study results further support the view that being born
     prematurely increases the risk for diminished lung development and function as the child grows. These children do
     not recover the lost development with age. They also are at an increased risk for developing asthma, wheezing, and
     declination of lung function during respiratory infection season.

     Nutritional Impact During Childhood
     Nutrition plays a significant role in the development and function of the respiratory system throughout childhood.
     Adequate nutritional intake during childhood maintains a healthy growth pattern, aids lung tissue repair, and
     supports the immune system to prevent and treat infection (Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021). Intake of adequate amounts of
     macronutrient protein and micronutrients vitamins A, C, E, omega-3 fatty acids, and zinc is important for lung
     function. Inadequate consumption of the proper nutrients causes impaired lung function and respiratory problems.
     Improper nutritional intake affects the immune system, which protects the lungs from infection and inflammation.
     Malnutrition throughout childhood increases the risk for infection and exacerbates conditions like asthma.
     Childhood obesity causes detrimental effects on lung capacity by reducing lung capacity, expiratory reserve, and
     residual volume due to excessive adipose tissue increasing the intraabdominal pressure on the diaphragm, altering
     full chest expansion (Ferreira et al., 2020).

     Adolescence

     Childhood progresses into the adolescence stage through physiological alterations (Han et al., 2019; Schultz et al.,
     2018). These changes include increased lung volume, respiratory muscle strength, airway resistance, susceptibility
     to respiratory tract infection (RTI), and decreased respiratory rate, as follows:

       · Lung volume increases as the child grows. The lung capacity and volume continue to grow as long as there are

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                      14.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan             277

      no underlying factors hindering growth (Schultz et al., 2018).
  · Increased respiratory muscle strength continues, and muscles increase the ability to exchange air in the lungs.
  · Increased airway resistance occurs because of functional and structural changes during adolescence.
  · Increased susceptibility to respiratory infections occurs as changes to the immune system and lack of adequate

      nutritional intake influence.

Overall, the physiological changes that occur during adolescence contribute to or deter from pulmonary capacity
and function. Although RTI susceptibility increases and asthma can be challenging during adolescence, the
pulmonary systems of most adolescents experience growth.

Nutritional intake during adolescence is crucial as the pulmonary system grows and develops (Gozzi-Silva et al.,
2021). Adequate macronutrient and micronutrient intake also aids in the immune system's development. Protein
consumption should include 0.85-1.2 g of protein per kilogram of body weight per day (Hudson et al., 2021). Solid
recommended sources of protein include lean meats, poultry, fish, eggs, dairy products, beans, tofu, legumes, and
nuts.

Micronutrient intake for adolescents should focus on vitamins A, C, and E, omega-3 fatty acids, magnesium, and
water (Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021; Scoditti et al., 2019). Vitamins A, C, and E are essential antioxidants that protect the
lungs from oxidative stress and inflammation. See Table 14.1 for a list of vitamins and possible food sources. Finally,
adolescents must remain hydrated, which is essential for all life functions.

Micronutrient        Food Source
Vitamin A
                       · Carrots
                       · Liver
                       · Spinach
                       · Sweet potatoes

Vitamin C            · Citrus fruits
                     · Kiwi
                     · Strawberries
                     · Tomatoes

Vitamin E            · Leafy green vegetables
                     · Nuts
                     · Seeds
                     · Vegetable oils

Magnesium            · Chia seeds
                     · Leafy green vegetables
                     · Legumes
                     · Nuts
                     · Seeds
                     · Whole grain

Omega-3 fatty acids  · Chia seeds
                     · Flaxseeds
                     · Mackerel
                     · Salmon
                     · Sardines
                     · Walnuts

TABLE 14.1 Micronutrient Food Sources (source: Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021)

Diets full of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats all regulate the development of lung
tissue and repair, promoting a healthy immune system. In addition to these specified nutrients, adolescents need to
consume a balanced and varied diet (Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021) and exercise regularly to support proper pulmonary
function.
278  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     Unlike many other American adolescents, Kai grew up eating fresh fruits and vegetables. His family had fruit trees in
     his yard, so he grew up picking fresh fruits from their source. His mother would obtain the rest of their food items
     from the local food market, with everything being grown locally. Kai's mother would cook all their meals at home,
     and he would walk to school and play football to get plenty of exercise. No one in his family smoked, and they rarely
     ate outside of the home.

         1. What lifestyle choices in Kai's adolescence might lead the nurse to believe that Kai comprehends the benefits
             of good lifestyle choices?
              a. His family growing their own fruit
              b. His family's history of eating fresh fruits and vegetables and his daily exercise
              c. His screen time
              d. His family not eating outside of the home

         2. What information from Kai's past can the nurse incorporate into the dietary client's education plan?
              a. Previous history of adolescent exercise and dietary selection
              b. Smoking cessation
              c. History of food sourcing
              d. History of being a football star

     Adulthood

     Adulthood is a developmental stage after adolescence and typically lasts until later adulthood. During this period,
     individuals reach physical and cognitive maturity and assume adult responsibilities, such as career development,
     marriage, and parenthood. Fewer physiological changes occur as the state of health stabilizes, and fewer rapid
     developmental changes occur. The body does gradually change in function and structure during the aging process.
     Some of these changes occur in the pulmonary system, so it is vital for nurses to advocate for healthy lifestyle
     modifications and perform regular health screenings to promote optimal pulmonary health throughout adulthood.

     The physiological changes during this time include lung size and function, respiratory muscle strength, respiratory
     diseases, immune function, and lifestyle habits (Han et al., 2019; Schultz et al., 2018; Rogers & Cismowski, 2018).
     By adulthood, lung growth and development are maximized, and function begins to decline. Respiratory muscle
     strength improves during adolescence but declines as one ages. In adulthood, respiratory disease risk increases
     related to unhealthy lifestyle choices such as smoking, occupational exposure (chemical plant workers, construction
     workers, and health care providers exposed to chemicals such as chemotherapy), and not exercising. The immune
     system protects the respiratory system as one of its functions from infection and inflammation. When a client
     reaches adulthood, immune function diminishes gradually, making individuals more susceptible to illnesses
     throughout aging.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     When Kai moved out of his parent's house at age 20, he found it difficult to get a job, so he started working with a
     local construction company at age 24. Kai began smoking when he was 25 while working on the construction sites.
     He stated, "Smoking used to help me decompress." The local construction company required Kai to work long

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Pulmonary Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                279

hours, making healthy food choices and exercise incorporation challenging. Kai found himself relying on fast food
options and the hard work on the construction sites as his daily "exercise." Kai moved through the ranks and is now
a foreman, where he supervises the employees under him at the job sites. He sits more frequently than he used to
and found himself putting on more weight, jumping from 255 lb to 280 lb.

    3. What lifestyle choices occur during adulthood might lead Kai to an increased risk for respiratory disease later
        in life?
         a. Construction work, smoking, and eating fast foods
         b. Smoking, drinking alcohol, and exercising
         c. Eating fast foods, construction work, and drinking lots of water
         d. Smoking, construction work, and working long hours

    4. What lifestyle changes can Kai make early on to decrease his chance of developing a chronic respiratory
        disease?
         a. Working out
         b. Smoking cessation and eating better
         c. Different job
         d. Go back to school

Nutritional Needs Related to Pulmonary System for the Adult
Nutritional support is essential throughout the lifespan in maintaining healthy lung function (Collins et al., 2019;
Scoditti et al., 2019; Sharifi-Rad et al., 2019; Vahid & Rahmani, 2021; Voraphai et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2021). As
lung function and capacity decline as a client ages, the importance of healthy lifestyles and nutrient-rich dietary
choices cannot be overstated. The dietary choices include antioxidant-rich foods that protect the lungs from free
radical damage (discussed in the next section) and oxidative stress. Fruits and vegetables are excellent sources of
antioxidant-rich foods, especially berries, citrus fruits, leafy greens, and tomatoes. Omega-3 fatty acids hold anti-
inflammatory properties that reduce inflammation in the lungs. Excellent sources of omega-3 fatty acids include
salmon, mackerel, sardines, flaxseeds, chia seeds, and walnuts. Lean protein is an essential macronutrient to aid in
repairing lung tissue and is found in skinless chicken, fish, beans, and legumes. Avoiding harmful environmental
substances, not smoking, avoiding excessive alcohol intake, and getting regular exercise promotes lung function and
health.

Later Adulthood

As people age, their progression parallels their risk for chronic disease. The lungs experience physiological changes
as people age, leading to altered lung capacity and increased risk for infection. The lungs also suffer a barrage of
continuous assaults over their lifetime. These assaults are chemical, mechanical, biological, immunological, and
xenobiotic. These insults lead to oxidative stress in the lung tissue because of antioxidant capacity depletion.

Free radicals are unstable molecules that contain unpaired electrons in an atomic orbit that participate in
phagocytosis's cellular destruction mechanism through macrophages and granulocytes (Sharifi-Rad et al., 2020).
Phagocytosis is the process of phagocytes ingesting and eliminating larger particles. Free radicals are kept at bay by
the body's antioxidant system. Adverse effects occur when homeostasis of the free radicals is not maintained.
Research studies indicate the free radicals of oxygen play a role in chronic disease and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
damage (Sharifi-Rad et al., 2020). Increasing the amounts of free radicals cause cellular damage and apoptosis (the
death of cells). Antioxidants counteract the free radical destruction process.

Nutritional Needs Related to Pulmonary System for the Older Adult
The nurse treating older clients must recognize the need for antioxidant supplements. The current American diet is
high in processed foods and additives. These food choices increase the risk for oxidative stress in the body,
depleting the antioxidant capacity. The pulmonary system's reaction to oxidative stress includes activating the
inflammatory response, which further compromises the lungs and cascades further oxidative stress. These oxidative
reactions to the stressors are directly linked to chronic diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), and lung cancer (Rogers & Cismowski, 2018).
280  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     14.2 Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 14.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on pulmonary illness.
       · 14.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on chronic pulmonary illness.

     Nutrition Requirement for Optimal Pulmonary Health

     Lung disease is the umbrella term for several diseases and disorders of the pulmonary system that prohibit the
     lungs from performing optimally (NIH, 2022b). Lung diseases inhibit and alter respiratory function, breathing
     capabilities, and lung capacity. Lung diseases vary in etiology. Infectious microorganisms cause some, while others
     maintain an environmental cause. Chronic pulmonary diseases cause long-term breathing problems, drastically
     impacting a client's quality of life. These conditions include symptoms of cough, wheezing, and shortness of breath.
     Other common chronic pulmonary diseases include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, pulmonary
     fibrosis, and pneumonia. Pulmonary conditions that are not long term include respiratory tract infections and
     pulmonary embolism.

     Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
     Chronic or long-term lower pulmonary diseases are classified as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
     The COPD categories include emphysema and chronic bronchitis (Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021; NIH, 2022b; NIH,
     2022d). These obstructive diseases are progressive and limit the volume of air that flows into and out of the
     airways, decreasing gas exchange and making it difficult to breathe (NIH, 2022d). See Figure 14.3. Emphysema
     results in damage between the walls of the air sacs, or alveoli, that exchange gas in the lungs (NIH, 2022d; Pahal et
     al., 2023). Without injury present, the alveoli easily expand and stretch with inhalation and deflate readily with
     exhalation (Pahal et al., 2023). Emphysema leads to permanent dilation of the airspaces and decreases alveolar and
     capillary surface area. For example, consider an overinflated balloon that does not maintain the same elasticity over
     time. The common cause of emphysema is exposure to cigarette smoking and other noxious gases, such as sulfur
     dioxide (Pahal et al., 2023). Chronic bronchitis is the result of continuous inflammation of the airway linings,
     causing increasing mucus with clinical manifestations that include a productive cough of at least 2 months occurring
     within a 2-year time frame (NIH, 2022b; Widysanto & Mathew, 2023). As with emphysema, cigarette smoking,
     active or passively, or inhaling toxic chemicals and industrial pollutants is the leading causative factor in developing
     chronic bronchitis.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses                                                                              281

FIGURE 14.3 The COPD disease process begins as healthy lungs endure exposure to different noxious environmental exposures.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Chronic lung conditions such as COPD severely diminish the quality of life, so individuals should strive to consume
foods that promote lung function throughout the chronic diseases states to prevent exacerbations (Collins et al.,
2019; NIH, 2022b; NIH, 2022d; Pahal et al., 2023; Scoditti et al., 2019; Widysanto & Mathew, 2022). Exercise is
limited in clients with COPD, because they often suffer from dyspnea on exertion as a condition symptom. The lack
of exercise is attributed to muscle loss and dysfunction, resulting in fatigue. Even the act of eating might trigger
dyspnea, leading to anorexia. If a client is faced with the choice between breathing and eating, they will breathe to
survive, which why anorexia and malnutrition is a common finding in these clients. As anorexia is present, the risk
for significant malnutrition increases while vital vitamin and nutritional depletion continues. The lack of critical
nutritional components accelerates respiratory decline as respiratory muscles weaken and cough pressure
diminishes. As cough pressure declines, mucosal buildup threatens potential complications such as pneumonia.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Kai is in the clinic today for difficulty breathing upon walking. His current vital signs are listed on the left side of the
following table. Kai states that he has smoked for 30 years and frequently eats fast food because his job demands
long hours and he does not have time for grocery shopping. You notice a cough; Kai states he does not know when it
began exactly. He has noted a decrease in his weight, and he has a hard time working the long days his job demands
because he becomes short of breath. You look at his chart, shown on the right side of the following table, which
282  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     includes his vital signs and exam notes from his visit last year.

     Today's Vital Signs                                           Last Year's Vital Signs and Exam Notes

       Temperature: 97.6ºF                                         Temperature: 98.0ºF
       Blood pressure: 128/89 mm Hg                                Blood pressure: 126/82 mm Hg
       Heart rate: 99 beats/min                                    Heart rate: 89 beats/min
       Respiratory rate: 28 breaths/min                            Respiratory rate: 20 breaths/min
       Oxygen saturation: 89% on room air                          Oxygen saturation: 92% on room air
       (drops to 77% while walking)                                Height: 6'0"
       Height: 6'0"                                                Weight: 280 lb
       Weight: 268 lb
                                                                   The client presents with mild dry cough for 2 weeks.
     TABLE 14.2                                                    Client's chest x-ray shows enlarged lung air pockets.
                                                                   The client does not have a history of respiratory
                                                                   conditions but stated he has smoked for 30 years. The
                                                                   client is a construction worker with a fluctuating
                                                                   dietary history. Recommendations for client include
                                                                   smoking cessation.

     5. Based on the documented visit history, which of the following issues requires follow-up by the nurse during
         today's visit?
          a. Smoking
          b. Hydration status
          c. Dietary recommendations
          d. Workplace safety

     6. The nurse is constructing a teaching plan for Kai to address potential complications of COPD. Which of the
         following conditions will the nurse include in the plan?
          a. Asthma
          b. Respiratory syncytial virus
          c. Pulmonary fibrosis
          d. Pneumonia

     Asthma
     Asthma is a chronic disease clinically characterized by recurrent inflammation and airway narrowing (Gozzi-Silva et
     al., 2021; Hashmi et al., 2023; NIH, 2022a). These symptoms of chronic inflammation result from irritation from
     correlated efforts between the respiratory epithelium and both the initial and the (later) adaptive immune
     responses. Hyperresponsiveness is the reaction of the airway results from the activation of the granulocytes, such
     as the eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and mast cells. The response of the granulocytes triggers the
     smooth muscle in the airways to contract and secret mucus and also includes microvascular leakages. As the airway
     swells, gas exchange is prevented, and symptoms such as shortness of breath, dyspnea, cough, and wheezing is
     present. The disease process is associated with childhood and can carry into adulthood, or it might occur in
     adulthood. The etiology of asthma relates to allergic and environmental factors such as hay fever, tobacco smoke,
     particulate matter, pollen, mold, dust mites, food, and eczema. Asthma has no cure, affecting 1 in 13 people in the
     United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022). Figure 14.4 provides a visual of a normal airway
     with asthmatic and asthma attack airways.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses                                                                                                283

FIGURE 14.4 During an asthma attack, chronic inflammation triggers an immune response that causes the smooth muscles in the airways
to tighten, preventing gas exchange and restricting the ability to breathe. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Pulmonary Fibrosis
Like scars that develop on the skin, pulmonary fibrosis involves scarring of the lung tissue (Krishna et al., 2022).
Scar or fibrotic tissue does not function normally in gas exchange. The fibrotic tissue prevents oxygen flow from the
alveoli into the bloodstream, leading to low oxygen levels and compromised lung capacity as the scar tissue stiffens.
Pulmonary fibrosis etiology might be idiopathic or secondary to another illness, medication, radiation therapy, or
environmental exposure (Agarwal & Huda, 2022; Krishna et al., 2022).

Nutritional intake significantly impacts clinical outcomes for individuals with pulmonary fibrosis. Nutrients are in
high demand due to the increase in respiratory workload, activation of inflammatory mediators, hypoxemia, and lack
of physical exercise (Faverio et al., 2020). As with COPD, malnutrition remains prevalent for those with inadequate
nutrition intake. Some preferred treatment medications for pulmonary fibrosis cause diarrhea and other adverse
effects such as food malabsorption. Specific dietary counseling by a registered dietitian is recommended for those
who experience these effects.

Respiratory Tract Infections
Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) encompass a variety of microorganisms that cause respiratory symptoms in the
individuals that contract them (LaRocque & Ryan, 2019; Saleri & Ryan, 2019). RTIs are commonly acquired viral
infections. These infections manifest in either the lower tract as pneumonia or in the upper tract as bronchitis,
rhinitis, sinusitis, otitis, pharyngitis, epiglottitis, and tracheitis. Systemic manifestations include fever, headache,
sore throat, cough, chest pain, dyspnea, and myalgia (LaRocque & Ryan, 2019; Saleri & Ryan, 2019). Transmission
occurs through direct droplet contact or inhalation (Saleri & Ryan, 2019). While many upper respiratory tract
284  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     infections are short term, some may lead to pneumonia. Table 14.3 outlines several RTIs and their symptoms.

     Respiratory Tract   Symptoms                                              Recommendations
     Infections Type
                                                                                 · Hot tea with lemon or hot soup
     Upper respiratory tract                                                         for sore throat

     Common cold         Sneezing, stuffy nose, runny nose, sore throat,         · Gargle with warm salt water
                         watery eyes, fever, cough                               · Cold liquids
                                                                                 · Popsicles made with all-natural
     Pharyngitis         Sore throat, dry throat, pain with swallowing, pain
                         with speaking                                               fruit and fresh fruit juices
                                                                                 · Plenty of fluids (water)
     Acute rhinitis      Sneezing, stuffy nose, runny nose, itchy nose,          · Honey
                         throat, eyes, clear drainage from ears                  · Elderberry
                                                                                 · Increasing vegetables
     Acute otitis media  Fever, ear pain, loss of balance, hearing               · Reducing dairy intake until
                         difficulties
                                                                                     symptoms improve
     Laryngitis          Hoarseness, raw and sore throat, dry cough              · Ginger
                                                                                 · Chicken-noodle soup
     Tonsillitis         High fever, headache, earache, feeling tired, voice
                         changes

     Lower respiratory tract

     Acute bronchitis    Runny nose, low-grade fever, congestion,              Same as for upper respiratory tract
                         wheezing, cough                                       infections

     Pneumonia           Cough, difficulty breathing, rapid heartbeat, fever,

                         loss of appetite

     TABLE 14.3 Respiratory Tract Infections, Their Symptoms, and Dietary Recommendations to Alleviate Symptoms (sources: Green et al.,
     2020; Lucas et al., 2019; Saleri & Ryan, 2019; Thomas & Bomar, 2022)

     Pneumonia
     Pneumonia is a condition that leads to inflammation of lung parenchyma caused by infection, chronic pulmonary
     diseases, ventilator use, or aspiration (NIH, 2022c; Sattar & Sharma, 2022; Sanivarapu & Gibson, 2022). When
     germs migrate into the lungs, the immune system is activated, causing alveoli and lung parenchyma inflammation.
     The inflammation causes the lungs to fill with fluid or pus. When an infection is a cause, the types of pneumonia are
     classified by acquisition type: community (within 48 hours of hospital admission), hospital-acquired (nonintubated
     person after 48 hours of hospital admission), ventilation (within 48 hours after intubation), or health
     care-associated (hospitalization within last 3 months) pneumonia. Pneumonia can lead to further chronic
     complications for some clients, such as lung fibrosis, damaged lung parenchyma, necrotizing pneumonia, cavitation,
     empyema, abscess, and death (Sattar & Sharma, 2022; Sanivarapu & Gibson, 2022). When left untreated, the
     mortality rate for pneumonia is 30%.

     Pulmonary Embolism
     A pulmonary embolism is a cease in blood flow to the pulmonary artery or its branches. A pulmonary embolism
     Figure 14.5 causes decreased or no blood flow because a blood clot becomes dislodged and migrates to the lungs
     (Vyas & Goyal, 2022). As lipid plaques accumulate on the arterial walls, the body's inflammation systems activate
     (Ashrobi et al., 2022). Initial lipid plaques evolve into fibrous plaques that activate the release of inflammatory
     markers and procoagulating factors. The process is known as atherosclerosis, and the activation of the platelets
     causes adhesion and aggregation that triggers clot formation. A thrombus is a clot formed in a blood vessel that
     prevents the natural flow of blood within the vessel through this process (Ashorobi et al., 2022; Vyas & Goyal,
     2022). A thrombus that breaks off becomes an embolus. When it travels to the lungs and prevents the natural flow
     of blood within the lungs, it is known as a pulmonary embolism.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses                                                                                        285

FIGURE 14.5 A pulmonary embolism stops the flow of blood within the lungs. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

Alternative Food and Supplement Options

A well-balanced diet is important for overall health and becomes especially important for the client who remains
predisposed to pulmonary conditions. Specific dietary recommendations vary depending on the type and severity of
the pulmonary disease. Certain foods have potential benefits for pulmonary disorders and should be included in the
overall management and treatment of clients with pulmonary conditions.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
While eating becomes a complex and breathless chore for clients with COPD, the nurse should educate clients on
the proper nutritional intake to promote optimal pulmonary health and prevent COPD exacerbations. Clients who
comprehend the need for appropriate healthy balance are met with improvements in health. A diet with high anti-
inflammatory foods, such as fresh fruit and vegetables, with minimal consumption of processed sugar, salt, and fried
fatty foods, is a solid recommendation from leading government entities. Macronutrient portion intake includes
15-20% proteins, 30-35% fats, and 40-45% carbohydrates (Collins et al., 2019; Hancu, 2019; Scoditti et al.,
2019). Protein-required measurements equate to 1.2-1.5g protein/kg (Collins et al., 2019; Hancu, 2019).

Micronutrients from oral nutritional supplements that maintain antioxidant and anti-inflammatory qualities include
vitamins A, C, and E. These vitamins, within their function, protect and prevent the progression of COPD. Vitamin D
has been found to reduce COPD exacerbation rates (Collins et al., 2019). Individuals with COPD should include
vitamin C at 75 mg/day for females and 90 mg/day for males--vitamin D at 600 IU for adults and 800 IU for people
aged 70 or older (Hancu, 2019).

As nurses perform their assessments, the should use the information the gather in the client's nutritional planning
and as client teaching opportunities. While completing the assessment of a client with COPD, the nurse should
consider:

  · Some clients with COPD may appear overweight because of their free-fat mass index or visceral fat-area
      measurements (Hancu, 2019).

  · Malnutrition is still of concern in these clients (Hancu, 2019).
  · Avoid any judgment toward clients who are overweight.

In addition, the nurse should teach the client to:

  · Prepare and/or consume nutritionally dense meals.
  · Eat small, frequent meals.
  · Rest before mealtimes.
  · Time meals when energy level is at its highest.
286  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

       · Aim for a BMI between 20-24, maintain muscle mass, and include pulmonary rehabilitation.
       · Choose food options that require minimal energy expenditure in preparation.
       · Limit alcohol consumption.

     Asthma
     While some food triggers asthma and allergic symptoms, several foods and food groups have been shown to reduce
     the risk for developing asthma (Alwarith et al., 2020). Recommendations include daily ingestion of one or more
     servings of fruits and vegetables and whole grains, which may reduce the risk in children, adolescents, and adults.
     These food groups have also been shown to make asthma symptoms more manageable and are inversely related to
     wheezing in children because of the antioxidant effects and preventative oxidative damage. Fruit intake decreases
     asthma symptoms and the sensitization by inhaled allergens. The anti-inflammatory results of flavonoids in raw
     vegetables (lost during the cooking process) are believed to explain the association between raw vegetable
     consumption and well-managed asthma (Alwarith et al., 2020). High-fat intake, commonly in Western dietary
     preferences, is associated with worsening airway inflammation and lung function limitations. Clients with asthma
     should consider a plant-based diet, vegetarian diet, or strictly vegan foods to reduce asthma risk and decreases the
     need for as-needed asthma medication use. If the client decides on a plant-based diet, counseling by a registered
     dietitian should be included to avoid nutritional deficiencies.

     According to Alwarith et al. (2020), a positive relationship exists between dairy consumption and concurrent asthma
     symptomology. Current dietary guidelines recommend 3 servings per day of dairy for clients with asthma, because it
     supplies calcium and vitamin D. Consultation with an allergist is recommended if dairy intake must be avoided
     (Comerford et al., 2021). The nurse should teach the clients who wish to avoid dairy products to seek plant-based
     milks that are fortified with vitamin D. See Table 14.4 for the various supplements and their relationship to lung
     anatomy and physiology.

     Supplement  Relationship with Pulmonary System                Food Sources
     Vitamin E
                   · Stops oxidative damage and lung inflammation    · Almonds
                       Sunflower, safflower, and soybean oil         · Peanuts
                                                                     · Pumpkin
                                                                     · Red bell pepper

     Vitamin C   · Encourages airway hydration and decreases free  · Citrus (oranges, lemon, and
                    radicals                                          grapefruit)

                 · Controls immune-system cytokines                · Bell pepper
                 · Stops oxidative damage                          · Strawberries
                 · Makes asthma symptoms more manageable           · Tomatoes
                                                                   · Cruciferous vegetables

                                                                      (broccoli, Brussels sprouts,
                                                                      cabbage)

     Selenium    · Protects against oxidative damage and lung      · Pork
                    inflammation                                   · Beef
                                                                   · Turkey
                                                                   · Fish
                                                                   · Eggs
                                                                   · Beans and nuts (Brazil nuts)

     TABLE 14.4 Function of Micronutrients Within the Pulmonary System and Food Examples (sources: Allen & Sharma, 2023; Alwarith et al.,
     2020)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         14.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Pulmonary Illnesses                             287

Supplement  Relationship with Pulmonary System           Food Sources
Vitamin D     · Aids the immune system and response
                                                           · Cod liver oil
                                                           · Salmon
                                                           · Fortified foods such as (dairy

                                                               and plant milks, orange juice)
                                                           · Eggs

Magnesium   · Relaxes smooth muscle, used in asthma      · Pumpkin seeds
               exacerbation; need monitoring to prevent  · Chia seeds
               hypermagnesemia                           · Almonds
                                                         · Boiled spinach
                                                         · Cashews
                                                         · Peanuts
                                                         · Soy milk
                                                         · Rolled oats

TABLE 14.4 Function of Micronutrients Within the Pulmonary System and Food Examples (sources: Allen & Sharma, 2023; Alwarith et al.,
2020)

Pulmonary Fibrosis
The adoption and continued consumption of unhealthy dietary selections increase and accelerate the risk for
chronic diseases. Diets high in saturated fats increase the risk for pulmonary fibrosis development in both idiopathic
and age-related cases (Mercader-Barcelo et al., 2020). In the same analysis, Mercader-Barcelo et al. (2020) state
that a diet high in unsaturated fats reduces the severity of pulmonary fibrosis and the development of pulmonary
fibrosis. A diet high in saturated fats and high fructose corn syrup (sodas, candy, processed foods) sped up the
development of pulmonary fibrosis, while a diet including plant-derived polysaccharides has shown antifibrotic
effects. Plant-based polysaccharides include coconut fiber, barley, oats, wheat bran, and chicory root. The amino
acids arginine, glycine, and L-norvaline have demonstrated protection against pulmonary fibrosis in animal studies
as they reduce the buildup of neutrophils and macrophages in peripheral blood. As with the chronic illnesses COPD
and asthma, including foods high in vitamins A, B, C, D, and E is recommended.

Respiratory Tract Infections and Pneumonia
A healthy, balanced food intake boosts the immune system and helps prevent respiratory tract infections. Meeting
optimal pulmonary health nutritional requirements moderates the body's immune response, promoting lung health
and respiratory homeostasis (Gozzi-Silva et al., 2021; Scoditti et al., 2019). Nutritional requirements for respiratory
tract infections (RTI) and pneumonia are similar. Undernutrition is associated with an increased risk for frailty,
difficulty in healing, increased risk for infection and worsening condition, morbidity, and mortality. A decrease in
nutritional status predicts life expectancy in clients who begin with an RTI and develop pneumonia; becoming
winded from eating leads to further deterioration of the condition. Nurses should seek to promote healthy habits to
prevent and treat RTI with attention to vaccinations, adequate hydration, hand hygiene, smoking cessation, exercise,
and nutrition.

Vahid and Rahmani (2021) recommend an anti-inflammatory diet to prevent and manage RTI and pneumonia
associated with infections and COPD. Their definition of an anti-inflammatory diet includes using turmeric, ginger,
garlic, onion, saffron, vitamin C, vitamin D, zinc, and omega-3 fatty acids. They conclude that these supplements,
bulbs, and spices decrease symptoms, minimize the duration, and prevent future infections. Consumption of the
micronutrients vitamin C, vitamin D, and zinc play a role in strengthening and protecting the immune system.
Adequate protein intake also supports the immune system per Vahid and Rahmani (2021). They state that the anti-
inflammatory diet not only aids the immune system but also boosts lung function and decreases oxidation.

Turmeric is a spice hailed for its anti-inflammatory properties. Turmeric contains curcumin (Vahid & Rahmani,
2021), which inhibits the expression of cytokines, thus decreasing the inflammatory response. This inhibitor has
also been proposed as an antiviral intermediary for RTI (Vahid & Rahmani, 2021).

Ginger also belongs to the curcumin category, demonstrating similar antiviral and anti-inflammatory responses,
such as its classmate turmeric. Ginger is thought to act by diminishing lung inflammation. See Figure 14.6.
288  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     FIGURE 14.6 Ginger, which has been shown to have anti-inflammatory effects, can be added to dishes as an ingredient or a spice. (credit:
     "English: Wild rice, ginger, carrots, peas, and celery - Massachusetts, USA" by Daderot/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     Garlic has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and cholesterol-lowering effects. Garlic is high in folic acid, vitamin C,
     calcium, iron, magnesium, potassium, zinc, vitamin B2, vitamin B1, and vitamin B3. Garlic is thought to have
     antiviral, antibiotic, and antifungal effects on the body. See Table 14.5.

     Source         Role in the Body
     Garlic
                      · Aids the immune system by preventing biosynthesis of inflammatory markers
                      · Related to the deterrence of virus from attaching to its host cells

     Onions         · Anti-inflammatory properties because of organosulfur compounds with quercetin and
                       allicin

                    · Prohibit virus from attaching to its host cells
                    · Improves lung function as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral

     Vitamin C      · Neutralizes free radicals
                    · Minimizes anti-inflammatory markers
                    · Inactivates and interferes with virus proliferation

     Vitamin D      · Strengthens the immune system and helps to prevent RTI
                    · Anti-inflammatory properties by limiting inflammatory cytokine response

     Zinc           · Potentiates antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties

                    · Strengthens the immune system by controlling inflammatory cytokines

     Omega-3 fatty  · Play a role in lung tissue remodeling

     acids

     TABLE 14.5 Micronutrients and Their Role in Pulmonary Health (source: Vahid & Rahmani, 2021)

     Pulmonary Embolism
     The American diet contains detrimental inflammation-causing triggers. Yuan et al. (2021) observed that a higher
     intake of French fries increased the risk for thrombosis. The incidence of pulmonary embolism decreased with a diet
     high in fresh fruits and vegetables. Pneumonia and pulmonary embolism have inflammatory response activation as
     compensatory mechanisms to combat the triggers of the disease processes.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                                                          289

14.3 Treatments and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 14.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments utilized for pulmonary disorders.
  · 14.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      pulmonary disorders.

Drug-Food Interactions with Treatments for Pulmonary Disorders

Medical interventions for pulmonary disorders may be associated with dietary interactions or adverse effects. Some
medications used to treat chronic pulmonary disorders require dietary modifications, while other foods and
supplements interact with the prescribed medications. When interactions do occur, harmful side effects can result,
or interaction may limit the efficacy of the drug used to treat the illness.

Chronic pulmonary diseases such as asthma, COPD, and pulmonary fibrosis affect millions of people worldwide
(NIH, 2022a; NIH, 2022b; NIH, 2022d). Treatment to manage these conditions includes a variety of medications in
certain combinations. Bronchodilators, corticosteroids, and immunosuppressants help manage condition
symptoms; however, these medications have the potential to interact with certain foods that may alter their
absorption ability, limit effectiveness, and jeopardize safety. This section will provide an overview of everyday drug-
food interactions associated with standard treatment options for pulmonary diseases.

Health care providers must discuss possible food and drug interactions with their clients to ensure that the
medications are being used effectively with maximum results and minimize side effects. The nurse and health care
provider should guide clients on the best ways to take prescribed medications and advise on potential dietary
restrictions.

Bronchodilators
Bronchodilators are beta-2 adrenergic receptor agonists used as first-line medications to treat asthma and COPD.
Foods such as caffeine enhance the efficacy of bronchodilators as a first-line treatment options (Wee et al., 2020),
because caffeine shares the same effects in the body as bronchodilators. Side effects include tremors, nervousness,
anxiety, and heart palpitations. On the other hand, meals high in dietary fat can prohibit the absorption of the
bronchodilator (Santo et al., 2021). When the absorption is delayed, the effect of a beta-2 adrenergic receptor is
diminished. So high-fat diets should be avoided in clients with asthma and COPD who use bronchodilators.

Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids are hormone mediators created in the adrenal cortex (Yasir et al., 2022). This medication class
decreases airway inflammation in acute and chronic pulmonary conditions. Corticosteroids are used in asthma and
exacerbation of COPD. Nurses should advise clients to take corticosteroids with food to prevent stomach irritation.
Some foods--grapefruit, for example--may increase corticosteroid volume amounts in the bloodstream and increase
the risk for adverse effects (Food and Drug Administration, 2021).

Antibiotics
Antibiotics are commonly used to treat lower RTI and while antibiotics, antivirals, and antifungals are common
medical interventions for pneumonia. Levofloxacin is commonly used to treat RTI and pneumonia (DailyMed, 2022).
Concurrently using levofloxacin with dairy products or calcium-fortified juices decreases the absorption of the
medication and thus should be avoided (DailyMed, 2022).

Fruits and vegetables have antioxidant, antifungal, antibiotic, and antiviral qualities, which support the immune
system (Vahid & Rahmani, 2021). These effects help the immune system combat the invader during the use of
antibiotics.

Treatments and Medication That Can Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

Certain medications and medical interventions can be lifesaving when discussing pulmonary disorders. However,
these life-saving treatment options sometimes unintentionally affect a client's nutritional condition. These
treatment modalities might lead to deficiencies in vital nutrients that maintain, prevent, or improve pulmonary
function. It is crucial for health care providers to continuously monitor the clients they treat and educate them about
290  14 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

     potential nutritional deficiencies and how to treat them. A balanced and nutrient-rich diet may help reduce
     nutritional deficiencies and support and improve overall respiratory function.

     Corticosteroids
     As previously mentioned, corticosteroids are commonly used to decrease inflammation in the airways in conditions
     such as asthma and COPD (Yasir et al., 2022). Long-term use of corticosteroids causes some nutritional
     deficiencies. These deficiencies include decreased potassium, calcium, and vitamin D, which in turn increase the
     risk for decreased bone density, fractures, diminished muscle mass, muscle weakness, and osteoporosis.

     Oxygen Therapy
     Sometimes, chronic pulmonary conditions such as COPD warrant long-term oxygen therapy. Long-term oxygen
     therapy in COPD clients contributed to deficiencies of vital nutrients in clients already suffering from malnutrition
     (Mekal et al., 2021). As the energy demand shifts during COPD, hypoxia (low oxygenation to tissues) causes
     decreased oxygenation and decreased normal intestine function (Zheng et al., 2015). As the body works to
     oxygenate, the decrease in intestine function causes a loss of nutrients (Zheng et al. 2015). Mekal et al. (2021)
     noted deficiencies in calcium, vitamins A, C, D, and E, and folates in about 95% of their COPD clients. The lack of
     vital nutrients impacts the pulmonary system's optimal functional capabilities by decreasing muscle strength and
     respiratory function. Clients with deficiencies need to be closely monitored and taught about nutrient-rich dietary
     options to select to minimize these insufficiencies in nutrients.

     Mechanical Ventilation
     If an acute or chronic respiratory disease exacerbates to the point of life-saving measurement requirements,
     mechanical ventilation provides a break to the lungs to allow them time to rest (Kalaiselvan et al., 2021). According
     to Kalaiselvan et al. (2021), clients on mechanical ventilators do not have appropriate dietary intake, anorexia, and
     malabsorption of vital nutrients. The prolonged use of mechanical ventilation leads to vitamin D and calcium
     deficiencies. These deficits contribute to respiratory problems secondary to muscle weakness and difficulty
     weaning from the ventilator.

     Antibiotics
     Malabsorption of vital nutrients contributes to pulmonary problems, limited immunity, and increased risk for RTI.
     Antibiotics are often used in the treatment plan for RTI and bacterial pneumonia (Sanivarapu & Gibson, 2023). Long-
     term use of antibiotics disrupts gut bacteria and prevents nutrient absorption, leading to deficiencies. According to
     Ramirez et al. (2020), healthy bacteria in the colon helps break down xenobiotics and other compounds that play a
     role in amino acid and vitamin synthesis within the colon. When antibiotics are used, they remove the healthy
     bacteria that helps vitamin synthesis in the colon, causing the deficiencies. Nurses should recommend probiotic-
     rich sources such as kimchi, sauerkraut, kefir, yogurt, and drinks such as kombucha to counter the loss of good
     bacteria with antibiotic use. These probiotic-rich interventions help combat the side effects of antibiotics that
     include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. When the nurse develops a discharge plan that includes antibiotic use,
     probiotic-rich foods and drinks should be included in the plan.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        14 · Chapter Summary 291

Chapter Summary

· Nutrition plays a vital role in the growth,              lead to vitamin deficiencies. COPD is one of the
   development, and maintenance of the pulmonary           most prevalent conditions affected by this. The
   system throughout the lifespan. Starting in utero,      diminished respiratory capacity among clients with
   maternal malnutrition can limit alveolarization and     COPD can limit the amount of food they are able to
   pulmonary vascular development in the fetus.            eat, placing them at high risk for nutritional
                                                           deficiencies.
· Lung development continues through childhood          · Consuming a nutrient-rich diet boosts the immune
   and adolescence during which the child's lung           system and helps prevent respiratory tract
   volume expands and respiratory muscle strength          infections and pneumonia. An anti-inflammatory
   increases. By adulthood, respiratory growth and         diet can also minimize the impact of infections.
   development stabilizes and can begin to decline         High-fat diets can exacerbate asthma and
   secondary to aging and comorbidities.                   pulmonary fibrosis symptoms.

· Pulmonary conditions limit nutritional intake and

Key Terms

apoptosis cellular death                                    the lung parenchyma caused by infection, chronic
asthma a chronic disease process clinically                 pulmonary diseases, ventilator use, or aspiration;
                                                            pneumonia can lead to chronic damage, such as
    characterized by recurrent inflammation and airway      lung fibrosis
    narrowing, limiting gas exchange in the lungs       pulmonary embolism a thrombus that becomes
chronic bronchitis when the airway lining                   dislodged and travels to the lungs, preventing the
    experiences too much inflammation, leading to           natural flow of blood within the pulmonary artery or
    increased mucus production                              its branches
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)            pulmonary fibrosis scarring of the lung tissues that
    chronic pulmonary diseases known as emphysema           causes stiffening, limiting lung function
    and chronic bronchitis                              respiratory tract infections (RTI) microorganisms
emphysema damage between the walls in the alveoli           that infect the upper and lower respiratory tract and
    that exchange gas in the lungs                          lead to symptoms such as fever, sore throat, cough,
free radicals compounds that take part in the cellular      chest pain, dyspnea, and myalgia
    destruction mechanism of phagocytosis through       rhinitis inflammation that causes symptoms such as
    macrophages and granulocytes                            nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, and
hyperemia a condition that occurs as a result of a          postnasal drip
    higher-than-normal blood flow
pneumonia a condition that leads to inflammation of

Review Questions

1. Based on physiological changes that occur during pregnancy, which nutrients should the nurse encourage a
    client to eat to support the pulmonary system and fetal development during pregnancy?
     a. Carbohydrates
     b. Vitamin C
     c. Proteins
     d. Vitamin B

2. Nutritional factors play a role in the development and function of the pulmonary system during infancy. Which
    nutrient is essential for the development of the pulmonary system?
     a. Iron
     b. Protein
     c. Vitamin C
     d. Omega-3 fatty acids

3. The nurse is caring for a pregnant client who has nutritional deficits. How should the nurse describe the
    potential fetal effects from maternal malnourishment?
     a. The fetus will experience lower blood glucose levels.
292 14 · Review Questions

         b. The fetus will develop a slower-than-normal heart rate.
         c. The fetus may develop cognitive and behavioral delays.
         d. The fetus may experience hormone imbalances.

    4. The nurse is working with a client who was recently diagnosed with asthma and is using a bronchodilator
        inhaler. Which of the following foods should the nurse instruct the client to minimize or avoid?
         a. Steak
         b. Coffee
         c. Grapefruit
         d. Kale

    5. The nurse is providing prenatal diet instruction for a pregnant client. Which nutrients should the nurse
        encourage the client to consume to promote explain proper fetal lung function and development?
         a. Proteins, vitamins A, D, and E, and omega-3 fatty acids
         b. Carbohydrates and vitamins A, D, and E
         c. Proteins and iron
         d. Fats, vitamins B12 and B6, and calcium

    6. The nurse is providing discharge teaching for a client with respiratory alterations. Which of the following
        statements regarding the effects of nutrition on the immune system and lung health should be included in the
        plan?
         a. Good nutrition is important, although it does not prevent acute respiratory tract infections.
         b. Nutrition only affects lung tissue repair, not the immune system.
         c. Improper nutritional intake alters the immune system but does not impact lung health.
         d. Nutrition plays a role in supporting the immune system to prevent and treat infection and repair lung
              tissue.

    7. The nurse is instructing the parent of a child recently diagnosed with asthma. Which of the following foods
        should the nurse instruct the parent to include with the child's meals to decrease the risk for an asthma
        exacerbation?
         a. Salmon or other fatty fish
         b. A lean protein such as chicken
         c. At least one serving of fruits and vegetables
         d. A serving of red meat

    8. The nurse is counseling a client experiencing worsening COPD symptoms on diet strategies to minimize the
        impacts of the disease. Which dietary component is associated with worsening airway inflammation and lung
        function limitations?
         a. Saturated fats
         b. Carbohydrates
         c. Vitamins
         d. Unsaturated fats

    9. What is the goal of an anti-inflammatory diet for clients with RTI and pneumonia?
         a. To limit the immune system's response
         b. To increase the immune system's response
         c. To decrease lung function and reduce coughing
         d. To minimize the duration of and decrease the risk for infections

  10. The nurse is instructing a client on long-term oxygen therapy at home on the role of nutrition in managing the
        client's condition. Which of the following statements by the client indicates the client understands the
        instruction?
         a. "I know my GI tract is not getting as much oxygen as it used to, so I need to make sure I get enough

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                14 · Suggested Reading 293

              vitamins and minerals in my body."
         b. "I need to eat whatever I feel like I can - calories are the most important thing."
         c. "I need to eat as much protein as possible."
         d. "I need to try to avoid foods high in calcium as these can affect my condition."

Suggested Reading

Calcium NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional/
Magnesium NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-Consumer/
Selenium NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Selenium-HealthProfessional/
Vitamin A NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminA-Consumer/
Vitamin C NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminC-Consumer/
Vitamin D NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/
Vitamin E NIH recommendations: https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminE-Consumer/
294 14 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 15

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Renal Wellness

FIGURE 15.1 Complex carbohydrates, such as breads containing whole grains that are rich in fiber, can have positive effects on the renal
system, helping to effectively eliminate waste from the body. (credit: modification of work "Loaves of nice bread" by ProjectManhattan/
Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System
15.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness
15.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness
15.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness
INTRODUCTION The renal system, which comprises the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra, works to eliminate
liquid wastes from the body, manage fluid and electrolyte balance, and regulate blood pH, volume, and pressure.
Nutrition markedly impacts this system and can affect morbidity and mortality of clients with abnormal or
malfunctioning renal systems. This chapter focuses on assessment of the renal system and analysis of abnormal
findings and potential illnesses. The chapter will illustrate how to use this knowledge to identify important
nutritional needs and deficiencies to best educate clients on ways to improve morbidity and mortality surrounding
renal system illnesses.
Consider this case: Jose Vasquez, a 55-year-old client in an outpatient care setting who returns frequently for
regular health evaluations. The client's diagnoses include obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, and
chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 2. The client receives routine education on dietary and lifestyle changes needed
to best preserve kidney function and prevent disease advancement.
296  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     15.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 15.1.1 Recognize the normal function of the renal system.
       · 15.1.2 Recognize cues of nutritional impact on the renal system.
       · 15.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the renal system.

     Normal Function of the Renal System

     The renal system contains the kidneys, urinary bladder, ureters, and urethra (Figure 15.2) The kidneys (the primary
     organs in this system) filter blood and remove serum wastes, excrete wastes from the body, maintain blood pressure
     (National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, n.d.), maintain acid-base balance, and balance fluids. The
     kidneys are also responsible for reabsorption of glucose, amino acids, bicarbonate, water, and phosphate, as well as
     chloride, sodium, magnesium, calcium, and potassium ions (Newman, 2023).

     FIGURE 15.2 The major organs of the renal system are responsible for regulating the composition and volume of bodily fluids, as well as
     eliminating waste products from the body. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     There are two kidneys, each located between the twelfth thoracic and third lumbar vertebrae on either side of the
     vertebral column. The right kidney is slightly lower than the left because of the liver. A fibrous connective tissue
     known as the renal capsule covers the outermost layer of the kidneys (Figure 15.3).

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System                                                                     297

FIGURE 15.3 The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, regulate fluid balance, and produce hormones that help
control blood pressure and stimulate production of red blood cells. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Renal Cortex and Medulla
The next layer of the kidney is the renal cortex, followed by the renal medulla. The renal medulla consists of a
series of renal pyramids that contain straight tubular structures and blood vessels. The top point of these pyramid-
like structures, known as the renal papilla, points toward the innermost layer of the kidney, called the renal pelvis,
which is found within the renal sinus. The renal sinus (cavity) collects urine that is produced by the functioning layer
of the kidney, the parenchyma (the renal cortex and medulla together). Inside the parenchyma are the nephrons,
the basic functioning units of the kidney (Figure 15.4).

FIGURE 15.4 The nephron filters the blood and produces urine. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Nephrons
Each kidney has roughly 1 million nephrons (Cleveland Clinic, 2023b, 2023c). A nephron is the functional unit of the
kidney and contains two parts: the glomerulus, which is a cluster of capillaries and nerve endings that cluster
around its second part, the renal tubule. Urine created in the nephrons will pass into collecting ducts and flow to the
minor calyxes, to the major calyxes, into the renal pelvis, and out of the kidney into the ureter.
298  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     The kidneys remove three primary wastes: urea, uric acid, and drugs and their metabolites. Urea are wastes from
     protein breakdown, while uric acid is waste from the breakdown of nucleic acids (Newman, 2023).

     Hormone Production
     The kidneys also play a role in the production of certain hormones that support other body processes. For example,
     they help balance blood pressure by retaining water and sodium in the body; they also produce renin that helps to
     maintain appropriate blood pressure by managing water reabsorption (Merck Manuals, 2023). The kidneys assist
     with red blood cell production: they create and release erythropoietin, a hormone that signals the bone marrow to
     produce red blood cells. Another hormone, calcitriol, which is a form of vitamin D that helps the body absorb
     calcium and regulates the parathyroid hormone, is produced by the kidneys. The kidneys also help to raise glucose
     levels through employing gluconeogenesis--the formation of glucose from precursors--in the renal cortex.

     Renal Artery, Renal Vein, and Ureters
     Two other important kidney components are the renal artery and the renal vein. The renal artery controls blood flow
     to the kidneys for both supply to the organ and for filtering purposes. Blood flows through this artery at a rate of 1.2
     L/min (Dalal, Bruss, & Sehdev, 2022). The renal vein carries filtered blood back to the heart, away from the kidneys.

     The ureters are small tubes that run from the renal pelvis to the urinary bladder, allowing for urine passage
     (National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, n.d.). The urine is moved by way of peristalsis, or the
     involuntary constriction and relaxation of musculature that promotes movement. The layers of the ureters include
     the fibrous coat (outer layer), the muscular coat (middle layer), and the mucosa (inner layer).

     Bladder
     The urine that passes down the ureters travels to the urinary bladder, a temporary storage area for urine located in
     the pelvic cavity, posterior to the symphysis pubis. The layers of the bladder include the outer superior surface
     layer, the parietal peritoneum, and the outer fibrous connective tissue. The detrusor muscle is made up of
     interwoven smooth muscle fibers that control the contraction of the bladder during urination; the submucosa, which
     supports the mucous membrane and is composed of connective tissue; and the innermost layer, the mucous
     membrane, which is composed of transitional epithelium that runs continuous with the ureters.

     To prevent backflow of urine into the ureters, small flaps of mucosa cover the opening of the ureters into the bladder
     and act as valves; the internal urethral sphincter, located at the bottom of the bladder, is controlled by the detrusor
     muscle to control exit of urine through the urethra.

     Urethra
     The urethra is a thin-walled, hollow tube-like duct that allows urine to pass from the bladder to the outside of the
     body. The urine enters the urethra through the internal urethral sphincter; to exit the urethra, it passes through the
     final controlled muscle, the external urethral sphincter, which is composed of striated muscle fibers. The urethra's
     layers include the fibroelastic connective tissue layer (outer layer), smooth muscle layer (middle layer), and
     epithelial spongy submucosa (inner layer).

     Adrenal Gland
     Although adrenal glands are not part of the renal system, they are an extremely important accessory gland. One
     adrenal gland, or suprarenal gland, sits atop each kidney. These glands release a hormone called aldosterone,
     which helps to balance the blood pH and fluid balance by signaling the excretion of potassium and the reabsorption
     of sodium by the kidneys; aldosterone is part of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system to help manage blood
     pressure (Merck Manuals, 2023). The other major role adrenal glands play is in the release of cortisol. Cortisol has
     several uses in the body such as helping to maintain blood pressure, increase glucose levels, reduce inflammation,
     and control metabolism. The relationship to the kidneys comes into play when cortisol signals the kidneys to
     reabsorb specific electrolytes and excrete others based on the function it is trying to accomplish in the body at a
     given time.

     Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Renal System

     Assessment of the renal system starts with collecting subjective data about urinary symptoms the client is
     experiencing. Assessing for fluid retention, over- or underproduction of urine, and fluid deficit is useful when
     assessing renal function. Swelling, unexplained weight gain, difficulty breathing, and very clear urine are some

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System                                                     299

symptoms a client might report that are important to the assessment of the renal system. Additional symptoms
might include dysuria (painful or difficult urination) (Urology Care Foundation, 2023), urinary urgency, or urinary
frequency. Other information concerning urinary incontinence, passage of urinary stones, color and clarity of urine,
retention of urine, and nocturia (nighttime urinary frequency). Objective data collected to validate these subjective
findings can include assessment of limb edema, crackles in the lungs, intake and output measurements, and testing
of the urine directly.

After collecting subjective data, the nurse should complete a physical examination of the renal system. This can be
done through organ evaluation and measurement of function results. The physical assessment of the organs should
begin with the abdominal assessment procedure as described in The Digestive Process with some special
considerations to focus on the renal system during this assessment.

The first step is an inspection of the skin, during which the nurse should examine the color and look for masses,
bulging areas, or distention. Skin discoloration may indicate anemia, if pale or cyanotic; a bulging area above the
symphysis pubis may indicate urinary retention or a full bladder; and distention may indicate fluid build-up. Next,
during auscultation of the abdomen, hyperactive bowel sounds can indicate diarrhea, which can result from
hyperkalemia (Cleveland Clinic, 2023a), possibly related to renal issues. During palpation of the abdomen,
hyperkalemia may manifest as abdominal tenderness; severe skin dryness may mean dehydration; and an
overdistended bladder seen through palpation may indicate urinary retention issues. To palpate the right kidney, the
nurse should place one hand under the right flank of the client and press downward against the outer edge of the
right abdomen to "sandwich" the kidney, which should be smooth and firm (Roscoe, 2022). The left kidney cannot
normally be palpated--unless enlarged--due to its location behind the bowel (Roscoe, 2022). Abdominal palpation
can also identify urinary retention and a full bladder by identifying fluid in an enlarged bladder. During the final
step--percussion of the abdomen--a dullness above the symphysis pubis may indicate bladder distension
(Maddukuri, 2022b).

     SAFETY ALERT

 Contraindications for Deep Palpation

  Deep palpation is contraindicated in clients with suspected abdominal aortic aneurysm, appendicitis, polycystic
  kidney disease, kidney transplantation history, or a tender spleen, due to a risk for injury to the client and rupture
  of organs (Roscoe, 2022).

Bladder Scanning
Bladder scanning is another way to evaluate the bladder and its ability to effectively empty. This scan can assist in
determining whether a client is retaining urine, indicated by bladder distention and abdominal fullness and
discomfort. Post void residual (PVR) volume can be measured with a bladder scan machine, which is a portable,
hand-held, non-invasive, ultrasound device. A wand is placed at the suprapubic area for examination immediately
after the client voids and attempts to fully empty their bladder (Ballstaedt & Woodbury, 2022). Results help to
determine if the bladder is being emptied adequately during micturition, or urination; determine if urine is being
produced in those with renal illness; and assess for any bladder tumors, diverticula, or stones that may be present.
For young and middle-aged adults (ages 18-65 years), a PVR of less than 50 mL is considered normal, over 200 mL
is considered inadequate; for older adults (over age 65), 50 to 100 mL is considered normal; and for children, more
than 20 mL is considered abnormal. A PVR over 500 mL, combined with identified neurologic findings, is highly
predictive of cauda equina syndrome, a dysfunction affecting the multiple lumbar and sacral nerve roots of the
cauda equina, which can cause a need to strain or an altered flow or altered awareness of the need to urinate.

     SAFETY ALERT

 Bladder Scanning During Pregnancy

  Bladder scanning is not suitable on clients who are pregnant, those with uterine prolapse, or those with severe
  abdominal scarring and abdominal ascites because these conditions may prompt false high results (Ballstaedt &
  Woodbury, 2022).
300  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     Other Body Assessments
     In assessing the renal system, the nurse should examine the chest, skin, costovertebral angle (the area on the back
     flank at the bottom of the 12th rib forming a 90-degree angle to the spine, as shown in (Figure 15.5), rectum, groin
     and genitals, and neurologic system. In examining these areas, the nurse should:

       · Auscultate the chest for heart and lung sounds (Maddukuri, 2022a).
       · Examine the skin for color, turgor, and temperature.
       · Evaluate neurologic indicators such as level of consciousness, orientation, ability to speak and write clearly, and

           movements of the hands.
       · Review the costovertebral angle for pain (Maddukuri, 2022b).
       · Determine if there is any prostate enlargement by completing a rectal examination. (Although the prostate has

           no relation to the renal system itself as far as function, if it enlarges, it can press against the urethra, preventing
           urine from exiting the body).
       · Examine the groin and genitals for herniation, deviation from normal anatomy, especially of the urethra,
           possible signs of infection, and any masses.

     FIGURE 15.5 Pain or tenderness at the costovertebral angle, the angle formed by the intersection of the 12th rib and the vertebral column
     on either side of the spine, should be evaluated for pain or tenderness, as it can indicate problems with the kidneys or urinary tract. (credit:
     modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Glomerular Filtration Rate, Serum Creatinine, and Blood Urea Nitrogen Tests
     In addition to physical assessment, several pertinent tests are used to determine the proper functioning of the renal
     system and are the true indicators of health. The three major serum tests are the glomerular filtration rate (GFR),
     serum creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022; National
     Kidney Foundation, n.d.). The GFR measures how well the kidneys remove excess fluids and waste products from
     the blood (factoring in age and sex). This test is related to the 24-hour creatinine clearance test, because it can also
     identify how well the kidneys filter out wastes. The GFR can be used to evaluate the client for acute kidney injury
     (AKI) as well as to determine the stage of CKD and when the kidneys have failed completely, requiring
     transplantation or dialysis. Normal GFR for adults (18-69 years) is above 90 mL/min/1.73 m2; adults (70 years and
     older) should be greater than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2; children and adolescents (3-17 years) should be greater than 80
     mL/min/1.73 m2; and newborn to 2 years should be 40-60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (Mitchell, Strafford, & Tavares, 2022;
     National Kidney Foundation, 2023a).

     Serum creatinine is a measurement of the waste product from muscle energy consumption and muscle damage
     from the kidneys, whereas BUN is a waste product that comes from ingested proteins excreted by the kidneys.
     Serum creatinine levels should be 0.74-1.35 mg/dL for men 19 years and older, 0.59-1.04 mg/dL for women 19
     years and older, and 0.5-1.0 mg/dL for children ages 2-18 years. Normal BUN levels for all ages are 6-24 mg/dL.

     Urine
     Testing urine can indicate how well the renal system maintains fluid balance by measuring hydration status and
     volume produced. The 24-hour creatinine clearance test measures the amount of creatinine excreted directly into
     the urine and is conducted through a urine sample collection process completed over 24 hours (Centers for Disease
     Control and Prevention, 2022; National Kidney Foundation, n.d.). If the creatinine clearance amount is low, then the
     kidneys are not filtering properly. A full urinalysis can test for pH, sodium, potassium, urea, creatinine, uric acid,

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Renal System                                                     301

phosphorus, calcium, chloride, ammonia, water, ketones, nitrites, blood, glucose, protein, and leukocytes to
evaluate for infection and renal damage (Mitchell, Strafford, & Tavares, 2022). Most often, a urine dipstick test is
used, which can test for blood, urine specific gravity, urine pH, glucose, protein, nitrates, and leukocytes (Mitchell,
Strafford, & Tavares, 2022). A more specific dipstick urinalysis test, the albumin dipstick test, checks for
microalbuminuria that is caused by smaller protein amounts than the standard urine dipstick test can detect. This
test can help identify kidney disease in clients who have a negative test for excess protein in the urine in the regular
urinalysis testing but who are at high risk for kidney disease (National Kidney Foundation, n.d.). Another specific
urine test is the albumin-to-creatinine-ratio that uses the amount of albumin and creatinine levels to form a ratio,
which indicates the level of kidney function.

Image and Biopsy Tests
Imaging tests--such as ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) scans--and biopsies can also be conducted to
monitor the function of the kidneys. An ultrasound image of the kidneys can identify obstructions in the urinary tract
and evaluate the size and position of the kidneys. A CT scan of the kidneys can help identify obstructions, structural
abnormalities (National Kidney Foundation, n.d.), and kidney disease, which would present as abscesses, masses,
cystic masses, blockages, or lesions. A kidney biopsy is conducted by taking a sample of the kidney tissue, usually
through CT-guided or ultrasound-guided sharp needle aspiration. The tissue sample is then evaluated under the
microscope for irregularities like inflammation, protein deposits, or damage, such as scarring or cancerous
anomalies (National Kidney Foundation, 2023b).

Serum Electrolyte Testing
Serum electrolyte testing monitors fluid balance and electrolyte levels, both of which are regulated by the kidneys.
Irregular values can indicate issues with function. The major electrolytes--sodium, potassium, calcium, and
phosphorus-- are monitored; however, bicarbonate, chloride, and magnesium are also important indicators of
kidney function. This list describes the importance of monitoring these nutrients:

  · Sodium plays a significant role in maintaining fluid and acid-base balance and is primarily regulated by the
      kidneys. If the kidneys are not functioning properly, sodium values can be impacted (Newman, 2023).

  · Potassium, primarily regulated by the kidneys, is an important electrolyte to monitor because minor deviations
      can cause a client to experience life-threatening problems such as cardiac dysrhythmias, also known as an
      irregular heartbeat.

  · Calcium and phosphorus have an inverse relationship--when one is high, the other is low. Calcium is extremely
      important to body functions and the musculoskeletal system. If calcium levels get too low, bone structure can
      break down and be life threatening for a client who has renal disease. Although calcium is not excreted through
      the kidneys, increased phosphorus levels is a common issue in real failure. Phosphorus levels must be
      restricted to prevent low calcium levels.

  · Although the kidneys regulate bicarbonate levels, they are not as easily attributed to kidney function--other
      pathologies in the body and compensatory mechanisms can impact these levels.

  · Chloride is excreted and reabsorbed, along with sodium, from the blood. It is, however, found in higher amounts
      in interstitial compartments and lymph fluid than in the blood, so monitoring sodium is more important than
      monitoring chloride for fluid balance because most of these storage areas cannot be measured. It is still
      important to ensure excessive intake in chloride is addressed, as this can lead to an increase in sodium levels,
      fluid retention, and edema.

  · Magnesium plays an important role when renal failure is present because excessive intake can lead to
      hypermagnesemia and can exacerbate or cause hypocalcemia. Regular functioning kidneys remove excess
      magnesium, but in the case of failure and an inability to filter, hypocalcemia can become a serious issue leading
      to renal bone dysplasia, a life-threatening condition in which the body breaks down the bones to increase
      blood calcium levels by releasing the calcium stored in bones.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  COVID-19 and Renal Function
  Clients who have a history of COVID-19 infection, particularly severe COVID-19 infection, should be evaluated
  for renal damage and failure, despite prior history because "30% of clients who are hospitalized with COVID 19
302  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     develop AKI" and "more than 50% who are admitted to the intensive care unit with kidney injury require
     dialysis." This relationship is still being researched, but several hypotheses are currently being considered:

       · COVID-19 directly targets renal cells.
       · The decrease in oxygen from respiratory failure starves and damages the kidneys.
       · COVID-19 causes a cytokine storm that destroys renal cells.
       · COVID-19 causes clots that damage the small vessels in the kidneys (Sperati, 2022).

     Analysis of Nutrition and the Renal System

     Subjective and objective data should be collected, as previously discussed, to evaluate abnormal findings and the
     possibility of malfunction in the renal system. The nurse should complete an analysis of the client's nutritional
     status through the client's lab values and all assessment findings. A baseline of the renal system should then be
     established and used to develop a nutritional plan.

     When assessing the client, the nurse should ask about dysuria (Urology Care Foundation, 2023), urinary urgency,
     urinary frequency, urinary incontinence, passage of renal stones, color and clarity of urine, retention of urine, and
     any issues with nocturia. These findings can indicate several pathologies, including cystitis (inflammation of the
     bladder caused by infection from bacteria). Cystitis is commonly referred to as a urinary tract infection (UTI).
     Dysuria can also be related to pyelonephritis, an infection of the upper urinary tract that involves the parenchyma
     and kidney pelvis. Pyelonephritis is also a UTI, but it is more serious and is usually accompanied by fever, flank pain,
     nausea and vomiting, hematuria, and suprapubic tenderness, all of which can be subjective data that is also
     objectively verifiable.

     A report of nocturia, oliguria (low urine output), or anuria (absent urine output) with foamy quality urine can be
     related to CKD. CKD will very often include many other subjective complaints that will be verifiable by objective data
     as well. Other assessment data that could indicate CKD include lethargy, fatigue, headache, breathlessness, edema,
     symptoms relating to anemia, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, cramping muscles, hematuria (blood in the
     urine), and pruritis (uncomfortable itching). Findings of colicky pain, hematuria, nausea, and vomiting can be an
     indication of renal lithiasis, or kidney stones. Discharge from the penis or vagina, dysuria, frequency, and purulent
     drainage from the penis all can be indicative of sexually transmitted infection.

     When physical assessment findings indicate potential pathologies in the renal system, testing can assist in
     diagnosing the issue. GFR will indicate if there is a decrease in the function of the kidneys when the results are less
     than normal. Serum creatinine should be tested with the BUN results to evaluate kidney function. If the creatinine is
     high and the BUN is high, kidney functioning is insufficient. Table 15.1 lists laboratory tests typically performed to
     evaluate possible renal system issues and their relationship to the renal system.

     Lab Test          Results        Relationship

     White blood cell  Elevated       UTI

     count

     Potassium         Elevated       CKD

     Sodium            Decreased      Fluid overload and edema from CKD

     Calcium           Decreased or   CKD/hyperparathyroidism related to CKD/renal
                       elevated       osteodystrophy

     Bicarbonate       Decreased      CKD

     Phosphorus        Elevated       CKD

     Magnesium         Elevated       CKD or AKI

     Chloride          Decreased      Fluid overload and edema from CKD

     TABLE 15.1 Testing for Renal System Abnormalities and the Relationship to the Renal System

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness                                                                    303

15.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 15.2.1 Prioritize the hypotheses of nutritional habits that optimize renal wellness.
  · 15.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize renal wellness utilizing nutritional habits.

Planning Nutrition Goals

The nurse should consider a client's current renal system when planning nutritional goals; therefore, plans will vary
accordingly. For the client with healthy kidneys, the goals of nutrition should focus more on dietary needs for
comorbidities, including limiting sodium, trans fats, saturated fats, and alcohol; eating appropriate amounts of
protein; and maintaining adequate fluid balance.

When creating nutritional plans for clients with compromised kidneys, the nurse should collaborate with a renal
dietician and consider all laboratory test values. The plans for these clients should focus on limiting fluid intake,
potassium, phosphorus, sodium, trans fat, saturated fats, magnesium, and proteins, while increasing calcium. Note
that at the start of dialysis, slightly different restrictions apply.

The Healthy Renal System Goals
The nurse should direct clients with a healthy renal system and no comorbidities to consider nutritional goals for
renal wellness. A good starting point is to use the MyPlate portioning method with every meal (de Bellefonds, 2021).
In addition, it is important to limit sodium intake to no more than 2300 mg/day. Because the majority of sodium
intake comes from processed foods and not table salt, encourage clients to avoid pre-processed foods or, at
minimum, choose no-sodium or low-sodium options.

     MYPLATE

  MyPlate (https://openstax.org/r/myplateg) pictorially represents healthy portion sizes of different food groups in
  a nutritionally sound diet. This tool is useful as a good starting point for any healthy client trying to improve their
  nutritional intake to maintain health.

Clients should also be aware of protein intake because protein byproducts are filtered through the kidneys. Clients
should eat enough protein to maintain overall health, but not consume too much because the kidneys will have to
work extra hard.

The nurse should encourage the client to choose complex carbohydrates such as whole grains, fruits, vegetables,
lentils, and beans over simple carbohydrates such as sweetened beverages, packaged foods, and desserts (de
Bellefonds, 2021). Heart health is important to kidney health, so limiting saturated fats and avoiding artificial trans
fat is recommended. The client should consider limiting, or even eliminating, their alcohol intake. Alcohol is a waste
product that the kidneys need to filter out, making it less efficient to filter out other things during this time; alcohol is
also dehydrating, which affects the kidneys' ability to regulate the body's hydration status.

Another factor the nurse should consider is any comorbidities a client has. For example, a client who has a healthy
renal system but has hypertension or diabetes is at much higher risk for developing CKD. Dietary goals should
include foods that will keep these pathologies under control, as well as include nutrients that support renal health
once a client has developed CKD.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Fads for Weight Loss--Dangers to Renal System Health
  Diets that promote excessive or reduced intake of specific nutrients, such as protein or carbohydrates, can be
  dangerous because they limit many nutrients and promote disease. For example, diets with excess red meats
  and saturated fats may cause heart disease; diets high in protein can lead to intraglomerular hypertension that
  may cause renal hyperfiltration, glomerular injury, and proteinuria, which could lead to CKD (Gang-Jee, et al.,
  2020). Well-known diets that require extreme nutritional changes include Atkins, Keto, Dukan, Montignac,
304  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     Scarsdale, Stillman, and the Zone.

     Goals for Clients with CKD
     Clients with CKD need to follow the preceding guidelines, but they also have more restrictions. For clients who have
     CKD and diabetes and/or hypertension, the following restrictions are also required in addition to their original
     nutritional plan dictated by their comorbidity, categorized by stage Table 15.2.

     Stage  GFR        Function                                     Water Intake                 Nutrient Intake
     1
             90 mL/      · Working well.                              · Increase water             · Consume low-fat
            min/         · Client is unaware of                           intake.                      and low-sodium diet.
            1.73 m2
                             deficiencies.

     2      60-89 mL/ · Still functioning.                          · High water intake. · Continue low-fat and

            min/       · Client may be asymptomatic                                                 low-sodium diet.
            1.73 m2       or show signs of                                                       · Add foods higher in

                                      hypertension.                                              calcium and

                                                                                                 magnesium.

     3A     45-59 mL/ · Decrease in function, with                  · Continue high              · Continue with low-

            min/          kidneys starting to decline.                        water only if no   fat and low-sodium
            1.73 m2    · Client will have                                     edema or heart     diet and food options

                                      hypertension.                           failure present.   that are high in

                       · Client may have anemia,                    · If client has heart        calcium and

                                      fatigue, anorexia,                      failure or edema,  magnesium.

                                      malnutrition, and bone pain.            restrict fluids.   · If heart failure or

                                                                                                 edema is present,

                                                                                                 restrict foods with

                                                                                                 phosphorus,

                                                                                                 potassium, and

                                                                                                 protein, limiting

                                                                                                 proteins that are

                                                                                                 plant-based or from

                                                                                                 lean meats.

     3B     30-44 mL/

            min/
            1.73 m2

     TABLE 15.2 Nutrient Intake for Clients with CKD, Dependent on Stage of Failure (source: National Kidney Foundation, 2023a)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      15.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness           305

Stage  GFR        Function                            Water Intake          Nutrient Intake
4                                                       · Restrict fluids.
       15-29 mL/    · Severe decline in kidney                                · Restrict intake of fat,
       min/             function; may need dialysis.                              sodium, potassium,
       1.73 m2                                                                    phosphorus, and
                    · Client will have                                            magnesium.
                        hypertension, anemia,
                        malnutrition, altered bone                            · Increase intake of
                        metabolism, edema,                                        calcium.
                        metabolic acidosis,
                        hypocalcemia, an elevated                             · If not yet on dialysis,
                        BUN and creatinine. Client                                restrict protein.
                        may have uremia and
                        azotemia.                                             · If dialysis has been
                                                                                  started, increase
                                                                                  protein.

5      < 15 mL/   · End-stage renal disease           · If on dialysis,     · If on dialysis, follow

       min/          (ESRD).                          follow stage 4        stage 4
       1.73 m2    · Client will have complete         recommendations.      recommendations.

                  kidney failure in which all         · If recipient of a   · If recipient of a

                  other symptoms are present          kidney                kidney

                  and worsened.                       transplantation,      transplantation,

                  · Client will have azotemia         follow regular        follow regular

                  with overt uremia and               healthy diet.         healthy diet.

                  require dialysis or renal

                  transplantation to survive.

TABLE 15.2 Nutrient Intake for Clients with CKD, Dependent on Stage of Failure (source: National Kidney Foundation, 2023a)

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

Many barriers exist for clients with CKD--the more advanced the disease, the higher the likelihood that a client will,
either deliberately or accidentally, not follow a nutritional plan. The nutritional plan for clients with CKD restricts
fluids, fat, sodium, phosphorus, protein, magnesium, and potassium and increases calcium, which presents many
challenges, especially before transplantation. The nurse should counsel the client on the following:

  · Restricting fluids can be extremely difficult; the kidneys will excrete more urine if unable to concentrate solutes
      in smaller urine amounts. The client will then become extremely thirsty because they are losing much more
      water than they are permitted to drink each day.

  · Sodium and phosphorus are not only found in certain fresh items but are also added to many processed foods
      as preservatives. Processed foods are much cheaper and more readily available to clients with busy lives, so it
      is more difficult to avoid these types of foods. Fast foods--prepared foods that are readily available--are not
      only extremely high in both sodium and phosphorus, but also in fat content. The nurse should counsel the client
      to limit their fast-food intake to only once or twice a week

  · The client with CKD also needs to understand how to combine plant protein sources in the right amounts and
      types to replace proteins easily found in meat. Although lean meat protein sources are acceptable, options tend
      to be more expensive.

  · The challenge faced when limiting magnesium is that many food sources high in magnesium are high in plant
      proteins, which can replace meat proteins, making selections more limited. Another difficult balance to achieve
      with magnesium is that many high calcium foods that need to be increased are also high in magnesium.

  · Lastly, potassium is found naturally in a variety of fresh and healthy food choices. Many foods that the client
      was taught to eat before they had CKD to manage hypertension, diabetes, or any number of other
      comorbidities, will be ones they now have to avoid due to high potassium content. Potassium is the opposite of
      most other foods on the list--it is high in fresh food options and low in processed food options.
306  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

     15.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 15.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
       · 15.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize renal wellness.

     Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

     When providing holistic care, the nurse should address potential barriers the client may face in accessing healthy
     foods. According to the World Health Organization, 30-55% of health outcomes are influenced by social
     determinant health disparities such as economic stability, food security, social context, and environment, among
     others (Reinoso et al., 2022; World Health Organization, 2020). Many of the fresh foods recommended on a
     customized nutritional plan for renal disease are often more expensive and harder to obtain than packaged or
     processed foods. To set the client up for success in following the plan, the nurse should inquire about any food
     security issues the client has. The nurse should create a plan that addresses the client's insecurities and further
     support the client by connecting them to the appropriate resources.

     HELPFUL PROGRAMS

     The nurse should refer clients to one of the multiple government programs (https://openstax.org/r/fnsusda)
     available to help with food security issues.

     Client Teaching

     Client adherence to the nutritional plan may also be difficult if they are lacking education or fail to engage in a plan.
     If the client does not understand diet restrictions or the need to follow them, they are not likely to follow the
     prescribed diet. Client and family or caretaker engagement in the planning of their diet and in the active learning
     process is considered essential to success--engaged clients are more likely to be proactive in the management of
     their condition and they are more likely to make the needed behavior changes to improve their quality of life
     (Kariuki, 2022).

     The nurse should use multiple educational strategies to increase client confidence and compliance. Educational
     strategies may include teach-back evaluation of understanding, programmed medication reminders, access to their
     medical records, easy communication with their provider, and condition-specific educational resources in multiple
     formats, including digital formats (Kariuki, 2022). The nurse should educate the client on some of the common
     difficulties they will face when following the nutritional plan and provide specific strategies to address them. The
     nurse should provide their client with some tips and tricks to help with some of the previously mentioned difficulties
     Table 15.3.

     Electrolyte/  Substitutions/Hacks
     Restrictions
                     · Use small glasses at meals, or do not fill large glasses completely.
     Fluids          · Suck on hard, sugar-free candy, such as mints or sour balls, to help lubricate the mouth.
                     · Take sips and not gulps to savor liquids.
                     · Divide fluid intake into manageable amounts for each part of the day.
                     · If going out in the evening, take in less during the day to save intake.
                     · Use alcohol-free mouthwash and perform good oral hygiene.

     Potassium     · Avoid high-potassium foods.
                   · Use herbs, but not salt substitutes.
                   · Take diuretics or potassium binders when directed by the provider.

     TABLE 15.3 Substitutions and Nutritional Hacks to Help with Nutritional Plan Adherence in CKD (sources: DaVita, 2023; National Kidney
     Foundation, 2022)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     15.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness                  307

Electrolyte/  Substitutions/Hacks
Restrictions
                · Use salt substitutions (not salt substitutes) such as garlic or onion.
Sodium          · Make sauces, gravies, and snacks at home.
                · Do food prep and freeze meals instead of buying store-bought microwave meals.
                · Buy and cook fresh meats, not smoked, cured, luncheon, processed, or jerky meats.

Phosphorus    · Use phosphorus binders when prescribed by the provider--take with meals.
              · Limit foods that are especially high in phosphorus, like dark colas, chocolate, chocolate

                 drinks, cheese, milk, cream soups, ice cream, pudding, regular yogurt, oysters, beef liver,
                 organ meats, sardines, caramels, and processed meats and foods.
              · Limit any store-bought food that contain phosphorus, phosphate, phosphoric, or
                 pyrophosphate.

Magnesium     · Avoid milk of magnesia to treat for heartburn.
              · Increase fiber intake, as it helps decrease magnesium absorption.
              · Eat Greek yogurt as a healthy alternative to help lower magnesium levels, increase calcium,

                 and not raise phosphorus.
              · Exercise to the point of sweating to lower magnesium.

Fat           · Avoid trans fats and saturated fat.

              · Avoid processed foods.

              · Make food at home.

              · Remove skin and fat from meat.

              · Bake foods instead of frying.

              · Use olive oil or avocado oil for cooking.

              · Avoid sugary desserts.

              · Read nutrition labels carefully to choose the least amount of trans fat and saturated fat.

Protein       · Limit protein before dialysis--but eat enough to maintain health.
              · Use plant sources high in protein first, such as quinoa, edamame, lentils, fava beans,

                 chickpeas, pinto beans, lima beans, mung beans, green peas, tofu, pumpkin seeds,
                 soybeans, chia seeds, almond milk, and mycoprotein.
              · Use animal sources of protein sparingly, and choose lean sources such as skim milk, egg
                 whites, skinless chicken, and fish.

Calcium       · Increase calcium; raising calcium will help lower phosphorus levels as well.
              · Eat foods high in calcium and enriched with calcium; plant sources of calcium are a better

                 option than dairy sources, as dairy also contains higher levels of phosphorus.

TABLE 15.3 Substitutions and Nutritional Hacks to Help with Nutritional Plan Adherence in CKD (sources: DaVita, 2023; National Kidney
Foundation, 2022)

     TRENDING TODAY

Advanced Nutritional Counseling for Nurses

To optimize renal health, it is imperative that clients with preexisting kidney disorders seek advanced nutritional
counseling. Nurses can meet this need and positively impact client outcomes by obtaining certifications in
nutrition science. As nursing roles expand, nurses continue to look for opportunities to positively impact client
care. Several strategies can enhance the nurse's delivery of care, mastery of knowledge, and future job
opportunities.

In this Trending Today, explore opportunities that build upon a nursing license as a base to add skillsets to your
practice and certifications to your resumé. Evaluate one of the following to determine benefits and challenges of
these professional development areas:
308  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

       · National Academy of Sports Medicine Certified Nutrition Coach at https://www.nasm.org/
           (https://openstax.org/r/nasmo)

       · Cornell Nutrition and Healthy Living Certificate at https://online.cornell.edu (https://openstax.org/r/
           onlinecornelledu)

       · National Board of Nutrition Support Certification at https://www.nutritioncare.org (https://openstax.org/r/
           nutritioncareorg)

     Now answer the following questions:

     1. Which evidence-based practice certification did you view, and why?
     2. How would obtaining this certification impact the care you provide?
     3. How would obtaining this certification impact your practice potential?
     4. As a nurse, how would you use a nutrition certification to help your client achieve their optimal level of

           health?

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     Mr. Vasquez is in the clinic for a routine visit following his education session with the renal dietician 2 weeks prior.
     The nurse reviews his food recall report for the last 3 days (72 hours) to evaluate the need for further education. The
     client's diagnoses include obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, and CKD stage 2, so his nutritional
     education would have included all these issues.

         1. Which dietary selection made by Mr. Vasquez suggests the need for further teaching by the nurse?
              a. Lunch meats
              b. Turkey off the bone
              c. Apples
              d. Hard-boiled eggs

         2. Mr. Vasquez has an upcoming celebration and asks the nurse for a suggestion for a dessert that he could eat.
             What suggestion is appropriate for the nurse to make?
              a. Cupcakes
              b. Fruit salad
              c. Ice cream
              d. Chocolate milk

     15.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 15.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effects on renal wellness.
       · 15.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote renal wellness.

     Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Nutritional Plan for Renal Wellness

     Evaluation of the effectiveness of a nutritional plan involves evaluation of both client adherence to the plan and the
     effectiveness of the plan to reach the intended outcomes. Mr. Vasquez's nutritional plan is considered in the
     following Unfolding Case Study feature. If the plan is ineffective in any way, the nurse should determine the
     cause--adherence or general ineffectiveness--so that they can make appropriate changes.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            15.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Renal Wellness                  309

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

At the last visit, Jose Vasquez was educated on nutritional changes that will help preserve kidney function and
manage comorbidities. At a recent physical examination, the following are noted:

                               Vital Signs                                    Physical Examination

  Temperature:                 97.9°F (36.6°C)                                · No edema is present.
  Blood pressure:              118/76 mm Hg                                   · Lungs are clear to auscultation
  Heart rate:                  98 beats/min
  Respiratory rate:            14 breaths/min                                    in all fields.
  Oxygen saturation:           97% on room air
  Weight:                      Client has lost 3 lb (5.44 kg) since his last
                               visit 3 months ago
  Finger stick glucose level:  100 mg/dL

TABLE 15.4

Mr. Vasquez reports following the nutritional guidelines strictly, and his food diary reflects this to be the case. Lastly,
the nurse receives the following lab results from the sample drawn 2 days ago as a preparation for this visit:

Lab Test    Normal Range                    Mr. Vasquez's Lab Results
GFR         90-120 mL/min/1.73 m2           52 mL/min/1.73 m2

Potassium   3.5-5.0 mEq/L                   6.2 mEq/L

Sodium      135-145 mEq/L                   122 mEq/L

Phosphorus  2.5-4.5 mg/dL                   5.3 mg/dL

TABLE 15.5

3. Based on these assessment findings, what would the nurse document about the success of the nutritional
    plan for Mr. Vasquez?
     a. Plan is effective.
     b. Plan is ineffective due to client nonadherence.
     c. Plan is ineffective despite client adherence.
     d. Unable to judge plan effectiveness with assessment presented.

4. Which dietary change would Mr. Vasquez need to make if he progressed to stage 3 CKD?
     a. Increase calcium.
     b. Restrict fluids.
     c. Restrict magnesium.
     d. Increase fats.

Modifying a Nutritional Plan to Promote Renal Wellness

Unfortunately, renal disease may still progress even when the client follows an appropriate nutritional plan; the
client's nutritional plan may need to be modified.
310  15 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part C

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Parts A and B.

     It is determined that, despite Mr. Vasquez following the nutritional plan, his condition has worsened. Although this
     disease process will progress regardless, it is still prudent to address the plan because the client's disease is now in
     an advanced stage; the plan requires modifications to prevent further injury.

         5. Now that the client has advanced from stage 2 to 3 CKD, what assessment findings indicate a need to change
             the current nutritional plan?
              a. GFR of 51 mL/min/1.73 m2
              b. Symptoms of heart failure
              c. No dependent edema
              d. Glucose levels that are low

         6. Which selection is appropriate for the client to include in their diet?
              a. Quinoa
              b. Skin-on baked chicken
              c. Sirloin steak, well-done
              d. Fried fish

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           15 · Chapter Summary 311

Chapter Summary

· The renal system comprises the kidneys, urinary             sodium, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus,
   bladder, ureters, and urethra, with the kidneys            potassium, and protein.
   being the primary organs.                               · Clients should engage in the planning of their diet
                                                              and in an active learning process concerning their
· The kidneys filter blood and remove serum wastes,           health. Engagement is considered an essential
   balance fluids, maintain blood pressure, maintain          pillar for successful health management because
   acid-base balance, and excrete wastes. The                 barriers to following the nutritional plan are more
   kidneys also reabsorb certain products including           likely to be identified. Engaged clients are more
   glucose, amino acids, bicarbonate, water,                  likely to be proactive and are more likely to make
   phosphate, chloride, sodium, magnesium, and                the needed behavioral changes to improve their
   potassium ions.                                            quality of life.
                                                           · The nurse should follow the four components of
· Heart health is important to kidney health, so              the client education process--assessment,
   making sure to limit saturated fats and avoid              planning, implementation, and
   artificial trans fat is important for both cardiac and     evaluation--holistically when providing client
   renal health.                                              education.

· Depending on the stage of renal disease, the client
   will have to control their intake of fluids, fats,

Key Terms

adrenal gland the small glands sitting on top of the           which the body breaks down the bones to increase
    kidneys that release adrenaline, noradrenaline,            blood calcium levels by releasing the calcium stored
    cortisol, and aldosterone                                  in bones
                                                           renal capsule the outermost layer of the kidney
aldosterone a hormone that triggers the reabsorption           composed of fibrous connective tissue
    of sodium by the kidneys                               renal cortex the outer layer of the kidney contained
                                                               inside the capsule
cortisol a hormone released by the adrenal glands to       renal medulla the inner part of the kidney that
    help maintain blood pressure                               contains working filtering units
                                                           renal papilla the apex of a renal pyramid
costovertebral angle the area on the back flank at         renal pelvis the top part of the ureter where the
    the bottom of the 12th rib forming a 90-degree             kidney tubules drain
    angle to the spine                                     renin an enzyme secreted by the kidneys that
                                                               stimulates the production of angiotensin
cystitis inflammation of the urinary bladder               symphysis pubis the joint consisting of a
erythropoietin a hormone released by the kidneys               fibrocartilaginous disc sandwiched between the
                                                               surfaces of the pubic bones
    that signals the bone marrow to produce red blood      urea the wastes from the breakdown of proteins
    cells                                                  ureters two hollow tube-like ducts that allows
glomerulus a cluster of capillaries around the end of          passage of urine from the kidneys to the urinary
    a kidney tubule that filters waste products from the       bladder
    blood                                                  urethra the hollow tube-like duct that allows urine
gluconeogenesis the generation of glucose from non-            passage from the bladder to the outside of the body
    carbohydrate carbon substrates                         uric acid the wastes from the breakdown of nucleic
hematuria blood in the urine                                   acids
kidneys a pair of bean-shaped organs that filter out       urinary bladder a hollow organ posterior to the
    blood wastes and excrete urine                             symphysis pubis that acts as a storage reservoir for
micturition the act or urinating                               urine before excretion
nephron the functional unit of the kidney that
    contains the glomerulus and its tubule
parenchyma the renal cortex and medulla together
pruritis uncomfortable itching
pyelonephritis inflammation of the kidney
renal bone dysplasia a life-threatening condition in

Review Questions

1. The nurse provides dietary instruction to a client with kidney disease. The nurse informs the client which
    nutrient is not directly absorbed by the kidney?
312 15 · Review Questions

         a. Calcium
         b. Sodium
         c. Magnesium
         d. Potassium

    2. Which laboratory value would indicate to the nurse that an adult male client has a potential renal problem?
         a. Serum creatinine: 1.5 mg/dL
         b. Blood urea nitrogen: 7 mg/dL
         c. Glomerular filtration rate: 93 mL/min/1.73 m2
         d. Potassium: 4.1 mg/dL

    3. When should the nurse perform a bladder scan to determine a client's PVR?
         a. Before the client voids
         b. Immediately after the client voids
         c. One hour after the client voids
         d. When the client has the urge to void

    4. Which snack choice made by a client indicates to the nurse that the client understands the need to increase
        complex carbohydrates in the diet?
         a. Snack cakes
         b. Crackers
         c. Muffins
         d. Fruits

    5. Which nutritional instruction would the nurse give to a client with CKD who is not on dialysis?
         a. Decrease calcium intake.
         b. Use plant sources of protein before animal sources.
         c. Increase intake of trans fat.
         d. Reduce dietary fiber.

    6. When developing a nutritional plan of care, which factor should the nurse consider for improving client
        adherence to plan?
         a. Level of engagement
         b. Age
         c. Gender
         d. Comorbidities

    7. Which assessment finding in a client on dialysis is of concern to the nurse?
         a. Client is not restricting protein intake.
         b. Client chooses foods that are low in potassium.
         c. Client drinks large amounts of fluids.
         d. Client has increased intake of calcium.

    8. What instruction should the nurse give to a client on a fluid restriction secondary to kidney disease who
        reports increased thirst?
         a. Suck on hard, sweet candies.
         b. Use large glasses for drinking.
         c. Fill drinking glasses completely.
         d. Sip fluids slowly.

    9. Which food item on a 72-hour nutritional recall does the nurse identify as appropriate for a client who needs
        to restrict phosphorous intake?
         a. Vanilla ice cream

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                15 · Suggested Reading 313

         b. Potato chips
         c. Hot dogs
         d. Chocolate milk

  10. Which food selection on a 72-hour recall indicates to the nurse that a client who must restrict potassium and
        sodium intake requires more instruction?
         a. Salt substitute
         b. Cauliflower
         c. Grapes
         d. Apple

Suggested Reading

Amin, R., Thalluir, C., Docea, A., Sharifi-Rad, J., & Calina, D. (2022). Therapeutic potential of cranberry for kidney
   health and diseases. eFood, 3(5), e33. https://doi.org/10.1002/efd2.33

Avesani, C., Cardozo, L., Wang, A., Lindholm, B., Stenvinkel, P., & Mafra, D. (2022, September 28). Planetary health,
   nutrition, and chronic kidney disease: Connecting the dots for a sustainable future. Journal of Renal Nutrition,
   S1051-2276(22)00161-3. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.jrn.2022.09.003

Bhattacharjee, R., Jackson, A., Ruthirakanthan, A., Juriasingani, S., Levine, M., Jiang, L., Patel, R., Richard-Mohamed,
    M., Forrest, S., Ravichandran, S., Sener, A., & Luke, P. (2022). The impact of nutritional supplementation on donor
   kidneys during oxygenated ex vivo subnormothermic preservation. Transplantation Direct, 8(10), e1382.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/TXD.000000000000138

Caldiroli, L., Molinari, P., Abinti, M., Rusconi, C., Castellano, G., & Vettoretti, S. (2022). Can Mediterranean diet have a
   positive impact on kidney health? A pending answer to a long-time question. Nutrients, 14, 4366. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu14204366.

Ebrahim, Z., Glorieux, G., Moosa, M., & Blaauw, R. (2022). Effect of simplified dietary advice on nutritional status and
   uremic toxins in chronic kidney disease participants. South African Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 35(4).
    https://doi.org/10.1080/16070658.2021.2018788

Nagai, K., Kosaka, S., Kawate, Y., & Itsubo, N. (2022). Renal health benefits of sustainable diets in Japan: A review.
   Renal Replacement Therapy, 8(25). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41100-022-00415-6
314 15 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 16

Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal
Health

FIGURE 16.1 Renal health is impacted by nutrition and lifestyle choices. (credit: modification of work "dried-fruits" by www.Pixel.la Free
Stock Photos/Flickr, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan
16.2 Nutrition and Chronic Renal Illness
INTRODUCTION The renal system impacts many other systems in the body. Throughout the lifespan, nutrition and
other lifestyle decisions can impact the growth, development, and functioning of this system. The nutritional needs
of this system change not only with age but also with the current health status of the kidneys. It is the nurse's role to
ensure that clients understand their nutritional needs based on their specific parameters such as age, renal health,
and comorbidity status.
Consider this case: Kayla Davis' journey begins with the problems her mother encountered during pregnancy. We
will examine the various decisions for care in light of her disease and nutritional needs.
316  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     16.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 16.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during pregnancy.
       · 16.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during infancy.
       · 16.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during childhood.
       · 16.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during adolescence.
       · 16.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during adulthood.
       · 16.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the renal and urologic systems during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     Nutrition plays a role in the development and function of every system in the body, including the renal system. This
     role starts with the in utero development of a person and continues throughout their life. Nutrition combined with
     lifestyle decisions can interact with normal and pathologic processes in the renal system, sometimes resulting in
     system failure.

     Poor nutrition during pregnancy can lead to fetal abnormalities that can cause kidney disease in the future (National
     Kidney Foundation, 2022). Additionally, individuals with renal disease experience more problems during pregnancy
     and must manage their nutritional intake differently. This section will cover these nutritional considerations and
     their impact on the renal system during pregnancy.

     The Healthy Pregnant Client
     Pregnancy is accompanied by expected urinary and renal changes. Increased blood volume and cardiac output
     result in increased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal blood flow, which in turn causes increased excretion
     and reduced blood levels of bicarbonate, urea, creatinine, and urate (Willacy, 2022). In increased GFR, the renal
     tubules are unable to meet the increased fluid demands, resulting in mild glycosuria and proteinuria; fluid retention
     increases, reducing plasma osmolality. The smooth muscle of the renal pelvis, ureters, and bladder relaxes and
     dilates, causing the kidneys to increase in length; the ureters to lengthen, curve, and increase in residual urine
     volume; and the bladder to increase its capacity. The uterus may also put pressure on the bladder and ureters as it
     increases in size.

     Good nutrition during pregnancy can prevent problems and support overall renal health for the pregnant client and
     fetus. To achieve these aims, the client should:

       · Increase caloric intake by 340 calories per day starting with the second trimester and 452 calories per day
           starting with the third trimester (for a singleton pregnancy).

       · Take a prenatal vitamin that includes iron or take a separate iron supplement in addition to a prenatal vitamin to
           prevent iron-deficiency anemia.

       · Avoid caffeine or limit it to less than 200 mg/day (Gleason, et al, 2022).
       · Increase fluid intake, especially water.

     (source: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2023; Holcombe, 2022)

     Because of the normal physiologic changes expected, specific renal issues that most commonly arise during
     pregnancy include urinary tract infections (UTIs), pyelonephritis, and nephrolithiasis (kidney stones). Changes
     make urine less acidic, and it contains more hormones and sugars, increasing risk for bacterial growth (Sissons,
     2019). Signs and symptoms of UTI include dysuria, frequency of urination, hematuria (American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2023b), abdominal cramps, and dyspareunia (pain during sexual intercourse).

     If a UTI spreads from the lower urinary tract into the kidneys and develops into a more serious infection,
     pyelonephritis, signs and symptoms may then also include fever of 38.0°C (100.4°F) or higher; flank pain;
     costovertebral angle tenderness (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2023b); chills; nausea;
     vomiting; and back, side, or groin pain. Significant fetal and maternal morbidity and mortality have been associated
     directly with pyelonephritis (Wing & Johnston, 2017). For instance, it has been linked to preterm delivery, in which
     case all of the newborn's systems will be underdeveloped; disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which can
     lead to hemorrhage and death of both mother and fetus; and maternal sepsis and respiratory distress, which can

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                   317

lead to renal failure and maternal and fetal death (Wing & Johnston, 2017).

Prevention of UTIs, and subsequently pyelonephritis, is based on urinary hygiene and nutritional recommendations.
The nurse should instruct the client to drink 64-96 oz of water daily (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020). Drinking 8-10 oz of unsweetened cranberry juice or taking cranberry supplements daily may
also help decrease the risk of UTI. Pregnant clients should also keep caffeine intake to 200 mg or less daily
(Holcombe, 2022) and eat an overall healthy diet that includes proper nutritional and caloric intake (Sissons, 2019).

Nephrolithiasis usually occurs in the second or third trimester, when there is greater pressure on the renal organs
from the growing uterus, and within the first year of giving birth (Furst, 2021; Urology Care Foundation, 2023). The
pressure and narrowing of the passages for urine flow can concentrate urine and thus increase the risk for stone
formation. Another factor that increases the risk for kidney stones is an elevated vitamin D level, which increases
calcium levels in the urine (Orlando Health, 2023). Signs and symptoms the pregnant client may experience include
nausea; vomiting; urgency and frequency of urination; hematuria (blood in the urine); and pain in the back, flank, or
upper abdomen. The nurse should provide the following nutritional recommendations for nephrolithiasis during
pregnancy:

  · Get adequate daily amounts of vitamin B6 and magnesium (Weinberg, 2023).
  · Avoid excessive vitamin C (Peerapen & Thongboonkerd, 2023).
  · Limit sodium intake to less than 2.3 g/day (UT Southwestern Medical Center, 2023).
  · Drink ten 10 oz glasses of water or other fluids daily (Urology Care Foundation, 2023).
  · For calcium oxalate stones, maintain calcium intake at 1000-2000 mg/day and limit intake of oxalate-rich

      foods (Peerapen & Thongboonkerd, 2023; UT Southwestern Medical Center, 2023).
  · For uric acid stones, limit animal proteins and eat more plant proteins (Peerapen & Thongboonkerd, 2023).

A recent study has shown that healthy individuals who developed hypertension during pregnancy had twice the risk
of developing kidney disease within the first several years after the birth of their baby. Risks were even higher in
those who had hypertension before pregnancy and had worsening of their condition during the pregnancy (Malek et
al., 2022; Williamson, 2022). Nutritional recommendations for hypertension include limiting sodium intake to less
than 2 g/day, getting 4700 mg of potassium daily, limiting meats and saturated fats, eating 4-5 servings each of
fruits and vegetables, and following all other recommendations included in the Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) diet.

  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  Disparity Implications--Pregnancy and Hypertension
  Research evidence reveals a racial disparity exists showing that Black women were much more highly affected
  than White women: Black women who had hypertension before and during pregnancy were three times more
  likely to develop kidney disease (Malek et al., 2022).

The Pregnant Client with Preexisting Renal Disease
Pregnant clients with preexisting renal conditions will be more severely impacted by mild anemia, due to dilution of
the blood from fluid retention; an increased GFR, putting more work on the glomeruli; decreased serum sodium,
potassium, urea, creatinine, calcium, and albumin; mild glycosuria and proteinuria; reduced plasma osmolality;
increased urine retention in the system, which increases infection risks; decreased urine acidity; and increased
pressure in the system due to the growing uterus. Preexisting maternal renal conditions that can be affected by
pregnancy include polycystic kidney disease (PKD); post-renal transplant status; and chronic kidney disease
(CKD), a progressive disease of the kidneys that eventually ends in kidney failure.

Individuals with CKD are at much greater risk for experiencing adverse pregnancy outcomes, which can include
preeclampsia; acceleration in the loss of kidney function, thereby speeding the process of CKD to end-stage renal
disease (ESRD) or complete renal failure; fetal intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR); preterm delivery; the infant
being of low birthweight or/and small for gestational age (SGA); the need for the infant to receive care in the
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU); and maternal or fetal demise (Siligato et al., 2020; Wiles et al., 2019, 2020).

Kidney function declines as much in the 9 months of pregnancy as it does for a client living 1.7-4.9 years with
318  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     kidney disease. Therefore, pregnancy could lead the client with CKD to complete kidney failure and need for a
     transplant or dialysis, purification of blood through means other than the kidneys, which can be extremely
     dangerous for the mother and fetus (Wiles et al., 2020).

     Clients with CKD who have problems with chronic anemia, hypertension, proteinuria, or fluid and electrolyte
     imbalance before pregnancy will have continuation, and likely worsening, of these problems during pregnancy.
     Nutritional modifications for these clients involve a delicate balance between the needs of the growing fetus and the
     requirements of CKD. It has been found, however, that plant-based diets that are moderately restricted in protein
     decrease risks for preterm delivery and SGA status resulting from IUGR (Attini et al., 2022).

     The Fetus
     Certain nutritional components have been found to be critical for renal development in utero, and the pregnant
     person's nutrition before and during pregnancy, as well as during early lactation, has been shown to have a
     substantial impact on this system. Clients with severe iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy have been shown to
     have elevated risks for preterm birth, placental abruption, and fetal malformation, which can include malformations
     of the fetal renal system (Shi et al., 2022). Pregnant clients with various disease processes may need specific
     dietary restrictions, but low-protein, low-carbohydrate, low-calorie, and low-sodium diets, as well as diets deficient
     in the micronutrients folic acid, iron, zinc, and vitamin A, have all been shown to have potential long-term adverse
     effects on the development of the renal system in the fetus (Nusken et al., 2020). High-fat, high-sodium, and high-
     fructose diets have also been shown to be detrimental to renal system development. Depending on the exact timing
     of the deficiency or the amount of exposure during development, adverse effects could include an altered number of
     nephrons, blood pressure dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, altered sodium handling, endothelial
     dysfunction, inflammation, and oxidative stress of the kidney.

     Studies have shown that increases in fetal growth and infant birth weight may be achieved by enhancing maternal
     nutrition during pregnancy (Columbia University Irving Medical Center, n.d.). Inadequate maternal nutrition during
     pregnancy is also a significant modifiable determinant for the development of chronic diseases in the child (Lee et
     al., 2021). Nutritional intake that is not sufficiently supplied with key nutrients such as iodine, iron, folate, calcium,
     and zinc can cause severe health problems in the mother (UNICEF, n.d.) that will directly affect fetal development
     and the individual's lifelong health. The nurse should instruct a pregnant client to take in 30 mg of iron, 220 mg of
     iodine, 600 mcg of folate, 1000 mg of calcium, and 0.6 mg of zinc daily.

     Infancy

     Infants must receive proper nutrition for growth and development because all organs are impacted by malnutrition.
     Well-balanced nutrition should provide enough calories for energy expenditure. Healthy, full-term infants require
     around 100 kcal/kg/day (Patel & Rouster, 2022), whereas preterm infants require around 130 kcal/kg/day (Medical
     Home Portal, n.d).

     Other nutritional recommendations to consider in an infant's diet concern micronutrients, including iron, zinc,
     copper, chromium, manganese, and selenium (Patel & Rouster, 2022). Infants 7-12 months old should get 11 mg of
     iron (Gavin, 2021), 3 mg of zinc (Stanford Medicine Children's Health, n.d.), 220 mcg of copper (National Institutes
     of Health, 2022a), 5.5 mcg of chromium (Duda, 2022), 0.6 mg of manganese (National Institutes of Health, 2021),
     and 20 mcg of selenium daily (Lubeck, 2023). Infants can quickly become dehydrated, so proper fluid intake is
     extremely important.

     The preceding recommendations are for infants born without renal system defects. Those born with renal issues
     may need nutritional alterations and fluid restrictions based on their level of kidney function. These restricted diets
     may be in the form of a specially balanced formula that includes 2-4 mEq of sodium per 100 mL of formula and a
     restriction of 1-3 mmol/kg/day of potassium (Nelms, 2018). Depending on the specific needs, restrictions may also
     be in place for calcium, phosphorus, protein, calories, and fluids.

     Oligohydramnios, a very low to almost absent amount of amniotic fluid, is a severe condition that must be managed
     before birth and can be related to impaired or absent kidney function in the fetus (Keilman & Shanks, 2022). Starting
     at 16 weeks' gestation, around 90% of the amniotic fluid is made up of urine produced by the fetal kidneys.
     Immediate treatment for oligohydramnios is imperative because the fetus's lungs need this fluid to develop
     properly.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                      319

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Jennifer Davis had a difficult pregnancy. Prior to conceiving, she lived with type 2 diabetes, hypertension, chronic
moderate anemia, and stage 2 CKD. During the pregnancy, despite being very adherent, her kidney disease
advanced. She closely followed her nutritional restrictions for low sodium, low sugar, low carbohydrate, low fat, and
low protein, and as she progressed closer to kidney failure, she had to restrict fluids as well. Even though she
followed these dietary modifications, after delivery she was diagnosed with ESRD and was scheduled to have a
catheter placed to start hemodialysis (mechanical waste filtration).

Because of her health issues, she experienced preeclampsia that developed into eclampsia (seizures), requiring an
emergency cesarean birth of her infant at 32 weeks' gestation. Her infant demonstrated effects from Jennifer's
health issues as well. Due to Jennifer's chronic anemia, nutritional restrictions, and preterm delivery, the infant was
of very low birth weight and small for gestational age (SGA) due to intrauterine growth restrictions. She required 8
weeks of care in the NICU after birth.

Kayla Davis is now 1 week old. She weighs 1 kg (2.2 lb) and is 33 cm (13 in.) long.

    1. The nurse caring for Kayla is reviewing her nutritional plan, which is based on the highest normal calorie
        range daily for a preterm infant. How many calories daily should Kayla receive to meet her nutritional needs?
         a. 130 calories
         b. 270 calories
         c. 2,700 calories
         d. 4,000 calories

    2. The nurse is discussing Kayla's need for energy sources in her nutritional intake. Which macronutrient is the
        body's primary energy source from nutrition?
         a. Water
         b. Proteins
         c. Fats
         d. Carbohydrate

Childhood

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) updated nutritional requirements in 2020, including recommendations
for infants and toddlers for the first time. It is recommended that children have no added sugar in their diet until age
2 years (USDA, 2020). They should eat a large selection of fruits, vegetables, and grains, preferably with at least half
of the grains being whole grains, and their proteins should come from lean meat sources or plant-based proteins
(McCarthy, 2021), with low-fat dairy products added after age 2 years. They should not receive the same portion
sizes as adults.

In children with altered kidney function, it may be difficult to ensure that they get enough calories and protein to
grow within the confines of their restrictive nutritional needs. To protect renal health in children who do not have
altered kidney function, sodium should be limited to less than 2 g/day because amounts greater than this can lead
to fluid retention and hypertension. Sugar intake should be limited to less than 25 g/day (American Heart
Association, n.d.) because it can lead to obesity, hypertension, and kidney hyperfiltration. Children should be
encouraged to eat fruits and vegetables because, in addition to their other benefits, the fiber will help prevent
constipation (Deshpande, n.d.) and keep cholesterol in check. Fruits also contain citrate, which helps prevent stone
formation (Deshpande, n.d.). Adequate water intake of 34-61 oz/day (1-1.8 L) can prevent urinary infections,
constipation, dehydration, and kidney stones and assist in weight control (Deshpande, n.d.).

Common conditions that can develop even if children are not born with renal problems are UTIs, enuresis (bladder
320  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     incontinence after the age of 3 years), and nephrolithiasis. Nutritional recommendations can help maintain optimal
     renal health.

     Nephrolithiasis has become more common than it once was in children and adolescents (American Academy of
     Pediatrics, 2021) due to diets higher in processed foods, low vegetable intake, and lower physical activity levels.
     Risk factors for developing kidney stones in children and adolescents include family history of nephrolithiasis; a diet
     high in salt, meat, and processed foods; a diet low in fruits and vegetables; dehydration with low urine output;
     inherited conditions such as cystinuria (a rare condition in which kidney stones form from an amino acid called
     cysteine) and hyperoxaluria (excessive oxalate in the urine); some medications, including furosemide and
     topiramate; blocked urine flow; bowel diseases; kidney infection; prolonged sedentary periods, especially bed rest;
     weight loss surgery (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021); and urinary tract infections (UTIs).

     Enuresis may be diurnal (occurring in the daytime), nocturnal (occurring in the nighttime), primary (occurring in
     someone who has never had total bladder control), or secondary (occurring in someone who previously could
     control their bladder) (Johns Hopkins Medicine, n.d.). Enuresis has many psychological and physical causes. Renal
     causes include bladder pressure from constipation, overactive bladder (OAB), small bladder, structural problems in
     the urinary tract, inability to feel when the bladder is full (such as during sleep), UTI, and failure to urinate enough.
     Many of these causes would need to be addressed with the child's primary care provider. However, teaching the
     child different hygiene habits can be helpful, and OAB can be helped by following special nutritional considerations,
     discussed later in this chapter.

     Children urinate more often than adults because they tend to drink more fluids in relation to their size, have smaller
     bladders, and have less control over their urinary muscles, which results in feeling the need to "go" more often. UTIs
     can be very common in this age group; therefore, young children need to be educated on proper urinary hygiene
     (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2015). Females are more susceptible to UTIs than males because they have
     shorter urethras, so bacteria can more readily enter the urinary tract (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2015).
     General signs and symptoms of a UTI include vomiting, high temperature, lethargy, irritability, poor feeding, poor
     weight gain, and jaundice (NHS Inform, 2023). More specific signs and symptoms include pain or burning with
     urination; frequency or urgency of urination; deliberate holding of urine; change in toileting habits (such as
     enuresis); pain in the side, back, or abdomen; bloody or cloudy urine; and foul-smelling urine.

     Some nutritional measures can help prevent UTIs. Children should drink plenty of water to avoid constipation and to
     maintain the kidneys' function in eliminating waste products. Cranberry or blueberry juice can help create a more
     acidic urinary environment that will discourage bacterial growth (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2015). Colas and
     caffeinated beverages should be discouraged because these irritate the bladder and cause diuresis.

     Certain foods are beneficial in preventing UTIs as well. Yogurts with live and active cultures and other fermented
     products are recommended because they contain bacteria that help balance the body's systems and can thereby
     decrease the risk for UTIs (Norton Children's, 2020; Urology Specialists, 2015). Foods high in vitamin C, including
     oranges, lemons, strawberries, grapefruits, tomatoes, broccoli, and spinach, are beneficial to maintain a balanced
     urine acidity level (Figure 16.2). Foods containing proanthocyanidins, including cranberries, raspberries, and
     blueberries, are a good addition because these substances help prevent Escherichia coli infection, the number one
     bacterial cause of common UTIs (Norton Children's, 2020; Urology Specialists, 2015). High-fiber foods such as
     whole grains, apples, bananas, and legumes are important to prevent constipation, which can block urine excretion
     from the body and in turn cause urine stasis, which encourages bacterial growth (Norton Children's, 2020). Sugar
     intake should be limited because it provides a fuel source and breeding ground for bacteria to thrive (Urology
     Specialists, 2015).

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                                         321

FIGURE 16.2 Blackberries, blueberries, and strawberries are nutrient-rich fruits that help promote urologic wellness. (credit: modification
of work "strawberries, blueberries, and blackberries" by Jonathan Cutrer/Flickr, Public Domain)

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part B

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Part A.

Kayla was diagnosed with hydronephrosis (swollen kidney due to urine accumulation) related to uteropelvic junction
obstruction (blockage). This resolved on its own after 2 weeks of life. She was transferred from the NICU to the
regular pediatric floor for care at 8 weeks of age and was discharged home the following week. Her prematurity and
intrauterine growth restriction have resulted in ongoing effects on her development. She was diagnosed with type 1
diabetes because her pancreas is nonfunctioning, and one of her kidneys is nonfunctioning. The kidney is small and
undeveloped. The other kidney is functioning despite the hydronephrosis.

Unfortunately, by age 6, Kayla has developed CKD and is in stage 3 when diagnosed.

    3. Which nutritional restrictions will pose the most problems for her growth and development at this stage?
         a. Protein and calories
         b. Fluid and potassium
         c. Phosphorus and calcium
         d. Magnesium and sodium

    4. Because this client already has serious issues with their kidneys, the nurse educates the client's parents on
        nutritional measures to prevent further kidney issues that can exacerbate their other conditions. Which option
        would necessitate the need for further education?
         a. Broccoli
         b. Whole grain bread
         c. Cranberries
         d. Ramen noodles

Adolescence

During adolescence, puberty, hormonal changes, and growth spurts occur. The body goes through many changes
that require healthy and supportive nutrition to ensure proper growth and maturity. Food should include high levels
of calcium, vitamin D, and iron for bone and muscle development (Castle, 2022). Iron for males and females aged
9-13 should be around 8 mg/day. Males aged 14-18 should receive 11 mg/day, whereas females in this age group
should receive 15 mg/day. The calcium recommendation for adolescents is 1300 mg/day, and the vitamin D
322  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     recommendation is 600 International Units daily. Caloric intake should range from 1800-3200 calories daily for
     males and from 1600-2400 calories daily for females, depending on activity level (USDA, 2020).

     Adolescents should follow the same nutritional guidelines as other age groups for urinary health. UTIs and
     nephrolithiasis are the more common kidney-related issues in this age group. The same nutritional restrictions and
     recommendations discussed elsewhere in this chapter for these conditions apply for adolescents as well.

     UTIs have different causes in this group, necessitating additional educational points to discuss with the adolescent.
     All of the earlier hygiene recommendations are still important, but an additional cause of UTIs in adolescents (as
     well as in adults) is sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Chlamydia, gonorrhea, and trichomoniasis all can infect
     the urethra and advance into the urinary system. Females also have increased risk for developing cross infections
     from bacterial vaginosis (BV) and yeast infections.

     Nutritional recommendations to help avoid BV and yeast infections include staying hydrated with plenty of water
     and avoiding sugary, caffeinated, and carbonated beverages to help maintain a healthy pH balance. Probiotic and
     prebiotic foods also help maintain the pH balance in the vagina and prevent yeast or bacterial overgrowth. Foods
     that contain probiotics include yogurt with live cultures, sauerkraut, kimchi, pickles, miso, tempeh, and kombucha
     (Sass, 2022). Prebiotics can be found in chicory root, leeks, garlic, asparagus, and onions.

     Foods with a low glycemic index may also help prevent BV by helping maintain the pH balance; such foods include
     whole grains, including oatmeal and barley; quinoa; yogurt; milk; nuts; legumes; beans; grapefruit; oranges; and
     carrots (Sass, 2022). High-fiber foods support healthy bacterial growth and help prevent BV. Vitamin D has been
     found to be important in overall vaginal health and pH balance). Foods that contain vitamin D include trout, cooked
     salmon, sardines, eggs, cheddar cheese, and fortified milk (Sass, 2022). Another important addition to the diet is
     apples, at least one daily, as these have been shown to improve vaginal lubrication (Sass, 2022; Tommaso et al.,
     2014). Foods to restrict include white bread, high-sugar foods, white rice, honey, processed grains, and highly
     processed foods (Sass, 2022).

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part C

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
     Case Study Parts A and B.

     Kayla and her mother have been managing her condition well, and her stage 3 CKD has remained stable. She is now
     13 years old and has come into the clinic for a regular check-up. The nurse is planning to provide Kayla with
     education on continued management of her CKD.

         5. What would the nurse include when teaching a client Kayla's age how to best promote renal health and slow
             the progression of CKD?
              a. Recommendation to increase fiber intake
              b. STI prevention
              c. Recommendation to increase fluids
              d. Recommendation to decrease exercise

         6. How many calories would be in the acceptable daily allowance range for Kayla?
              a. 2,000 calories daily
              b. 1,500 calories daily
              c. 2,600 calories daily
              d. 3,000 calories daily

     Adulthood

     Adults will not require as much from their nutritional intake for growth, although certain hormonal changes still
     occur in adulthood. Individuals in this age group face more health risks that can impact the kidneys and their
     functioning, including hypertension, diabetes types 1 and 2, CKD, PKD, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH),

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Renal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                    323

nephrolithiasis, cardiovascular disease, and hyperlipidemia. Foods should be nutrient dense; low in sugars, sodium,
and saturated fats; high in fiber and calcium; and include vitamin D (USDA, 2020, p. 101). Nutritional
recommendations specific for renal health mentioned previously in the chapter apply to this age group as well.
Nephrolithiasis, UTIs, BPH, and CKD are more common in this age group due to the comorbidities that often
develop.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part D

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
Case Study Parts A, B, and C.

At age 18, Kayla becomes pregnant. Her GFR is 49 mL/min/1.73 m2, and she has hypertension, type 1 diabetes, and
chronic anemia. Despite the known risks to her and the fetus, she wants to go through with the pregnancy. She is
currently not restricting fluids, but she is restricting protein, potassium, phosphorus, sodium, sugar, and
carbohydrates. She is following all heart-healthy recommendations.

    7. The nurse is educating Kayla about the potential problems in a pregnancy involving her unique health
        conditions. What would the nurse include in this education?
         a. Postterm delivery
         b. Spina bifida
         c. Multifetal pregnancy
         d. Fetal intrauterine growth restriction

    8. When Kayla is being monitored during her pregnancy, which lab value would be concerning and require
        immediate treatment?
         a. GFR 56 mL/min/1.73 m2
         b. GFR 15 mL/min/1.73 m2
         c. GFR 87 mL/min/1.73 m2
         d. GFR 92 mL/min/1.73 m2

Kayla decides to continue with the pregnancy despite the risks. During her second trimester, the fetus is markedly
small due to intrauterine growth restriction, and Kayla has advanced to stage 4 CKD and is approaching the need for
dialysis. Because of Kayla's rapid decline and the struggle to keep her potassium levels normal, her health care
provider orders a catheter to be placed for the impending need for dialysis and plans to deliver the baby as early as
safely possible. Unfortunately, 2 days before she is scheduled to have the catheter placed, Kayla goes into cardiac
arrest due to a dysrhythmia from hyperkalemia. She is unable to be revived, and her fetus is too premature to
survive.

Later Adulthood

For adults aged 60 years and older, the risk for chronic disease is highest. Such conditions include cardiovascular
disease, type 2 diabetes, obesity, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, CKD, congestive heart failure, cancers, and BPH.
Renal function also naturally declines in this age group, with defined GFR being less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2
(National Kidney Foundation, 2023). Therefore, preserving kidney function is very important, and medication
dosages may need to be adjusted to ensure safety.

Nutritional intake should include nutrient-dense foods and be rich in whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and dairy, as
well as protein to prevent muscle loss. Older individuals should also increase their intake of vitamin B12 because the
ability to absorb this vitamin declines as people age (USDA, 2020, p. 128). Foods high in B12 include beef liver,
clams, cooked salmon, tuna, eggs, fortified breakfast cereal, spinach, and kidney beans (National Institutes of
Health, 2022b). Adults in this age group must also be sure to drink enough fluids, especially water, because the
sensation of thirst declines with age, increasing the risk for dehydration and UTIs (U.S. Department of Agriculture,
2020, p. 129).
324  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     16.2 Nutrition and Chronic Renal Illness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 16.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on chronic renal disorders.
       · 16.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on acute exacerbation of chronic renal disorders.

     Urologic Illnesses

     Many different urologic and renal illnesses are impacted by nutrition. Some of the more common urologic
     illnesses--illnesses that affect parts of the renal system other than the kidneys--that can be impacted by nutrition
     include overactive bladder, interstitial cystitis, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and bladder cancer. Each of these has
     different causes and different nutritional impact based on the pathophysiology of the disease.

     Overactive Bladder
     Overactive bladder (OAB), affecting more than 33 million Americans, causes urinary incontinence and urinary
     urgency resulting from involuntary contraction of the detrusor muscle of the bladder (Mobley et al., 2020).
     Anticholinergic medications and beta-3 adrenoceptor agonists are prescribed to treat this condition (Mobley et al.,
     2020). Some individuals also take 2-4 g of sodium bicarbonate twice daily to alkalinize the urine and make it less
     irritating to the bladder (Mobley et al., 2020).

     Nutritional considerations for urologic illness center around reducing symptoms and avoiding medication
     interactions. Anticholinergic drugs should not be taken with alcohol because this combination can increase the risk
     for respiratory depression, unconsciousness, and death (Cafasso, 2023). Alcohol also acts as a diuretic, so clients
     should avoid it to prevent increased urinary frequency (Stoppler, 2020). They should also avoid carbonated
     beverages because they contain substances that can irritate a sensitive bladder and increase symptoms. Another
     important nutritional modification is to eliminate caffeine. Coffee, tea, other caffeinated beverages such as energy
     drinks, and brown chocolate all contain an acid that acts as a bladder irritant and aggravates OAB symptoms
     (Mobley et al., 2020; Stoppler, 2020).

     Citrus fruits, including oranges, grapefruits, lemons, limes, and clementines, are also acidic; they can alter the urine
     pH and contribute to urgency and incontinence, so clients should avoid or reduce consumption of them (Mobley et
     al., 2020; Stoppler, 2020). Pineapple, tomatoes, wasabi, chili, spicy salsa, and other spicy condiments are all acidic
     foods, as are cranberries; although cranberries are beneficial for avoiding UTIs, they contain irritants that
     exacerbate OAB (Mobley et al., 2020; Stoppler, 2020). Sugar, artificial sweeteners, honey, grapes, bananas, apples,
     peaches, plums, strawberries, raw onions, dairy products (especially sour cream and aged cheeses), prunes,
     ketchup, vinegar, soy sauce, and mayonnaise can all contribute to an increase in OAB symptoms (Mobley et al.,
     2020; Stoppler, 2020). Nocturia can be decreased if individuals restrict their fluids during the day, especially after 6
     p.m. (Mobley et al., 2020).

     Nurses can encourage clients to try food substitutions. Dill, rosemary, thyme, and garlic are great substitutes for the
     more irritating spices (Stoppler, 2020). White chocolate is recommended instead of regular chocolate because it
     contains no caffeine, but clients should be cautioned not to eat too much because it contains sugar. Peas and
     carrots, along with other high-fiber foods, are encouraged to keep bowel movements regular and prevent symptoms
     resulting from increased pressure on the pelvic floor from constipation (Stoppler, 2020). In addition to estrogen
     supplementation for women with OAB symptoms related to estrogen deficiency, these clients can benefit from
     consuming vegetables that contain phytoestrogens, such as yams and carrots (Mobley et al., 2020). These clients
     should also increase their intake of potassium, protein, and, especially, vitamin D, which works to reduce urinary
     urgency at the site of the detrusor muscle (Mobley et al., 2020).

     Another significant change clients can make is a lifestyle change, not a nutritional one: Clients who use tobacco
     should stop, as its use is linked with OAB symptoms (Mobley et al., 2020).

     Interstitial Cystitis
     Interstitial cystitis, also known as chronic pelvic pain syndrome, causes pelvic pain and a persistent desire to
     urinate, as well as nocturia, urinary frequency, and voiding of only small amounts at a time (Mobley et al., 2020).
     These symptoms mimic those of UTI, but urine cultures will consistently show no infection. Pentosan polysulfate

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                       16.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Renal Illness                                                      325

sodium, sodium bicarbonate with calcium glycerophosphate, and dimethyl sulfoxide have all been used to treat this
condition, and dietary modifications to reduce bladder irritants can effectively supplement pharmacotherapy.
Nurses should give the same nutritional recommendations to clients with interstitial cystitis as for those with OAB.

Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is an enlargement of the prostate gland, affecting men (19 million in the United
States) as they age and as their testosterone levels decrease. Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) include urinary
frequency and urgency, a weak urine stream, the feeling of being unable to empty the bladder, postmicturition
dribbling, and nocturia (Mobley et al., 2020). Nutrition has not been shown to directly affect testosterone levels, but
evidence indicates that the Mediterranean diet can be helpful in decreasing LUTS (Mobley et al., 2020). The
Mediterranean diet promotes daily consumption of plant-based foods to replace some meats and starches, and the
replacement of unhealthy fats, such as butter and margarine, with healthier fats (Modglin, 2022). This diet is rich in
olive oil, small amounts of fish and other seafood, and plant-based options.

Bladder Cancer
Bladder cancer is the seventh most common form of cancer diagnosed, with the highest incidence occurring in
White men (Mobley et al., 2020). Tobacco use is the greatest risk factor for the disease. Eating a diet high in
isothiocyanates, which are found in cruciferous vegetables such as cabbage and kale, and drinking tea have both
been linked to a decreased risk for developing bladder cancer.

Renal Illnesses

Renal illnesses are those that impact the kidney or any portion of the kidney. Many diseases can affect the kidney,
and although they may have different causes and initial signs and symptoms, they will also produce very similar
signs and symptoms because the diseases all impact the same organ. Common renal illnesses that can be affected
by nutrition include nephrolithiasis, CKD, and renal cancer.

Nephrolithiasis
Nephrolithiasis, commonly referred to as kidney stones, can occur as a single incident or as a chronic condition.
Kidney stones can cause a wide range of issues, from extreme pain to kidney failure due to hydronephrosis if they
block urine flow and are not treated in a timely manner. Nurses should instruct clients to drink at least 88 oz (2.5 L)
of fluids daily to help prevent stone formation (Mobley et al., 2022). Fruit juices are also recommended because
they contain citrate, which inhibits calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate stone formation (Dai & Pearle, 2022).

The type of nutritional modification required depends on the type of stone and its composition (Table 16.1).

Stone Type         Composition         Food Modifications

Calcium stones     Calcium oxalate or    · Avoid foods high in calcium: cheese, yogurt, edamame,
(oxalate or        calcium phosphate         calcium-fortified foods, canned sardines/salmon/tuna,
phosphate; 75% of                            tofu, almonds, leafy green vegetables.
stones)
                                         · Avoid foods high in oxalate: rhubarb, beets, potatoes.
                                         · Increase consumption of green and black tea.
                                         · Avoid high-fructose foods.
                                         · Phosphate stones: Limit sodium intake and nondairy

                                             animal protein.

Uric stones        Uric acid           · Avoid foods high in purines: red meat, shellfish, trout,
(up to 10% of                             scallops, alcohol, foods containing large amounts of
stones)                                   high fructose corn syrup.

                                       · Limit nondairy animal protein.
                                       · Ensure that gout is treated effectively.

TABLE 16.1 Renal Stone Composition and Nutritional Recommendations (sources: Dai & Patel, 2022; Ferraro et al., 2020; Karki & Leslie,
2023; Leslie et al., 2023; Levtchencko et al., 2022; Mobley et al., 2020)
326  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     Stone Type           Composition                          Food Modifications

     Struvite stones      Mixture of magnesium,                  · Restrict sodium: microwave meals, canned soups,
     (5%-15% of           ammonium, phosphate,                       canned meats, pizza, nuts, pickles, sandwich meats.
     stones)              and calcium carbonate
                                                                 · Limit intake of oxalate-rich foods.

     Cysteine stones      Cysteine                             · Increase consumption of fruits and vegetables.
     (1-2% of all stones                                       · Increase water intake to 4 L/day.
     but 6-8% of all                                           · Decrease sodium intake.
     pediatric stones)                                         · Limit nondairy animal protein.

     TABLE 16.1 Renal Stone Composition and Nutritional Recommendations (sources: Dai & Patel, 2022; Ferraro et al., 2020; Karki & Leslie,
     2023; Leslie et al., 2023; Levtchencko et al., 2022; Mobley et al., 2020)

     Chronic Kidney Disease
     Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects more than 31 million Americans, but many remain undiagnosed because the
     early stages are relatively asymptomatic (Mobley et al., 2020). Many things can cause CKD, but the most common
     causes are diabetes types 1 and 2 and hypertension, conditions that need to be managed correctly to slow disease
     progression. Nutrition plays a very important role in the health of clients with CKD, even if they advance to end-stage
     renal disease (ESRD) and require dialysis treatment or a renal transplant to sustain life.

     The stage of CKD is determined by GFR levels, which indicate how well the kidneys are filtering wastes from the
     blood. (See Table 15.2 in Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal Wellness.) Creatinine and blood
     urea nitrogen (BUN) levels are also monitored closely and change more as the kidneys progress toward failure.

     Nutritional restrictions are vital for clients with CKD. Referral to a certified renal dietician can ensure that clients are
     properly educated and that their nutritional needs are individualized to improve their quality and length of life.

     Foods high in calcium include cheese, yogurt, edamame, canned sardines, canned salmon, tofu, almonds, leafy
     green vegetables, and calcium-fortified foods. Foods high in magnesium include dark chocolate, avocados, nuts,
     legumes, tofu, seeds, whole grains, fatty fish, bananas, and leafy green vegetables.

     Phosphorus should be restricted to less than 800-1000 mg/day, protein to 0.6-0.8 g/kg/day, and potassium to less
     than 2000 mg/day (Mobley et al., 2020). Protein should come from lean sources as much as possible, which are
     those that come from low-fat, high-protein foods such as eggs and skinless chicken.

     For clients receiving dialysis treatments, strict fluid restriction is extremely important because gaining too much
     weight due to fluid retention in between treatments can cause serious side effects. The average fluid restriction for a
     client on dialysis is 32 oz daily (Fresenius Kidney Care, n.d.). Nurses should instruct clients that fluids are not just
     beverages and substances that are liquid at room temperature; this category also includes gelatin, ice cream, ice,
     ice chips, and soup.

        SAFETY ALERT

     Salt Substitutes

     Nurses should be sure clients are aware that when a low-sodium diet is required and sodium substitution is
     recommended, it is dangerous for them to use salt substitutes. These substitutes are made with potassium
     chloride, which can raise potassium to life-threatening levels. Instead, clients should check food labels for added
     sodium and flavor their food with herbs and other salt-free substitutes.

     Renal Cancer
     Renal cancer, or kidney cancer, occurs sporadically, but associations with aging, obesity, hypertension, smoking,
     acquired cystic kidney disease, and exposure to asbestos, cadmium, or petroleum have been observed (Mas Que
     Ideas Foundation, 2022). Most of the time, renal cancer is asymptomatic and found incidentally on an abdominal
     scan performed for other medical purposes; however, on occasion, a client may experience hematuria, an
     abdominal lump, or a symptom related to paraneoplastic syndrome, such as anemia, hypertension, weight loss,
     anorexia, or muscle wasting. Renal cancer will not necessarily cause immediate or automatic kidney failure.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Renal Illness                                                                                                327

Proper nutrition and nutritional modifications can help lower the risk for renal cancer, prevent adverse effects of
cancer treatments and medications, support the highest level of renal function possible, and maintain a client's life
expectancy after cancer remission.

Preventing renal cancer is the first priority. Eating grilled and pan-fried foods as well as red meats increases the risk,
so nurses should instruct clients to restrict or avoid these (Richards, 2022). Increased intake of vegetables, with
special emphasis on cruciferous vegetables, and foods containing vitamin C, such as citrus fruits, strawberries, bell
peppers, tomatoes, and white potatoes, shows promise for decreasing the risk for developing renal cancer (Liao et
al., 2022). High-fiber foods; foods rich in antioxidants such as vitamin E and selenium; and foods containing
phytochemicals, such as whole grains, may also reduce the risk (Thompson, 2023). See Figure 16.3.

FIGURE 16.3 A diet rich in cruciferous vegetables (purple cabbage), phytochemicals (quinoa), antioxidants (carrots), and vitamin C (bell
peppers and peas) may lower the risk for developing renal cancer. (credit: "Asian Quinoa salad food" by Watts/Flicker, Public Domain)

Nutritional changes can address adverse effects of cancer treatment. Many side effects of chemotherapy--such as
nausea and vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, constipation, flatus, bloating, weight loss, sore throat, gastrointestinal
problems, dysphagia, heartburn, dry mouth, mouth sores, and changes in taste and smell--make it difficult for the
individual to take in enough calories. Therefore, a nutrient-dense diet with sufficient calories, vitamins, and minerals
to ensure proper nutrition is important (Richards, 2022; Thompson, 2023). It should include whole foods, such as
fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limit foods high in salt and phosphorus (Richards, 2022). Fluid volume
status should be monitored because decreased kidney function may necessitate fluid restriction (Richards, 2022).
Nurses can suggest that clients with painful mouth sores avoid acidic or spicy foods, alcohol, and foods that are too
hot or too cold, and instead eat foods that are soft and easy to chew (Thompson, 2023).

Because of the eating issues that chemotherapy can cause, clients may better tolerate smaller, more frequent meals
and maybe even different food consistencies, such as soft, lightly mashed, or pureed foods (Richards, 2022). Brief
periods of fasting may even be beneficial during chemotherapy treatment because fasting can generate
environments in the body that make survival of cancer cells less likely and help normal cells resist the negative
effects of chemotherapy. These periods should be very short, and the client should eat calorie-rich, nutrient-dense
foods after fasting.

Another significant effect of chemotherapy is the risk for developing infection. Some nutritional precautions to lower
this risk include avoiding unpasteurized juice and dairy products as well as raw fish and raw meat (Richards, 2022).
Food preparation and storage are also important in infection prevention, so the nurse should educate the client on
appropriate methods.

In maintenance, a plant-based diet may improve survival after renal cancer (Richards, 2022). Because chronic
328  16 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

     inflammation has been shown to play a major role in cancer, and fruits and vegetables have strong anti-
     inflammatory properties, fruits and fiber-rich vegetables may have protective effects against renal cancer and its
     reoccurrence (Thompson, 2023). Since whole grains are high in fiber and contain antioxidants such as selenium and
     vitamin E as well as phytochemicals, they are also important nutritionally and may help prevent the occurrence and
     reoccurrence of renal cancer.

     Holistic Assessment of Cultural Considerations

     Most long-term kidney disease management is focused on CKD. Care of CKD starts with nutritional restrictions and
     treatment of any comorbidities to prevent disease progression, as the main goal is to prevent the need for dialysis
     (Satellite Healthcare, 2022). Some religious beliefs involve more restrictions in nutritional allowances and prevent
     the acceptance of dialysis or transplants, making it even more important for these clients to slow progression as
     much as possible for as long as possible.

     Nurses must be well versed in the nutritional and other care needs of these clients so they can properly educate
     them to holistically care for their disease as well as live within the confines of their religious and cultural beliefs.
     Treatment adherence, quality of life, and the self-care ability of clients with CKD and ESRD increase, and risks for
     complications decrease, when nurses are actively involved in clients' comprehensive care.

     Promotion of Food Security

     Food security must be addressed in all age groups to ensure renal health. The National Kidney Foundation has many
     partnerships with other organizations that are working on initiatives to address food insecurity, especially for
     individuals with special nutritional needs due to renal issues.

     Economic status and the accessibility of grocery stores can affect people's ability to obtain food. At least 33.2% of
     low-income individuals live more than a mile from the nearest grocery store (Economic Research Service, 2022).
     Older adults and individuals with mobility issues may have to rely on others to bring them food and therefore have
     even more limited food options. Having insufficient ways to obtain food from grocery stores because of
     transportation issues may lead some people to buy more fast food regardless of their health needs, as fast-food
     restaurants are often more numerous and easily accessed than grocery stores.

     Americans have access to a variety of government resources that can help them with food security issues. The Older
     Americans Act authorizes meal services and related services for those aged 60 and older, as well as their spouses,
     regardless of age. These services are provided in settings such as senior centers, churches, schools, and community
     centers, and meals can be delivered to individuals' homes if they have limited mobility (USDA, 2020, pp. 129-130).
     The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), commonly called food stamps, is a federally funded
     program that helps Americans with limited incomes obtain healthy foods and beverages during times of constrained
     resources (USDA, 2020, pp. 68, 90, 105, 120, 129). These same groups of people can take advantage of the
     Commodity Supplemental Food Program, which directly provides packaged food to older Americans with limited
     income via federally funded resources and distribution help from nonprofit organizations (USDA, 2020, p. 130). The
     Child and Adult Care Food Program is a federally funded program that provides reimbursement for food served to
     children and older adults cared for in after-school programs and day care centers, including adult day care (USDA,
     2020, pp. 68, 90, 130). The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
     provides specific healthy foods for women who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or postpartum and for children aged
     newborn to 5 years (USDA, 2020, pp. 68, 90, 120). The National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast
     Program provide low-income children with breakfast and lunch on school days, accounting for two-thirds of their
     daily caloric needs for those days (USDA, 2020, p. 90).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      16 · Chapter Summary 329

Chapter Summary

· Nutrition plays a large role in the developmental      promoting quality and length of life in clients with
   process of every organ in the body, including the     chronic renal illnesses.
   renal system.                                      · Many illnesses can be controlled or prevented with
                                                         proper nutritional modifications.
· The importance of nutrition for the renal system    · The most significant nutritional considerations for
   starts in utero and continues throughout the          the most serious diseases involving the renal
   individual's entire lifespan.                         system concern fluids, calories, protein,
                                                         potassium, sodium, calcium, and phosphorus.
· Normal nutritional needs are altered when renal or
   urologic alterations exist.

· Nutrition plays an extremely important role in

Key Terms

chronic kidney disease a progressive disease of the   enuresis bladder incontinence after the age of 3
    kidneys that eventually ends in kidney failure        years

cysteine an amino acid that contains sulfur           hyperoxaluria elevated amounts of oxalate in the
cystinuria a rare genetic condition in which              urine

    nephrolithiasis are made from cystine             nephrolithiasis kidney stones
dialysis purification of blood through means other    oligohydramnios very low to almost absent amniotic

    than the kidneys                                      fluid, which may be related to impaired or absent
dyspareunia painful sexual intercourse                    kidney function in the fetus

Review Questions

1. The nurse is caring for a client in the first trimester of pregnancy. Which assessment finding requires follow-
    up by the nurse?
     a. Decreased GFR
     b. Increased fluid retention
     c. Mild glycosuria
     d. Proteinuria

2. Which instruction would the nurse give to a client about nutrition during pregnancy?
     a. Eat 340 calories more each day in the first trimester.
     b. Start prenatal vitamins in the second trimester.
     c. Avoid or limit caffeine intake.
     d. Reduce fluid intake.

3. The nurse provides nutrition counseling to the parents of a child with CKD. Which nutritional restriction is
    most likely to affect growth and development?
     a. Potassium
     b. Sodium
     c. Fluids
     d. Protein

4. The nurse is educating a 14-year-old female adolescent with CKD and her parents about nutrition. Which
    recommended daily intake for iron should the nurse teach the adolescent and her parents?
     a. 7 mg/day
     b. 9 mg/day
     c. 12 mg/day
     d. 15 mg/day

5. The nurse is teaching a client about nutritional interventions for an overactive bladder. Which instruction
    should the nurse give the client?
     a. Avoid cola drinks.
330 16 · Suggested Reading

         b. Use artificial sweeteners instead of sugar.
         c. Reduce fiber intake.
         d. Avoid foods high in potassium.

    6. The nurse is providing discharge instructions to a client following the removal of a calcium kidney stone.
        Which instruction will the nurse give this client to prevent future stone formation?
         a. Avoid foods high in purine.
         b. Avoid foods high in oxalate.
         c. Restrict nondairy animal protein.
         d. Increase sodium intake.

    7. The nurse is completing a follow-up assessment of a client with a history of kidney stones. Which of the
        following dietary habits reported by the client indicates the need for additional instruction related to their
        kidney stone history?
         a. Drinks at least 2 L of fluid daily
         b. Eats a variety of fruits and vegetables
         c. Consumes a high-protein diet
         d. Drinks less than 6 oz of fruit juice each day

    8. The nurse is working at a community health fair, providing information about risk reduction for renal cancer.
        Which nutritional instruction will the nurse teach to reduce the risk for renal cancer?
         a. Increase intake of cruciferous vegetables.
         b. Increase intake of red meat.
         c. Eat more pan-fried foods.
         d. Cook meats on the grill.

    9. The nurse is developing a teaching plan for a client who has just entered stage 4 CKD. Which instruction will
        the nurse give the client?
         a. There are no restrictions on fluid intake.
         b. Reduce calcium intake.
         c. Restrict potassium intake.
         d. Increase magnesium intake.

  10. Which instruction should the nurse give a client with benign prostatic hypertrophy to reduce lower urinary
        tract symptoms?
         a. Increase intake of fresh fruits.
         b. Use butter rather than olive oil.
         c. Reduce intake of whole grains.
         d. Drink whole milk.

Suggested Reading

Allegaert, K., & Iacobelli, S. (2022). Editorial: The developing kidney: Perinatal aspects and relevance throughout
   life. Frontiers in Pediatrics, 10, 990854. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.990854

Kovesdy, C. (2022). Epidemiology of chronic kidney disease: An update 2022. Kidney International Supplements,
   12(1), 7-11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kisu.2021.11.003

National Kidney Foundation. (n.d.). Nutrition. https://www.kidney.org/nutrition

UNICEF. (2022, July 6). The state of food security and nutrition in the world 2022. Food and Agriculture
    Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural Development, United Nations Children's
    Fund, United Nations World Food Programme, World Health Organization. https://data.unicef.org/resources/
    sofi-2022/

UPMC. (2022). What to Eat on a Renal Diet. https://share.upmc.com/2022/05/renal-diet/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                16 · Suggested Reading 331

Verbitsky, M., Krishnamurthy, S., Krithivasan, P., Hughes, D., Khan, A., Marasa, M., Vena, N., Kholasa, P., Zhang, J.,
    Lim, T., Glessner, J., Weng, C., Shang, N., Shen, Y., Hripcsak, G., Hakonarson, H., Ionita-Laza, I., Levy, B., Kenny,
   E., ... Gharavi, A. (2023). Genomic disorders in CKD across the lifespan. Journal of the American Society of
   Nephrology, 34(4), 607-618. https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2022060725
332 16 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 17

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

FIGURE 17.1 Food ingestion, breakdown, absorption, and metabolism are critical to fuel the body for proper function. (credit: modification
of work "Close-up, a glass of cocktail with green fruit and fresh mint (https://openstax.org/r/wuestenigela)" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal System
17.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness
17.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness
17.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness
INTRODUCTION To stay nourished, humans must ingest food, digest it into smaller usable substances, absorb
what is digested into the body cells, and metabolize what is absorbed into usable energy. This chapter covers the
expected overall normal findings, the meaning of abnormal findings, and the importance of nutrition in gut health.
For detail regarding these processes and the ways to assess the gastrointestinal system properly for appropriate
functioning, see The Digestive Process.
Consider this case: We will be following Zekia Azan, a 56-year-old Jamaican American woman with a history of
Crohn's disease. She has an average of five or six watery stools daily despite therapy for her disease. She comes to
the outpatient clinic to be assessed after an exacerbation of her disease with increased diarrhea.
334  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     17.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal
     System

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 17.1.1 Recognize the normal function of the gastrointestinal system.
       · 17.1.2 Recognize cues of nutritional impact on the gastrointestinal system.
       · 17.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the gastrointestinal system.

     Normal Function of the Gastrointestinal System

     The gastrointestinal system comprises the organs in the upper gastrointestinal tract--the mouth, esophagus,
     stomach, and duodenum--and the organs in lower gastrointestinal tract--the small intestine, large intestine (or
     colon), rectum, and anus. The gastrointestinal system is aided by the teeth, tongue, salivary glands, and the
     pancreas, liver, and gallbladder, which are also known as ancillary digestive organs. The sensory system, the
     nervous system, the mucous membranes, and glands (digestive and adrenal) also have roles to play.

     There are four main functions of the gastrointestinal system: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and metabolism.
     Ingestion is the swallowing and absorbing of substances into the body. This process starts with the sensory organs
     before food even enters the oral cavity: The smell or sight of appealing food can trigger the salivary glands to release
     saliva. That process, combined with hunger, can increase the desire to ingest the food. Once the food is inside the
     mouth, its taste, sensed through the papillae on the tongue, can either encourage or inhibit its further ingestion.
     Foods that register an unappetizing taste encourage expulsion from the oral cavity.

     Digestion occurs when the body breaks down what is ingested into absorbable substances. This, too, starts in the
     oral cavity. The tongue and teeth start the digestion of food using mostly mechanical and some chemical processes
     known collectively as mastication. Mastication employs the use of the tongue for mechanical compression,
     abrasion, and distortion; secretion of mucins and lingual lipase, which assist in breaking down lipids; and
     manipulation to assist with movement during chewing and swallowing (Ogobuiro et al., 2023). The teeth are used
     strictly for mechanical processes during mastication as they cut, tear, grind, and chew food to break it down
     physically into smaller pieces.

     Chemical digestion and lubrication in the oral cavity to aid in food movement are accomplished by the tongue and
     salivary glands. There are three pairs of salivary glands in the mouth: the parotid glands, which release salivary
     amylase to break down complex carbohydrates; sublingual glands, which release a mucus secretion that acts as a
     buffer and a lubricant; and the submandibular glands, which release a mixture of salivary amylase, buffers, and
     glycoproteins called mucins (Figure 17.2) (Ogobuiro et al., 2023).

     The food is broken down and lubricated enough during mastication to be swallowed and moved to the next phase of
     digestion. The swallowing reflex is aided by the tongue, allowing food to travel down the esophagus via peristalsis
     and empty into the stomach through the lower esophageal sphincter.

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal System                                                      335

FIGURE 17.2 The salivary glands aid in chemical breakdown of food in the oral cavity. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and
Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Some digestion, both mechanical and chemical, occurs in the stomach, which also temporarily stores food. Food
exits the stomach as chyme, a blend of gastric juices and digested food particles. The stomach also synthesizes
proteins that are needed for vitamin absorption and microbial defenses, propagates the peristaltic reflex, and
releases intrinsic factor from the parietal cells, which enables the small intestine to absorb vitamin B12 (Hsu et al.,
2023). When chyme exits the stomach, simple carbohydrates have been digested. Larger molecules such as
complex carbohydrates, fats, and proteins have not yet been broken down.

The duodenum breaks down larger molecules. In the duodenum, at the sphincter of Oddi, there is a release of
digestive secretions by the ancillary organs (Ogobuiro et al., 2023), specifically from the gallbladder and the
pancreas. The pancreas releases active alpha-amylase, colipase, and lipase, and the gallbladder releases bile,
produced in the liver, to break down fats, proteins, and complex carbohydrates.

Absorption refers to the taking in of the broken-down substances into the cells. Very few substances are absorbed
by the stomach. The small intestine handles 90% of food absorption as food travels through its three segments, the
duodenum, jejunum, and ileum (Ogobuiro et al., 2023). The innermost layer of the mucosa of the small intestine is
composed of absorptive cells known as enterocytes, goblet cells, and enteroendocrine cells (Fish & Burns, 2022).
Enterocytes are effective at absorption because each one has around 3,000 microvilli that expand their available
surface area (Figure 17.3).
336  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     FIGURE 17.3 In the small intestine, goblet cells have microvilli to better absorb nutrients. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and
     Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The duodenum is the site for iron absorption and some vitamin B9 (folate) absorption, but the major site for vitamin
     B9 absorption is the jejunum (Fish & Burns, 2022). Minerals and vitamins A, D, E, and K are absorbed through the
     small intestine. The small intestine absorbs 90% of the water from digested food (Fish & Burns, 2022). The last
     segment of the small intestine, the ileum, is responsible for the absorption of bile salts and vitamin B12 (cobalamin;)
     (Fish and Burns, 2022). Each broken-down substance is now in a new, more usable form for use by the body's
     metabolic processes (Table 17.1).

     Macronutrient                    Before Digestion            After Digestion

     Carbohydrate:                    Amylose                     Monosaccharides
     polysaccharides (starchy
     foods)

     Carbohydrate: disaccharides      Lactose, sucrose, maltose,  Glucose, fructose, galactose
                                      trehalose

     Protein                          Large-chain amino acids     Separate amino acids and peptides
                                      joined by peptide bonds     (oligopeptides, dipeptides, tripeptides)

     Fat                              Triglycerides               Monoglycerides, fatty acids

     TABLE 17.1 Nutrients Before and After Digestion for the Body's Metabolic Use (source: Fish & Burns, 2022)

     The last part of the absorption process takes place in the large intestine. It has three main functions in digestion:
     absorption of the remaining water and electrolytes, absorption and production of vitamins, and formation and
     movement of feces to the rectum for elimination. The first portion of the large intestine, the ascending colon,
     removes any remaining water and key nutrients from the indigestible material passing through it while solidifying
     this waste to form stool.

     During this part of digestion, water osmosis causes absorption of the remaining water, sodium is absorbed via
     sodium channels, potassium absorption is regulated by its concentration in the lumen, and chloride and bicarbonate
     ions are exchanged. In addition, the large intestine houses trillions of bacteria, which produce many vitamins,
     including vitamin K, B vitamins, and biotin, through fermentation (Azzouz & Sharma, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                         17.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal System                              337

Metabolism refers to the chemical processes by which the body converts absorbed substances to energy. Catabolic
reactions release large amounts of protons, which are transported to mitochondria in the cells to produce adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), the body's chemical carrier of energy (Sanchez Lopez de Nava & Raja, 2022). An imbalance
between energy spent and energy used, or between anabolism and catabolism, can result in obesity or cachexia
(Sanchez Lopez de Nava & Raja, 2022). Obesity is clinically defined as an excessive or abnormal accumulation of fat
in the body that can increase an individual's health risks. Cachexia refers to muscle loss with or without fat mass
loss.

For these processes to take place effectively and provide balanced nutrition and appropriate energy, the individual
must first ingest the proper mix of the required nutrients and water.

Assessment of the Normal Gastrointestinal System

Assessment of the gastrointestinal organs and normal expected findings are explained in detail in The Digestive
Process. This section will cover expected physical assessment findings in clients who demonstrate normal
nutritional status. Overall normal physical assessment findings in addition to normal gastrointestinal organ-specific
findings can help confirm a fully functioning gastrointestinal system (Table 17.2).

Organ Assessed           Expected Findings
Lips
                           · Symmetric, soft, moist, smooth textured, uniform in color and with expected
                               color for race (pink for fairer-skinned and darker for darker-skinned
                               individuals), symmetrically contoured, symmetrically pursed when individual is
                               asked to purse the lips

Buccal mucosa and inner  · Uniform pink or freckled brown in darker-skinned individuals, moist (may be
lips                        slightly drier in older clients because of decreased salivation), glistening,
                            smooth, elastic texture

Gums                     · Moist and firm without retraction from the teeth; older clients may show some
                            hyperpigmentation and receding of the gumline

Tongue                   · Central resting position in the mouth but able to move freely; no tenderness,
                            swelling, or lesions; smooth with lateral margins and raised papillae (taste
                            buds); base should be smooth and prominent with veins and no ulcerations

Oropharynx               · Smooth and pink at the posterior wall; uvula midline at the back of the soft
                            palate and freely movable; tonsils (if present) smooth, colored appropriately for
                            race, of normal size (usually larger in children than in adults) or not visible,
                            without discharge; gag reflex present

Teeth                    · Smooth and white with shiny enamel; older adults may have teeth staining,
                            chipping, erosions, or abrasions due to the aging process and wearing of teeth;
                            older children and adults may have dental appliances; any dentures or bridges
                            should be smooth and intact
                            Expected number of teeth: adults, 32; children by the age of 3 years, 20;
                            children and young adults aged 6-20 years can have a varying number as they
                            lose primary teeth and gain permanent teeth; newborns should not have teeth

Soft palate and hard     · Light>Light pink or colored appropriately for race; the soft palate should be
palate                      smooth and the hard palate more irregularly textured; newborns may have
                            Epstein pearls, Bohn nodules, or gingival cysts

TABLE 17.2 Expected Normal Findings During Physical Assessment of the Gastrointestinal System (sources: Diaz de Ortiz & Mendez, 2022;
Gantan & Wiedrich, 2022; Mealie et al., 2022)
338  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     Organ Assessed                   Expected Findings
     Abdomen: inspection
                                        · Skin: intact, uniform in color and consistent with race, no ecchymosis or
                                            jaundice, silver-white striae (stretch marks) may be present (may be
                                            purple-pink in pregnant client), surgical scars may be present
                                            Flat, rounded but not distended or scaphoid (sunken); no protrusions or
                                            evidence of spleen or liver enlargement; no visible vascular patterns (except in
                                            pregnancy); respirations should cause symmetric movements of the abdomen;
                                            in very lean client, aortic pulsations may be visible at the epigastric area, and
                                            peristalsis may also be visible; umbilical stump should be present in newborns

     Abdomen: auscultation            · Bowel sounds present in all quadrants, low pitched and gurgling and occurring
                                         at a rate of 2-5 per minute, lasting from less than 1 second to several seconds
                                         each; no bruits or friction rub; no succussion splash

     Abdomen: percussion              · Dull, flat, or decreased sounds over organs; more tympanitic (louder and higher
                                         pitched) over areas of air or gas

     Abdomen: palpation               · No pain, crepitus, tenderness, bulging, masses, inflammation, or muscle
                                         guarding; deep palpation should reveal normal-sized organs without masses,
                                         nodules, or tenderness

     Anus                             · Skin intact, hairless, and slightly moister, coarser, and more pigmented than
                                         surrounding skin; patent anal canal

     Rectum                           · No masses or fissures; prostate in male client should be firm, smooth, not
                                         enlarged

     TABLE 17.2 Expected Normal Findings During Physical Assessment of the Gastrointestinal System (sources: Diaz de Ortiz & Mendez, 2022;
     Gantan & Wiedrich, 2022; Mealie et al., 2022)

     In addition to assessing individual organs, the nurse should conduct a general physical assessment, being alert for
     specific findings that indicate adequate nutrition (Table 17.3). Such findings also help demonstrate that the
     gastrointestinal system is functioning correctly.

     Feature Assessed                 Expected Findings

     General appearance               Alert, conscious, and ambulatory within the confines of client's ability; no general
                                      emaciation
     Height, weight, and body         Body mass index of 18.5-24.9 kg/m2; 30 and over is considered obesity, with Class
     mass index                       3 obesity being 40 or greater

     Vital signs                      Vital signs that fall within expected ranges can indicate good nutritional status, but
                                      many pathologies can affect vital signs without regard to nutrition. Blood pressure
                                      and pulse can indicate hydration status; low blood pressure (less than 90/60 mm
                                      Hg) and tachycardia (heart rate greater than 100 beats per minute) can indicate
                                      hypovolemia

     Eyes                             No pallor of the palpebral conjunctiva, icterus (yellowing) of the sclera, Bitot's
                                      spots (oval or triangular patches on the conjunctiva of built-up keratin), xerosis
                                      (dryness) of the cornea, or xanthelasmas (yellow plaques on or near the eyelids)

     Skin                             No xeroderma (dry skin), petechiae, purpura, ecchymosis, jaundice, carotenoderma

                                      (yellow-orange skin discoloration), poorly healing wounds, pigmentation or rashes

                                      in sun-exposed areas (such as around the neck or on the extremities, where

                                      pigmentation might look like gloves or stockings), xanthomas (localized lipid

                                      deposits), or loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue

     TABLE 17.3 Expected Normal Findings During General Physical Assessment (sources: Castera & Borhade, 2022; Cleveland Clinic, n.d.-b;
     Feroze & Kaufman, 2023; Johnson, 2021; Kesari & Noel, 2023; Rosenthal, 2020; Schneider & Gibbs, 2022; UPMC, n.d.)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                       17.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal System              339

Feature Assessed  Expected Findings

Hair              No dryness, brittleness, or unexpected discoloration; not easy to pluck; no patches

                  of baldness or extreme thinness

Nails             No dryness, brittleness, discoloration, clubbing, or koilonychia (soft nails that are
                  concave in the center and appear to be "scooped out")

Extremities       No edema, weakness, paresthesia, sensation loss, bowing, ulcerations, poorly
                  healing wounds, neuropathies, or muscle atrophy or wasting

Odor              No unusual odors; fruity acetone, musty, and sweet, burnt sugary odors can indicate
                  specific nutritional issues due to pathologies

Function          Ability to perform functions at the client's baseline for their age; deficits from

                  baseline or, in infants and children, delays in development, growth, or weight can

                  indicate poor nutritional status

TABLE 17.3 Expected Normal Findings During General Physical Assessment (sources: Castera & Borhade, 2022; Cleveland Clinic, n.d.-b;
Feroze & Kaufman, 2023; Johnson, 2021; Kesari & Noel, 2023; Rosenthal, 2020; Schneider & Gibbs, 2022; UPMC, n.d.)

Nutritional Deficiencies Related to Abnormal Assessment Findings in the Gastrointestinal
System

Abnormal findings in an assessment of the gastrointestinal system and other systems can indicate the presence of
disease or nutritional deficit. To best plan nutritional strategies for the client, the nurse should know what each
abnormal finding, in conjunction with laboratory results and dietary recall, could indicate. Some abnormal findings
and nutritional deficiencies and toxicities related to them are shown in Table 17.4.

Organ        Abnormal Findings                                     Nutritional Deficiency or Toxicity
Assessed

Lips         Fissures, crusts, or scales on the lips or in the     Deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin
Tongue       corners of the lips, cracked lips, angular cheilitis  B12 (cobalamin), and/or iron
             Inflammation of the tongue
                                                                   Deficiency of vitamin B2 (riboflavin) and/or
             Loss of taste                                         B3 (niacin)

                                                                   Deficiency of zinc

             Halitosis                                             Deficiency of vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
             Red, painful tongue that has a burning sensation      Deficiency of iron

Gums/        Ulcerative gingivitis                                 Deficiency of vitamin B2 (riboflavin) and/or
mouth                                                              B3 (niacin)
             Hemorrhagic gingivitis, painful mouth ulcers          Deficiency of vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
             Bleeding gingivitis                                   Deficiency of vitamin C

             Stomatitis (mouth inflammation)                       Deficiency of vitamin B complex

             Salivary gland dysfunction, dysphagia                 Deficiency of iron

             Recurrent aphthous stomatitis (canker sores)          Deficiency of zinc

Salivary     Dry salivary glands                                   Dehydration or iron deficiency
glands

Teeth        Pits, grooves, or missing areas in enamel of the      Deficiency of vitamin A
             teeth, giving teeth a translucent appearance

             Periodontal disease                                   Deficiency of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) and/or
             Abnormal bone patterns and shapes                     B12 (cobalamin)

                                                                   Deficiency of vitamin D

             Dental caries (cavities)                              Deficiency of vitamin D and/or fluoride

TABLE 17.4 Relationship of Abnormal Assessment Findings and Nutritional Deficiencies or Toxicities (sources: American Dental
Association, 2023; Cleveland Clinic, n.d.-a; Gold & Schoenhaus, 2023; Hakes, 2021; Johnson, 2022; Kesari & Noel, 2023; Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine, n.d.; Plewa & Chatterjee, 2022; Sawar et al., 2021; Stewart, n.d.)
340  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     Organ      Abnormal Findings                                  Nutritional Deficiency or Toxicity
     Assessed

     Oropharynx Recurrent tonsillitis                              Deficiency of vitamin D

                Pharyngitis                                        Deficiency of vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
                Inflammation of the hard and soft palates
                                                                   Deficiency of iron, vitamin B2 (riboflavin), B6
                                                                   (pyridoxine), B9 (folate), and/or B12
                                                                   (cobalamin), D, and zinc

     Abdomen    Constipation (hypoactive bowel sounds,             Deficiency of potassium, magnesium, vitamin
                decreased frequency of bowel movements, hard       B9 (folate), fiber, and/or fluid volume
                stools, straining with bowel movements,
                increased flatus, mild abdominal distention, mild
                abdominal tenderness)

                Diarrhea (hyperactive bowel sounds, increased      Deficiency of vitamin B3 (niacin) or excessive
                frequency of bowel movements, loose or watery      intake of potassium
                stools, increased flatus, abdominal tenderness,
                symptoms of fluid volume deficit from losses)

                Abdominal muscle pain and cramping                 Deficiency of magnesium, potassium,
                                                                   sodium, vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin D,
                                                                   and/or calcium

     Anus       Hemorrhoids and fissures (caused by chronic        Deficiency of fiber and/or fluid volume
                constipation and straining to pass stools)

     General    Loss of appetite                                   Deficiency of zinc
     appetite/  Weight loss
     weight                                                        Deficient caloric intake, protein deficiency, or
                                                                   impaired absorption

     Skin       Skin discoloration                                 Excessive intake of protein, carotene-
                                                                   containing foods, or supplements (vitamin A),
                                                                   causing diffuse hyperpigmentation, or
                                                                   excessive intake of both protein and zinc,
                                                                   causing carotenoderma

                Ecchymosis                                         Deficiency of vitamin C, vitamin K, or zinc

     Muscle     Muscle pain, cramps                                Deficiency of magnesium, potassium,
                                                                   sodium, vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin D,
                                                                   and/or calcium

     Eyes       Pallor                                             Deficiency of iron, protein, or vitamin B6
                                                                   (pyridoxine), B9 (folate), B12 (cobalamin), or
                                                                   C

                Bitot's spots, xerosis                             Deficiency of vitamin A

                Xanthelasmas                                       Excessive caloric intake, obesity, or
                                                                   hypercholesterolemia

     Hair       Dry hair                                           Deficiency of vitamin A or E

                Brittle hair                                       Deficiency of vitamin B7 (biotin)
                Discolored, easily pluckable hair; hair loss       Deficiency of protein or iron; overall severe
                                                                   malnutrition

     Nails      Dry and brittle nails                              Deficiency of vitamin B7 (biotin), zinc, or
                                                                   protein

                Nail discoloration                                 Overall poor nutritional status

     TABLE 17.4 Relationship of Abnormal Assessment Findings and Nutritional Deficiencies or Toxicities (sources: American Dental
     Association, 2023; Cleveland Clinic, n.d.-a; Gold & Schoenhaus, 2023; Hakes, 2021; Johnson, 2022; Kesari & Noel, 2023; Mount Sinai
     Icahn School of Medicine, n.d.; Plewa & Chatterjee, 2022; Sawar et al., 2021; Stewart, n.d.)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  17.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness            341

Organ     Abnormal Findings                       Nutritional Deficiency or Toxicity
Assessed

          Koilonychia                             Deficiency of iron, causing anemia

Extremities Edema                                 Deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine) or
                                                  protein; excessive sodium

          Paresthesia, muscle weakness            Deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine), B6
                                                  (pyridoxine), B12 (cobalamin), or E
          Loss of sensation                       Deficiency of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) or E
          Muscle atrophy and wasting              Severe malnutrition

          Bowing of the legs (caused by rickets)  Deficiency of vitamin D

TABLE 17.4 Relationship of Abnormal Assessment Findings and Nutritional Deficiencies or Toxicities (sources: American Dental
Association, 2023; Cleveland Clinic, n.d.-a; Gold & Schoenhaus, 2023; Hakes, 2021; Johnson, 2022; Kesari & Noel, 2023; Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine, n.d.; Plewa & Chatterjee, 2022; Sawar et al., 2021; Stewart, n.d.)

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Mrs. Azan tells the nurse that she has been having muscle weakness and cramping, abdominal pain, mouth and
tongue swelling, and sores in her mouth. When the nurse assesses Mrs. Azan, the nurse finds that she has angular
cheilitis, multiple canker sores in her buccal areas, a red and swollen tongue, and general pallor.

    1. Based on both the objective and subjective assessment findings, what would the nurse rule out as a potential
        deficiency being experienced by this client?
         a. Potassium
         b. Magnesium
         c. Vitamin B12
         d. Vitamin A

    2. Based on Mrs. Azan's presentation, which additional laboratory test should the nurse expect the health care
        provider to order?
         a. Iron
         b. Vitamin D
         c. Calcium
         d. Vitamin E

17.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 17.2.1 Prioritize nutritional habits that optimize gastrointestinal wellness.
  · 17.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize gastrointestinal wellness using nutritional habits.

Plan Nutritional Goals Based on Testing Results

Nutritional plans (meal plans) should be made with the client based on their specific signs and symptoms. This plan
may also include nutrient intake adjustments based on absorption requirements. Nutritional plans should include
any nutritional intake restrictions or additions for overall gastrointestinal health based on the client's specific needs.
In addition to the nutrients needed to avoid the deficiencies outlined in Table 17.4, the plan should include foods
known to be beneficial for the overall wellness of the gut's normal microbial growth and should be based on the
client's food preferences and dietary restrictions.
342  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     A common vitamin deficiency that displays with abnormal assessment findings is vitamin B. Vitamin B deficiencies
     that can be found, in order of most importance to the body for normal function, include:

       · B12 (cobalamin)
       · B1 (thiamine)
       · B2 (riboflavin)
       · B6 (pyridoxine)
       · B3 (niacin)
       · B9 (folate)
       · B7 (biotin)

     Several macro- and micronutrients can appear as abnormal assessment findings when deficient or toxic. They are
     listed as follows in order of importance for normal gastrointestinal function:

       · Iron
       · Zinc (deficiency and toxicity)
       · Vitamin D
       · Protein (deficiency and toxicity)
       · Vitamin C
       · Vitamin A (retinol)
       · Vitamin E
       · Magnesium
       · Potassium (deficiency and toxicity)
       · Sodium (deficiency and toxicity)
       · Fiber, calcium, fluids (water)
       · Phosphorus
       · Folate
       · Vitamin K
       · Fluoride
       · Calories (underconsumption and overconsumption)
       · Saturated fats (specifically for overconsumption only)

     The client may require enzyme replacement for digestion in the absence of a functioning liver, gallbladder, or
     pancreas.

     When the nurse is evaluating the client's diet to ensure healthy gut microbiota, dietary additions that might be
     considered include fiber, additional water, yogurt with active bacterial cultures, whole grains, fruits and vegetables,
     foods high in antioxidants, and probiotic and prebiotic foods (Afzaal et al., 2022; Gunnars, 2023; Lee et al., 2022;
     Weersma et al., 2020). Substances that should be restricted include saturated fats and trans fats, sodium, and
     alcohol (Afzaal et al., 2022).

          CLINICAL TIP

      Changes to a Client's Nutritional Intake

       Before the dietitian or nurse makes any recommendations to add or restrict anything from the client's nutritional
       intake, laboratory tests should be done to confirm what the physical assessment indicates. Once that testing is
       completed, the nutritional plan can be established.

     Nurses must also understand the synergistic relationships between certain nutrients so they can plan interventions
     to optimize nutritional progress. For example, if a client is iron deficient, an acidic environment will increase iron
     absorption, which can be achieved by adding vitamin C to the diet (Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 2020a). An
     inability to absorb iron could be directly related to a problem in the gastrointestinal system because most of the
     body's iron absorption occurs in the duodenum and proximal jejunum, so adding vitamin C to the client's diet would
     be crucial to correct their deficiency (Ems et al., 2023). There are also inhibitory effects to be aware of; calcium,
     phytates, and polyphenols, for example, can reduce iron availability.

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness                                                343

The inability to absorb nutrients is concerning when the client has gastrointestinal disease. Their nutritional plan will
include supplementation and higher nutritional intake levels than for a healthy client. A client with a gastrointestinal
disorder may eventually require injectable forms of vitamins to stay healthy if they cannot absorb them adequately
through oral ingestion. To best prepare a nutritional plan with the client, the nurse must consider the client's food
preferences and cultural practices.

Identify Challenges to Nutritional Goals

A client may face several challenges when trying to achieve their nutritional goals for gastrointestinal health. The
first is malabsorption. Even when the client adheres to the nutritional plan of care, their body may be unable to
absorb the nutrients provided in their oral intake. Many gastrointestinal diseases can cause these issues (refer to
Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health for greater detail on gastrointestinal diseases). To
address such deficiencies, the dietitian, nurse, and health care provider must work closely with the client to monitor
laboratory results and add supplementation in oral, enteral (feeding tube), and parenteral forms as needed to reach
nutritional goals.

Another challenge that may be encountered is the presence of food allergies or comorbidities. Many foods contain
allergens, such as eggs, milk, red meat, nuts, wheat/barley/rye (gluten), shellfish, and citrus fruits. Comorbidities
present a concern because if the client already has multiple nutritional restrictions due to other illnesses, such as
diabetes, hypertension, or chronic kidney disease, fewer food options may be available to them. In addition, the
client may be less motivated or able to follow a nutritional plan the more restrictive it becomes.

The final challenge to consider is the side effects of the gastrointestinal disease processes a client may be
experiencing. When a client has a gastrointestinal disease, they may be dealing with nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
and/or diarrhea. These issues may cause the client to be unable to consume food or to absorb enough nutrients
from what they do consume. For a client with these issues to be successful with their nutritional goals, the health
care provider, dietician, and nurse will need to address these issues, and the nutritional plan will need to include
foods that do not aggravate the client's conditions.

17.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 17.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
  · 17.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize gastrointestinal wellness.

Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

The exact foods included in a nutritional plan should be personalized to each client. Caring for the client holistically
requires the nutritional plan to evolve based on the client's dietary requirements. A holistic nutritional plan should
include food items that are appropriate based on the client's religious, cultural, and personal beliefs. For example,
some religions forbid a single type of meat or all meat. In this case, the nutritional plan should include reasonable
meat and nonmeat options, such as quinoa or pumpkin seeds, as appropriate to ensure proper protein intake.

Client Teaching

Client teaching for gastrointestinal health should focus not only on general health but also on the specific nutrients
known to improve the health of the gastrointestinal system, as discussed in this chapter. Teaching should begin by
determining nutritional goals and setting a plan with the client. A registered dietician should be consulted to ensure
that the nutritional plan is appropriate for all the client's needs, including any restrictions. The nurse should ensure
that the client understands the education and the plan developed with the dietician and should routinely follow up
to make sure the client is following this plan. The client must be an active part of this process so that the registered
dietician and nurse can determine if there is a lack of understanding. Active participation also gives the client a
chance to verbalize any specific food dislikes or barriers they may have in obtaining certain types of foods.

The nurse should ask the client to use the information they were taught to create a 3-day meal plan that includes
breakfast, lunch, dinner, snacks, and beverages. The client and the nurse can then sit down together and discuss
good choices and not-so-good choices the client may have made for each meal. This practice allows active learning
344  17 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Gastrointestinal Wellness

     for the client and is one way to evaluate the client's understanding of the nutritional plan.

     17.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 17.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effect on gastrointestinal wellness.
       · 17.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote gastrointestinal wellness.

     Evaluation of the Client's Adherence to the Meal Plan

     After a nutritional plan has been in place for at least 3 months, its effectiveness should be evaluated. The client's
     ability to follow the plan must first be established before the plan is modified. If a client is not able to follow the plan
     as prescribed, then changes need to be made based on the client's unique reasons for nonadherence.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Mrs. Azan returns to the clinic several months later after meeting with the registered dietician to make dietary
     modifications. She has been taking her prescribed supplements. Although her previous signs and symptoms have
     resolved, she is now presenting with unplanned weight loss; pallor; dry, brittle nails; hair loss; edema in the legs;
     and muscle weakness.

         3. What does the nurse recognize as a potential deficiency with these new presenting symptoms?
              a. Vitamin C
              b. Magnesium
              c. Iron
              d. Protein

         4. Mrs. Azan states that she has decided to follow a vegetarian diet. Which of the following food choices can the
             nurse recommend for this diet because it is a high-protein source?
              a. Carrots
              b. Quinoa
              c. Corn
              d. Whole grain bread

     Evaluation of the Effectiveness of a Nutritional Plan

     After it is established that the client is adhering to their nutritional plan, evaluating the effectiveness of the plan
     requires checking laboratory results and watching trends as well as performing physical reassessments. If the plan
     is not effective, adjustments should be made based on the cause of ineffectiveness.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part C

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Parts A and B.

     Mrs. Azan has returned for her follow-up appointment. It has been 3 months since her last visit. Blood levels were
     redrawn a week ago, and the results show that vitamin B12, magnesium, and potassium have stabilized to a low
     normal range, but iron is still very low. The laboratory tests ordered also show that Mrs. Azan's calcium and vitamin
     D levels are low now despite being normal previously. The 72-hour recall the client reports is consistent with the

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Gastrointestinal Wellness                                          345

nutritional goals and education given, and she says she has been following the plan closely. Her food choices are
diverse enough to ensure that the calcium and vitamin D levels should not have decreased.

    5. Given the results, what should the nurse conclude about the effectiveness of the nutritional plan?
         a. It is effective, but the client is nonadherent.
         b. It is effective, but the client is not documenting her food intake correctly.
         c. It is ineffective because the client cannot comprehend the instructions well enough.
         d. It is ineffective because the client's Crohn's disease is preventing absorption.

    6. Based on the findings, how should the nurse expect the nutritional plan to be modified?
         a. There will be no changes because the client has a chronic condition that cannot be cured.
         b. The amount of food to be consumed will be increased.
         c. Supplementation, either enteral (feeding tube) or parenteral, will be initiated.
         d. There will be no changes; instead, the client will be reeducated about the current plan to improve its
              effectiveness.
346 17 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

· The gastrointestinal system has four main                of vitamins, and formation and movement of feces
   functions: ingestion, digestion, absorption, and        to the rectum for elimination.
   metabolization.                                      · The first portion of the large intestine, the
                                                           ascending colon, removes any remaining water
· The small intestine handles 90% of nutrient and          and key nutrients from the indigestible material
   water absorption.                                       that passes through it, while solidifying this waste
                                                           to form stool.
· The duodenum is the site for iron absorption and      · The nutritional plan for clients with
   some vitamin B9 (folate) absorption, but the major      gastrointestinal diseases will include
   site for vitamin B9 absorption is the jejunum.          supplementation and higher nutritional intake
                                                           levels than for a healthy client.
· Minerals and vitamins A, D, E, and K are absorbed     · Challenges to nutritional goals include
   by the small intestine.                                 malabsorption, food allergies, comorbidities, and
                                                           side effects of the gastrointestinal disease
· The last segment of the small intestine, the ileum,      processes.
   is responsible for the absorption of bile salts and
   vitamin B12 (cobalamin).

· The large intestine has three main functions in
   digestion overall: absorption of the remaining
   water and electrolytes, absorption and production

Key Terms

absorption the taking in of broken-down substances      koilonychia soft nails with a concave indentation,
    into the cells                                          making them appear "scooped out"

Bitot's spots oval or triangular patches on the         mastication digestion of food using mostly
    conjunctiva of built-up keratin                         mechanical and some chemical processes

chyme gastric juices and digested food particles        metabolism the chemical processes in the body that
digestion the process by which the body breaks down         convert absorbed substances to energy

    what is ingested into absorbable substances         xanthelasmas yellow plaques on or near the eyelids
icterus another word for jaundice, a yellowish          xanthomas localized lipid deposits
                                                        xeroderma dry skin
    pigmentation of the skin                            xerosis extreme dryness of skin or tissue; in corneal
ingestion the taking in of substances into the body
                                                            xerosis, the cornea may appear hazy
    through swallowing or transdermal absorption

Review Questions

1. The nurse is assessing a client who has poor dentition. Which function of the gastrointestinal system will be
    affected most by this?
     a. Ingestion
     b. Digestion
     c. Absorption
     d. Metabolism

2. The nurse is assessing a client for gastrointestinal wellness. Which action should the nurse complete to
    assess the gastrointestinal system?
     a. Auscultate the lungs.
     b. Inspect the nares.
     c. Palpate the abdomen.
     d. Percuss the thorax.

3. The nurse is assessing a client for gastrointestinal wellness. Which finding could indicate a vitamin
    deficiency?
     a. Cyanotic lips
     b. Angular cheilitis
     c. Abdominal tenderness
     d. Diaphoretic skin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                17 · Suggested Reading 347

    4. The nurse prioritizes the nutritional content of clients' meal options when planning their care. Which protein
        option is best for clients of the Buddhist faith who are vegetarians?
         a. Broccoli
         b. Fish
         c. Tofu
         d. Whole wheat bread

    5. The nurse is caring for a client with a protein and iron deficiency who is allergic to beef. Which is the best
        alternative for the nurse to suggest?
         a. Edamame
         b. Milk
         c. Cheese
         d. Okra

    6. The nurse is providing dietary instruction to a client who needs to eat foods that support the gut's normal
        microbial growth. Which of the following statements indicates that the client understands the education?
         a. "I will drink at least a liter of water every day."
         b. "I will eat yogurt every morning with my breakfast."
         c. "I will make sure I eat protein at every meal."
         d. "I will drink an extra glass of milk every day."

    7. The nurse is working with a client with an iron deficiency. Which of the following foods would increase iron
        absorption?
         a. Whole milk
         b. Whole grain toast
         c. Scrambled eggs
         d. Fresh orange

    8. The nurse is preparing a client's nutritional plan for increasing their iron intake. Which vitamin should the
        nurse include?
         a. Vitamin A
         b. Vitamin C
         c. Vitamin E
         d. Vitamin D

    9. The nurse is reviewing a client's laboratory results and notices there has been little progress in raising the
        client's vitamin K level. Which assessment finding can the nurse directly relate to this continued deficiency?
         a. Pharyngitis
         b. Ecchymosis
         c. Skin dryness
         d. Weight loss

  10. The nurse is caring for a vegan client who is having difficulty eating enough protein. Which food item is
        appropriate for the nurse to recommend to this client?
         a. Quinoa
         b. Fish
         c. Eggs
         d. Carrots

Suggested Reading

Butts, M., Sundaram, V., Murughiyan, U., Borthakur, A., & Singh, S. (2023). The influence of alcohol consumption on
   intestinal nutrient absorption: A comprehensive review. Nutrients, 15(7), 1571. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu15071571
348 17 · Suggested Reading

Codutti, A., Cremer, J., & Alim, K. (2022). Changing flows balance nutrient absorption and bacterial growth along the
   gut. Physical Review Letters, 129, 138101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.138101.

Kitchens, R. (2023, February 2). Health headlines: Researchers calling vitamin D deficiency "invisible epidemic."
    KPLC News. https://www.kplctv.com/2023/02/02/health-headlines-researchers-calling-vitamin-d-deficiency-
    invisible-epidemic/

O'Connor, A. (2022, September 20). The best foods to feed your gut microbiome. The Washington Post.
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/wellness/2022/09/20/gut-health-microbiome-best-foods/

Omprakash, T. A. (2023, February 24). Key takeaways from Crohn's and Colitis Congress 2023. Crohn's and Colitis
    Foundation. https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/blog/key-takeaways-crohns-colitis-congress-2023

World Health Organization. (2023). Micronutrients. https://www.who.int/health-topics/micronutrients#tab=tab_1

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 18

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Gastrointestinal Health

FIGURE 18.1 Nutritional intake starts with the gastrointestinal system, and the types of foods consumed have a direct impact on overall
health. (credit: modification of work "mushrooms with lentils-3" by jules/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
18.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan
18.2 Nutrition and Chronic Gastrointestinal Illnesses
18.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION The gastrointestinal system is vital to the overall health of the body. The ability of this system to
function optimally depends not only on the absence of illness but on the proper development of this system
throughout the lifespan. This chapter will examine the nutritional requirements needed at each stage of life to assist
this system in developing to its optimal capacity. It will also review illnesses that impact this system.
Consider this case: The client--unborn at the start of this chapter's case study--is Bao Nhung. The client's mother,
Hien Nhung, is a 23-year-old first-generation Vietnamese American who works as a medical-surgical nurse on the
night shift at the local hospital. The client's mother works long nights, and the pregnancy was unplanned. Hien has
not received any prenatal care during the pregnancy.
350  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     18.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the
     Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 18.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during pregnancy.
       · 18.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during infancy.
       · 18.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during childhood.
       · 18.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during adolescence.
       · 18.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during adulthood.
       · 18.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the gastrointestinal system during later adulthood.

     Pregnancy

     Pregnancy adds nutritional needs to the pregnant client that were not required before conception, and the client's
     gastrointestinal health can impact the pregnancy even if they were healthy at the start. When a pregnant client has a
     gastrointestinal system illness, the stress of the pregnancy only adds to their nutritional needs. It is important that
     the expectant client maintain optimal nutrition during the pregnancy to ensure proper gastrointestinal development
     of the fetus as well.

     The Healthy Pregnant Client
     The healthy pregnant client without gastrointestinal illness should maintain a healthy diet and increase their caloric
     intake by 340 calories from their non-pregnant caloric intake amount daily starting the second trimester of a
     singleton fetal pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2023). During the third trimester,
     the caloric intake should increase by 450 calories from their non-pregnant caloric intake amount daily (Office of
     Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2023). Other recommendations for pregnancy include increasing water
     intake, decreasing caffeine intake, and adding a prenatal multivitamin with folic acid and iron (American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2022). It is also recommended that the pregnant client consume food and drinks
     that are low in added sugars, saturated fats, and sodium (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2023.
     Pregnant clients can follow the recommendations found using My Pregnancy Plate to ensure that they are eating
     well for their pregnancy (Oregon Health and Science University, 2023).

     Specific recommendations can also be included to maintain the pregnant individual's gastrointestinal health and
     support fetal development. The microbiome, or collection of microorganisms that reside primarily in the
     gastrointestinal tract, needs to be maintained during pregnancy to maintain overall gastrointestinal health. The gut
     microbiome promotes immune function and intestinal homeostasis by reducing production of inflammatory
     mediators (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019), which encourages normal mucosal functioning. Normal mucosal function is
     needed to ensure optimal intestinal absorption of nutrients.

     Additions to the diet that can be recommended by those caring for the client include prebiotic and probiotic foods.
     Probiotic foods are nondigestible substances that stimulate the growth of "good" gut bacteria and include
     fermented foods that contain live bacteria and yeast, such as yogurt, miso, kefir, kimchi, and honey (Tabani &
     Olendzki, 2019). Prebiotic foods are foods that contain live microorganisms intended to maintain good gut bacteria
     and include garlic, onions, asparagus, leeks, and bran. See Figure 18.2.

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                                              351

FIGURE 18.2 Prebiotic foods like this grilled asparagus, which is also high in fiber, can promote gastrointestinal health during pregnancy.
(credit: "Ett par sparrisar och några bitar paprika på en klotgrill" By VisbyStar/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Another important addition for the gastrointestinal system during pregnancy is 25-35 g of fiber daily. Fiber, with
adequate water intake, helps to prevent constipation and hemorrhoid development, remove excess cholesterol in
the diet, and maintain the gut microbiome (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019). The pregnant client can obtain fiber from
barley, flaxseed, oats, lentils, and beans.

The microbiome can also be protected by limiting foods that contain lactose, wheat, corn, and refined sugars that
feed harmful bacteria in the gut (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019). These foods promote systemic inflammation and upset
the balance of the microbiome.

The fetus will develop their own microbiome based on the maternal microbiome during pregnancy, interaction with
the environment after birth, and the diet and lifestyle they develop after birth. Maternal dysbiosis, or an imbalance
in the microbiome that is associated with unhealthy conditions, can contribute to infant dysbiosis (Garcia-Montero
et al., 2023; Martinez et al., 2021). Reducing gluten-containing foods while pregnant can help increase the number
of Akkermansia muciniphila, Saccharibacteria (formerly known as TM7 bacteria), and Proteobacteria in the fetus,
reducing low-grade inflammation in the infant and the risk for developing diabetes (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019).

Infants exposed to unhealthy maternal microbiomes, especially in conjunction with unhealthy childhood diets, are
at increased risk for having lean (lower than optimal bacterial amounts), defective intestinal microbiota, which leads
to dysbiosis in the gut (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019). This can lead to dysfunction in genes that are active in both
glucose and lipid metabolism (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019). Infants exposed to an unhealthy maternal microbiome are
also more likely to have issues with immune system development, develop long-term health issues, and even be
predisposed to developing immune-modulated diseases and Crohn's disease, a chronic inflammatory disease that
affects the intestines (UMass Chan Medical School, n.d.), particularly the colon and ileum, and can cause ulcerations
and fistulas.

The method of delivery can also affect the infant, regardless of the health of the mother's microbiome. When
delivered vaginally, the newborn develops a microbiome higher in Lactobacillus and Prevotella, which is similar to
the vaginal flora (Tabani & Olendzki, 2019). Newborns born via cesarean section will have higher levels of
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium, more similar to the mother's skin flora, which increases
risk for developing dairy allergies (Zhang, et al., 2021).

Promotion of a healthy maternal gut microbiome may also prevent preeclampsia as it has been shown to play a role
in preeclampsia and decrease the risk for premature birth (Jin et al., 2022). This is important for the overall health
of the infant's gastrointestinal system because prematurity can result in immature development of this system.
352  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     The lactating client should continue to maintain their gut health to help prevent issues with their infant. Prebiotics in
     foods such as kefir consumed by lactating women have been shown to reduce infant risks for developing colic,
     allergies, and other gastrointestinal problems (Garcia-Montero et al., 2023).

     The Pregnant Client With Preexisting Gastrointestinal illness
     Diseases that can heavily affect the nutritional status of the pregnant client and fetus include Crohn's disease;
     ulcerative colitis (UC), an inflammatory disease that causes ulcerations in the superficial lining of the large
     intestine; cholelithiasis; gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); pancreatic insufficiency; and diabetes types 1 and
     2 (Balestrieri et al., 2020; Lifespan Health System, n.d.) .When the pregnant client already has a gastrointestinal
     illness, eating properly for the health of the pregnancy becomes more difficult because intestinal absorption may
     not be optimal.

     Gastrointestinal issues that arise in an uncomplicated pregnancy can pose additional problems for these clients.
     Conditions such as nausea, vomiting, constipation, heartburn, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, and hyperemesis gravidarum
     (persistent and severe vomiting caused by pregnancy that can lead to weight loss and dehydration) can worsen
     these clients' ability to absorb and metabolize nutrients.

     Managing gastrointestinal issues that commonly occur during pregnancy can help alleviate some of the additional
     burden placed on these clients. Interventions commonly used during a healthy pregnancy include a healthy diet,
     increased fluids, and exercise, with medications usually reserved as a last resort. However, the usual treatments will
     not always address the underlying chronic issues in clients with preexisting conditions, who may need to be initially
     treated with more advanced treatments, including medication.

     These clients face will likely be advised to stop the suppressive medications they take to keep their chronic
     condition under control. Clients with GERD may have to be switched to less effective medications such as calcium
     carbonate to manage symptoms during pregnancy. Cholelithiasis can be manageable during pregnancy provided it
     does not cause infection or cholecystitis. Even if the gallbladder loses the ability to release enough of the needed
     digestive enzymes due to this condition, clients can be treated with supplemental enzymes.

     The gastrointestinal issues that pose the greatest threat to the health of the pregnancy are Crohn's disease and UC.
     The medications used to treat these may be stopped due to fetal risks. Clients with these diseases are at higher risk
     for iron (Mahadevan et al., 2019), vitamin D, and vitamin B12 (Mahadevan et al., 2019) deficiency during pregnancy
     due to malabsorption, a digestive disorder that causes the body not to absorb nutrients from food effectively, which
     occurs because of the inflammation process these illnesses cause. These clients will also be higher risk for folate
     deficiency during exacerbation periods due to the need for a low-residue diet during this time, as well as the
     potential for ileal involvement or the need to take medications that interfere with folic acid absorption (Mahadevan
     et al., 2019). Due to these issues, supplementation is imperative, and serum levels should be monitored for iron,
     vitamin D, and vitamin B12 (Balestrieri, 2020). Although iron supplementation is necessary, it can also increase the
     risks for constipation and abdominal pain (Mahadevan et al., 2019). These clients should be educated about
     increasing water intake and using acceptable laxatives during pregnancy.

     During pregnancy, these clients should be followed closely by a gastroenterologist. There are significant risks to the
     fetus because these diseases can impact fetal development. These clients have a greater risk for miscarriage,
     preeclampsia, poor maternal weight gain, placenta abruption, premature delivery, cesarean delivery, birth of a
     small-for-gestational-age newborn, and other delivery complications (Mahadevan et al., 2019).

     Diet recommendations for clients with Crohn's disease or UC are the same during pregnancy. These clients should
     be educated about additional needs of the pregnancy in conjunction with the requirements for their diagnosis for
     maintaining gut microbiome health. These clients need to avoid trigger foods. Although such foods may be different
     for each individual, common triggers include (Crohn's and Colitis Foundation, n.d.):

       · Foods high in insoluble fiber (raw kale, apple skins, sunflower seeds)
       · High-fiber foods (cabbage, asparagus, cauliflower)
       · High-lactose foods (cow's milk, ice cream, custard)
       · Sugar alcohols and artificial sweeteners (sorbitol, saccharin, aspartame)
       · Sugary foods and foods with added sugars (cookies, pastries, syrup)
       · High-fat foods (butter, cheesy foods, fried foods)

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                           353

  · Spicy foods (sriracha, chili powder)
  · Alcohol
  · Caffeine (soda, tea, coffee)
  · Sugar-sweetened beverages (soda, juices, drinks with syrup)

These clients should also avoid foods that can increase, or play a role in, intestinal inflammation (Crohn's and Colitis
Foundation, n.d.):

  · Red meat (beef, lamb, pork, bison)
  · Processed meat (lunch/deli meat, bacon, hot dogs)
  · Coconut oil, dairy fats, palm oil
  · Processed foods containing the following additives may also play a role: carboxymethylcellulose,

      polysorbate-80, carrageenan, maltodextrin, titanium dioxide, sulfates, guar gum

Some foods can be increased in the diet to decrease inflammation (Crohn's and Colitis Foundation, n.d.):

  · Fruits (bananas, raspberries, applesauce, blended fruit)
  · Vegetables (squashes, green beans, fork-tender cooked carrots)
  · Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids (fatty fish [salmon, tuna, mackerel], walnut butter, chia seeds, flaxseed oil,

      flaxseed meal)
  · Cooked and cooled or reheated starches (potatoes, sweet potatoes, rice, oatmeal) to form retrograde starch

      (Bedosky, 2022)
  · Leafy green vegetables

The Fetus
A pregnant client with preexisting gastrointestinal disease should closely follow the prescribed dietary
recommendations. Adherence will decrease the chances of fetal underdevelopment or premature delivery, which
can have lifelong effects for the child.

The fetus's gastrointestinal system begins development at 3 weeks' gestation and continues to mature through the
third trimester up to 32 weeks (Bhatia, Shatanof, and Bordoni, 2023). The pregnant client's nutritional intake is the
sole source of fetal nutrition, so they should eat foods that are necessary for proper fetal development. Folic acid,
iron, calcium, vitamin D, DHEA, and iodine all play vital roles in this development (Getz, 2022). The nurse can
educate the pregnant client about specific foods to ensure that their fetus will get these needed nutrients (Table
18.1).
354  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     Nutrient    Foods
     Folic acid
                   · Dark green leafy vegetables
                   · Beans
                   · Peanuts
                   · Sunflower seeds
                   · Fresh fruits, fruit juices
                   · Whole grains
                   · Liver
                   · Eggs
                   · Fortified foods

     Iron        · Red meats

                 · Fish and shellfish

                 · Eggs

                 · Nuts

                 · Dried fruit

                 · Whole-grain pasta and bread

                 · Iron-fortified bread and breakfast cereals

                 · Legumes

                 · Dark green leafy vegetables

                 · Oats

                 · Tofu

     Calcium     · Seeds
                 · Cheese
                 · Yogurt
                 · Sardines and canned salmon
                 · Beans and lentils
                 · Almonds
                 · Whey protein

     Vitamin D   · Cod liver oil
                 · Salmon
                 · Swordfish
                 · Tuna fish
                 · Orange juice fortified with vitamin D
                 · Dairy and plant milks fortified with vitamin D
                 · Sardines
                 · Beef liver

     DHEA        · Wild yams are the only food that contains anything similar to DHEA.
                 · DHEA is made naturally in the adrenal glands.

     TABLE 18.1 Foods for Proper Development of the Fetal Gastrointestinal System (source: Getz, 2022)

     Infancy

     In infancy, nutrition needed for the health of the gastrointestinal tract depends on whether the infant has any
     congenital abnormalities or early diagnosed illnesses related to the gastrointestinal system. Healthy eating patterns
     that start with the introduction of solid foods constitute the best start a parent can give their child to ensure the
     future of their gastrointestinal health because early eating patterns are often carried throughout an individual's life.
     This is true for all infants regardless of the presence or absence of gastrointestinal issues.

     The Healthy Infant
     It is extremely important to optimize nutrition during infancy for proper growth and development of the
     gastrointestinal system because this period in life involves very rapid growth. Infants who were born prematurely or

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan                                          355

had a low birth weight and have continued undernutrition, even in the absence of gastrointestinal illness or
abnormality, require additional nutrition to ensure proper growth and development because they are at much higher
risk for developing postnatal growth failure, failure to thrive, childhood obesity, and diabetes. They also have a
higher mortality risk in the future. These increased risks may be a result of having a low birth weight and rapidly
gaining weight as a compensatory measure (Patel & Rouster, 2023). For example, a healthy term infant requires 100
kcal/kg/day, but a preterm or low birth weight infant requires 110-135 kcal/kg/day to establish a healthy growth
and development pattern (Patel & Rouster, 2023). (Note: The use of "kcal" matches the wording in the source
material and, for the purpose of this chapter, is the same as "cal.")

The nutrition infants receive comes primarily from breast milk or formula. Protein provided in their diet is needed for
proper growth and system development and should be 15% of their daily intake (Patel & Rouster, 2023). Breast milk
is a more nutritious option because the protein is more bioavailable than the cow's milk or soy protein in infant
formula, allowing for greater absorption.

     SAFETY ALERT

 Infant Formula

  Infant formula in concentrated forms (both powder and liquid forms) should be mixed as instructed, using the
  appropriate measurements of formula concentrate and water. Adding additional water to formula concentrate
  can be dangerous because the resulting diluted formula can lead to suboptimal caloric intake and electrolyte and
  mineral imbalances. Suboptimal caloric intake can slow growth and development, and imbalances in electrolytes
  and minerals can cause serious health problems, including seizures, and can also lead to death. (source: Abrams,
  2022).

Carbohydrates should be 40-55% of an infant's daily intake. Carbohydrates are used for energy and must be
provided in correct amounts because the body will use protein for energy when not enough carbohydrates are
available (Patel & Rouster, 2023). Another portion of daily intake comes from fats (lipids), which also provide energy
to the body. Low birth weight and premature infants may require higher amounts of carbohydrates and lipids
because they lack sufficient body fat stores. One reason breast milk has been shown to be a healthier option for
infants is because it contains higher levels of medium and short-chain triglycerides, which are easier to absorb
(Patel & Rouster, 2023) than long chain fatty acids found in formula. When infants are born too early to have
developed a proper sucking reflex, it may be necessary for the breastfeeding parent to pump breast milk for feeding
via nasogastric or orogastric tube.

Micronutrients are also needed to ensure the health of the gastrointestinal system. These trace elements, absorbed
in the gastrointestinal tract, require age-, weight-, and disease-specific adjustments to ensure proper nutrition
(Patel & Rouster, 2023). Of these micronutrients, preterm and low birth weight infants require higher levels of iron,
zinc, and copper than healthy full-term infants do.

The Infant with Gastrointestinal Abnormalities
Infants with gastrointestinal system illness or abnormality require individualized nutritional considerations to
ensure that they grow and develop properly. This is especially true when the gastrointestinal issue causes
malabsorption. These infants require similar amounts of macronutrients but may become deficient in micronutrients
more easily due to malabsorption.

Breast milk has a higher content of more easily absorbed, more bioavailable forms of proteins and fats, making it the
optimal choice for infants, especially those with gastrointestinal issues. If the absorption issues do not allow
nutritional needs to be met, the infant may require parenteral nutrition for healthy development until the issue can
be controlled. Parenteral nutrition does put the infant at higher risk for toxicity from micronutrients. This makes it
imperative that the infant be transitioned to enteral feedings as soon as possible and monitored closely for toxicity.

Iron is not needed in higher concentrations in infant with GI abnormalities unless they are preterm or are
specifically not absorbing the appropriate amounts, as absorption occurs in the duodenum and proximal jejunum
(Patel & Rouster, 2023). Infants with short bowel syndrome, a group of problems related to ineffective absorption
of nutrients, or with congenital abnormality of zinc absorption are at highest risk for zinc deficiency. They may
356  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     require higher amounts of zinc in their diet (Patel & Rouster, 2023).

     Although large amounts of selenium are not recommended, it is important that premature infants and infants with
     gastrointestinal issues receive optimal amounts. Selenium is an antioxidant that reduces a wide range of
     inflammatory issues such as necrotizing enterocolitis (Patel & Rouster, 2023), an intestinal tract disease in which
     the intestinal lining becomes inflamed and dies and then is sloughed off.

     Breastfeeding is the optimal source of nutrients for infants, but it is even more important for infants with
     gastrointestinal issues the first year of life. Breastfeeding reduces risks for diarrhea, food allergies, inflammatory
     bowel disease, obesity, and diabetes (Patel & Rouster, 2023).

          SAFETY ALERT

      Contraindication for Breastfeeding

       Breastfeeding is contraindicated in infants with galactosemia, a genetic disorder in which the
       galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GALT) enzyme is missing or does not function properly (Patel &
       Rouster, 2023). This enzyme, produced in the liver, is needed to break down galactose, a sugar by-product of
       lactose, into glucose. It is found in breast milk, cow's milk, and other dairy foods. These infants must be on a
       lactose-free diet. All infants born in the United States are tested for galactosemia through mandatory blood
       testing soon after birth.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part A

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
     throughout the chapter.

     Hein Nhung has had a difficult pregnancy. She has experienced hyperemesis gravidarum and worsening of her
     gastroesophageal reflux disease. Because of her inability to gain the recommended amount of weight and to
     consume nutrient-rich foods during the pregnancy, Hein's gut microbiome has severely changed. These difficulties
     contributed to her baby, Bao Nhung, being delivered at 37 weeks' gestation, with a low birth weight for age.

         1. Which nutritional option would be best for the nurse to recommend to promote Bao's gastrointestinal health?
              a. Breastfeeding
              b. Parenteral nutrition
              c. High-calorie formula
              d. Additional water to prevent constipation

         2. During testing, Bao is found to have a deficiency in galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase. Which change
             should the nurse expect in Bao's diet?
              a. None until later in life
              b. An increase in the number of breastfeedings daily
              c. A switch to a low-protein formula
              d. A switch to a lactose-free formula

     Childhood

     Solid foods should be introduced into the diet at 6 months of age. After 1 year of age, most of the infant's diet should
     be solid foods. It is important to initiate healthy eating patterns because many of the habits started during this time
     will continue throughout the lifespan. Proper nutritional practices will encourage healthy growth and development,
     resulting in a healthy gastrointestinal system.

     Young children tend to be extremely active and are growing, so they need high-energy foods, mostly from
     carbohydrates (Thomas, 2023). Children aged 5-10 years old require 1500-2000 kcal/day (Thomas, 2023). Their

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                18.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Gastrointestinal Wellness Across the Lifespan                      357

daily diet should contain appropriately sized portions of 5 or 6 servings of vegetables (in a mix of colors and
including both leafy and nonleafy vegetables) and fruits (of different varieties), 4-6 servings of whole grains, 1 or 2
servings of protein (lean meat, fish, nuts, seeds, tofu), and 2-4 servings of dairy products (Thomas, 2023). They
should receive whole milk until age 2 and then 2% or lower-fat milk daily, with plenty of water and very limited
added sugars and snacks (Ben-Joseph, 2023; Table 18.2).

Food Group      Daily Servings  Portion Size (Ages   Portion Size (Ages   Portion Size (Ages
Meats/proteins  2               1-3)                 4-6)                 7-10)

                                  · 1 oz meat          · 1 oz meat          · 2-3 oz meat
                                  · ½ egg              · 1 egg              · 1-2 eggs
                                  · ¼ cup beans        ·  cup beans         · ½ cup beans

Dairy           2-3             · ½ oz cheese        · 1 oz cheese        · 1 oz cheese
                                · ½ cup milk         · ½ cup milk         · 1 cup milk
                                ·  cup yogurt        · ½ cup yogurt       · ¾-1 cup

                                                                             yogurt

Fruits          2-3             · ¼ cup cooked,      · ¼ cup cooked,      ·  cup cooked,
                                   frozen, or           frozen, or           frozen, or
                                   canned               canned               canned

                                · ½ piece fresh      · ½ piece fresh      · 1 piece fresh
                                · ¼ cup 100%         ·  cup 100%          · ½ cup 100%

                                   fruit juice          fruit juice          fruit juice

Vegetables      2-3             · ¼ cup cooked       · ¼ cup cooked       · ½ cup cooked
                                   vegetables           vegetables           vegetables

                                                     · ½ cup salad        · 1 cup salad

Grains          6-11            · ½ slice bread      · ½ slice bread      · 1 slice bread
                                · ¼ cup cooked       ·  cup cooked        · ½ cup cooked

                                   cereal, rice, or     cereal, rice, or     cereal, rice, or
                                   pasta                pasta                pasta
                                ·  cup dry           · ½ cup dry          · ¾-1 cup dry
                                   cereal               cereal               cereal

TABLE 18.2 Examples of Recommended Portion Sizes for Children by Age Group. (sources: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2015; García-
Montero, et al., 2023)

An adequate amount of fiber is needed in the diet for gastrointestinal health (Thomas, 2023). Prebiotic and probiotic
foods should be introduced when solid foods are introduced. Some child-friendly foods containing probiotics are
yogurt with live cultures, pickles, kombucha, and cheese; child-friendly foods containing prebiotics include kiwi,
bananas, and apples (Garcia-Montero, et al., 2023). Processed and artificially sweetened foods should be avoided
(Stanford Medicine Children's Health, n.d.). Another important consideration for gut health is to avoid unnecessary
antibiotics because they can damage and kill helpful bacteria in the gut.

Adolescence

Many expected body changes as well as a growth spurt occur during adolescence. These changes require an
increase in caloric intake to about 2200 kcal/day for females and 2500-3000 kcal/day for males, depending on
activity level such as participation in rigorous sporting activities (Nesta, 2019).

This age group has much more autonomy over their food choices and often eat fast foods because they do not like to
sit and eat but prefer fast convenience. Fast foods can contribute to constipation and need to be balanced with
nutrient-dense foods, high-fiber foods, prebiotics, probiotics, and high-calcium foods to support a healthy growth
and development pattern (Stanford Medicine Children's Health, n.d.). A good addition to encourage gut health and
increase calcium are leafy green vegetables (Johns Hopkins Medicine, n.d.).
358  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Bao has adjusted well to the special diet at birth and transitioned well in late infancy and childhood to an altered
     diet. At the age of 13, he begins having diarrhea, blood in the stool, fatigue, and abdominal pain and eventually is
     diagnosed with Crohn's disease. Bao is here today for a wellness visit with Hein.

         3. Hein asks how Bao has gotten Crohn's disease because it does not run in their family. Given Bao's history,
             what put him at increased risk for developing Crohn's disease?
              a. Inability to consume lactose
              b. Hein's pregnancy complications
              c. Bao had no increased risk
              d. Bao's lack of adherence to the prescribed diet

         4. The nurse is educating Hein and Bao about managing inflammatory periods. Which food should be avoided
             during inflammatory periods?
              a. Beans
              b. Yogurt
              c. White rice
              d. Chicken

     Adulthood

     During adulthood, calorie requirements decrease. Current recommendations are 1800-2400 kcal/day for women
     and 2400-3000 kcal/day for men, depending on activity level (U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department
     of Health and Human Services, 2020). Gastrointestinal health requires more of a maintenance approach during
     adulthood because this system is fully developed at this point in life. Prebiotics and probiotics are still
     recommended to maintain gut microbiome health.

     Clients should be educated to limit or avoid alcohol and to reduce fats and sodium in the diet for gut health (U.S.
     Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). Additions for nutritional
     health include foods rich in iron and calcium (U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and
     Human Services, 2020). People who smoke should be encouraged to stop because one of the negative effects of
     smoking is decreased blood flow to the intestines, which can have a negative impact on gut health.

     Later Adulthood

     As in early life stages, prebiotic and probiotic foods should be continued in later adulthood, along with a low-sugar
     diet. During this stage in the lifespan, men should consume 2000-2600 kcal/day, and women should consume
     about 1600-2200 kcal/day because energy expenditure is less than in younger adulthood (U.S. Department of
     Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). It is still important for clients in this age
     group to continue a high-calcium diet for bone health.

     For gut health, clients should eat a diet high in fiber and water and low in sodium (U.S. Department of Agriculture
     and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). During this stage in life, constipation may be common.
     High fiber will help prevent it, and water is required for the fiber to work effectively. Eating adequate protein is
     important in combination with physical exercise because muscle mass can decrease in older adults (U.S.
     Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). Blood flow is increased with
     muscle mass and is important for gut health and intestinal health.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            18.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Gastrointestinal Illnesses               359

18.2 Nutrition and Chronic Gastrointestinal Illnesses

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 18.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on chronic gastrointestinal disorders.
  · 18.2.2 Discuss the impact of nutrition on acute exacerbation of chronic gastrointestinal disorders.

Nutritional Requirements for Optimal Health With Gastrointestinal Illness

When gastrointestinal illness is present, prebiotics and probiotics are still recommended; however, there are
additional recommendations to aid in gut health. High-fiber diets and high water intake are beneficial during
nonexacerbation periods in gastrointestinal disease. However,

SAFETY ALERT

Contraindications for High Fiber Intake

When a client is experiencing inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract due to illness such as ulcerative colitis,
Crohn's disease, diverticulitis (inflammation of diverticula, which are bulging pouches that can form along the
intestines), or any other acute condition, high fiber intake is contraindicated because it can irritate the intestinal
lining and increase inflammation.

There are basic recommendations for gut health for individuals with gastrointestinal disease. Foods high in
saturated fats and trans fats should be avoided because they increase inflammation. Healthy fats, such as omega-3
fatty acids and monounsaturated fats, may help decrease inflammation and should be used in place of less healthy
fat (Nebraska Medicine, 2022). An anti-inflammatory diet is helpful overall in gastrointestinal illness. Antioxidants
found in foods such as avocados, broccoli, spinach, carrots, potatoes, and artichokes may help decrease
inflammation. Phytonutrients found in fruits and vegetables may help to protect against inflammation (Nebraska
Medicine, 2022). The Mediterranean diet follows the principles of anti-inflammatory nutrition.

Alternative Food and Supplement Options

Supplementation for gut health is often needed when gastrointestinal disease is exacerbated and in the
inflammatory phase because malabsorptive issues occur most often during this time. Supplementation adds higher
levels of needed nutrients to increase the chances of adequate absorption. In some severe cases, parenteral
supplementation may be required.

Food alternatives and simple replacements can be beneficial for promoting gut health, whether illness is present or
not (Table 18.3).

Food                  Replacement for Improved Gut Health

Milk                  Kefir

Sugary drinks         Kombucha

Milk, cheese curd,    Greek yogurt
mayonnaise

Red meats             Fruits and vegetables, fish, chicken

Sugary cereals        Oats

White bread           Sourdough bread

Nonsprouting lentils  Sprouting lentils

TABLE 18.3 Food Replacements to Improve Gut Health (sources: Crohn's and Colitis Foundation, n.d.; Johns Hopkins Medicine, n.d.;
Nebraska Medicine, 2022)
360  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     18.3 Treatments and Nutrition

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 18.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions for their impact on treatments used for gastrointestinal disorders.
       · 18.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

           gastrointestinal disorders.

     Drug-Food Interactions Related to Treatments for Gastrointestinal Disorders

     Medications used to treat Crohn's disease and UC are in the anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant classes.
     The most frequently used medications for Crohn's disease treatment are azathioprine and mercaptopurine. A client
     with UC is most often prescribed balsalazide, mesalamine, olsalazine, or sulfasalazine. For diverticulitis, antibiotics
     are needed; the most commonly used are ciprofloxacin plus metronidazole, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole plus
     metronidazole, amoxicillin-clavulanate, and moxifloxacin.

     Drug-food interactions are a concern when prescribing these drugs, so clients must be educated about specific
     interactions to avoid adverse effects (Table 18.4).

     Food               Food Interaction
     Azathioprine         · Avoid raw or half-cooked foods (can cause foodborne illness).

     Mercaptopurine     · Take 1 hour before or 2 hours after ingestion of milk or dairy products (reduces
                           absorption when taken with food).

     Balsalazide        · Swallow right away if taken with food as an open capsule (mixing with food can cause
                           staining of the tooth enamel).

                        · Review medication insert for information on mixing medication with applesauce.

     Mesalamine         · Take this medication on an empty stomach--at least 1 hour before meals or 2 hours
                           after meals when taking specifically the Asacol HD version of this medication.

     Olsalazine         · Drink plenty of water with this medication to protect the kidneys.
                        · Avoid smoking (decreases medication effectiveness).

     Sulfasalazine      · Avoid alcohol and spicy foods (increases risk for indigestion).

     Metronidazole      · Avoid alcohol during and 24 hours before and after treatments (can cause serious
                           adverse effects).

     Sulfamethoxazole-  · Avoid alcohol (can cause serious adverse effects).
     Trimethoprim
                        · No interactions.
     Amoxicillin-
     Clavulanate        · Avoid dairy products (can make less effective).
                        · Avoid vitamins containing iron, magnesium, calcium, or zinc within 4 hours before and
     Moxifloxacin and
     Ciprofloxacin         after taking this medicine (can make the drug and the vitamins less effective).

     TABLE 18.4 Foods to Avoid When Taking Certain Drugs (sources: Cancer Research UK, 2022; Mayo Clinic, n.d.; Mayo Clinic, 2023; NHS,
     2021; Offices of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2023; PeaceHealth, 2023)

     Treatments and Medications That Can Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

     Avoiding certain foods is not the only concern that needs to be addressed regarding treatments. Many of the
     medications already described can also cause nutritional deficiencies. The client must know which foods they can
     increase in their diet to prevent deficiency (Table 18.5).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                           18.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                                     361

Drug            Nutrient Deficiency        Foods to Replace Nutrients
Azathioprine      · Niacin (vitamin B3)
                                             · Red meat, poultry, fish, brown rice, nuts, seeds,
                                                 legumes, bananas

Mercaptopurine  · Hypoglycemia in          · Complex carbohydrates, along with monitoring of
                   children younger than      glucose levels
                   6 years old when
                   administered in a
                   liquid form

Balsalazide     · Folic acid can reduce    · Dark green leafy vegetables, beans, peanuts, sunflower
Olsalazine         adverse effects of the     seeds, whole grains, liver
Sulfasalazine      medication
Mesalamine                                 · Kefir, sourdough bread, sauerkraut, kimchi, other
                · Bifidobacterium             fermented vegetables
Ciprofloxacin      bifidum
Moxifloxacin                               · Milk enriched with acidophilus, yogurt containing live L.
                · Lactobacillus               acidophilus cultures, miso, tempeh
                   acidophilus
                                           · Legumes, egg yolks, organ meats, nuts, seeds,
                · Biotin                      mushrooms, avocados, sweet potatoes
                · Folic acid
                · Inositol                 · Dark green leafy vegetables, beans, peanuts, sunflower
                · Vitamin B1 (thiamin)        seeds, whole grains, liver
                · Vitamin B2
                                           · Whole-grain bread and bran, prunes, cantaloupe, citrus
                   (riboflavin)               fruits, beans, peas, almonds, peanut butter, liver
                · Vitamin B3 (niacin)
                · Vitamin B6               · Fortified breakfast cereals, pork, fish, beans, lentils,
                                              green peas, enriched cereals, breads, noodles, rice,
                   (pyridoxine)               sunflower seeds, yogurt
                · Vitamin B12
                                           · Dairy milk, yogurt, cheese, eggs, lean beef and pork,
                   (cobalamin)                organ meats (beef liver), chicken breast, salmon
                · Vitamin K
                                           · Red meat, poultry, fish, brown rice, nuts, seeds,
                                              legumes, bananas

                                           · Fish, beef liver and other organ meats, potatoes and
                                              other starchy vegetables

                                           · Fish, meat, poultry, eggs, dairy products
                                           · Kale, collard greens, broccoli, spinach, cabbage, lettuce

TABLE 18.5 Nutritional Deficiencies Caused by Pharmacologic Therapies and Foods to Replace Those Nutrients (sources: Kaiser
Permanente, 2015; Mayo Clinic, 2023; Naeini et al., 2021; Peace Health, 2015; Prescott et al., 2018; Ratajczak, et al., 2021)
362  18 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

     Drug               Nutrient Deficiency  Foods to Replace Nutrients
     Metronidazole
                          · Calcium            · Dairy products, soybeans, dark green leafy vegetables,
                          · Carbohydrates          calcium-fortified foods, canned salmon, figs
                          · Beta-carotene
                          · Fats               · Grains, fruit, dairy products, legumes
                          · Folic acid         · Yellow, orange, and green fruits and vegetables
                          · Iron               · Fish, avocados, seeds, nuts, olive oil, eggs
                          · Magnesium          · Dark green leafy vegetables, beans, peanuts, sunflower
                          · Potassium
                          · Sodium                 seeds, whole grains, liver
                          · Vitamin A          · Nuts, dried fruits, iron-fortified breads and cereals,
                          · Vitamin B12
                                                   legumes, oats, tofu
                              (cobalamin)      · Smoked, cured, salted, or canned meat, fish, or poultry;
                          · Vitamin D
                          · Vitamin K              frozen breaded meats; frozen processed foods such as
                                                   burritos and pizza; canned entrees (like canned pasta in
                                                   tomato sauce); salted nuts
                                               · Leafy green vegetables, orange and yellow vegetables,
                                                   tomatoes, red bell peppers, cantaloupes, mangos, beef
                                                   liver, fish oils, milk, eggs
                                               · Fish, meat, poultry, eggs, dairy products
                                               · Cod liver oil, salmon, swordfish, tuna, sardines, beef
                                                   liver, vitamin D-fortified orange juice and dairy and plant
                                                   milks
                                               · Kale, collard greens, broccoli, spinach, cabbage, lettuce

     Sulfamethoxazole-  · Vitamin K          · Kale, collard greens, broccoli, spinach, cabbage, lettuce
     Trimethoprim       · Calcium            · Dairy products, soybeans, dark green leafy vegetables,
                        · Magnesium
                        · Vitamin B12           canned salmon, figs
                                             · Pumpkin seeds, chia seeds, almonds, boiled spinach,
                           (cobalamin)
                                                cashews, peanuts, soy milk
                                             · Fish, meat, poultry, eggs, dairy products

     Amoxicillin-       · Vitamin K          · Kale, collard greens, broccoli, spinach, cabbage, lettuce
     Clavulanate        · Vitamin B12        · Fish, meat, poultry, eggs, dairy products
                                             · Dark green leafy vegetables, beans, peanuts, sunflower
                           (cobalamin)
                        · Folic acid            seeds, whole grains, liver
                        · Potassium          · Dried fruits, beans, lentils, potatoes, winter squash
                        · Vitamin B2
                                                (acorn, butternut), spinach, broccoli, beet greens,
                           (riboflavin)         avocados
                                             · Fish, meat, poultry, eggs, dairy products
                                             · Milk, yogurt, cheese, eggs, lean beef and pork, organ
                                                meats (beef liver), chicken breast, salmon
                                             · Kale, collard greens, broccoli, spinach, cabbage, lettuce

     TABLE 18.5 Nutritional Deficiencies Caused by Pharmacologic Therapies and Foods to Replace Those Nutrients (sources: Kaiser
     Permanente, 2015; Mayo Clinic, 2023; Naeini et al., 2021; Peace Health, 2015; Prescott et al., 2018; Ratajczak, et al., 2021)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           18 · Chapter Summary 363

Chapter Summary

· Gastrointestinal system health starts before birth          affect the gastrointestinal system and the ability to
   with the microbiome of the pregnant client.                absorb nutrients properly.
                                                           · Individuals with chronic gastrointestinal illness
· Prebiotic and probiotic foods are essential for             have increased malabsorption risks and
   everyone because they support the gut                      requirements.
   microbiome.                                             · Medications for gastrointestinal illnesses can
                                                              cause nutrient deficiencies and interact with
· Supporting the gut microbiome is one of the most            different foods.
   important ways to promote gastrointestinal health.

· Events and changes that occur at each stage can

Key Terms

Crohn's disease a chronic inflammatory disease that        microbiome a collection of microorganisms that
    can cause ulcerations and fistulas in the intestines,      reside in the body, primarily in the gastrointestinal
    particularly the colon and ileum                           tract

diverticulitis inflammation of diverticula, which are      necrotizing enterocolitis a gastrointestinal tract
    bulging pouches that can form along the intestines         disease in which the intestinal lining becomes
                                                               inflamed, dies, and is sloughed off
dysbiosis imbalance of gut microbiota associated
    with an unhealthy outcome                              prebiotic nondigestible substances that stimulate
                                                               growth of "good" gut bacteria
galactosemia a genetic disorder in which the
    galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT)         probiotic foods that contain live microorganisms
    enzyme is missing or does not function properly            intended to maintain "good" gut bacteria

hyperemesis gravidarum persistent and severe               short bowel syndrome a group of problems related
    vomiting caused by pregnancy; can lead to weight           to ineffective absorption of nutrients
    loss and dehydration
                                                           ulcerative colitis (UC) an inflammatory disease that
malabsorption a digestive disorder that causes the             affects the superficial lining of the large intestine,
    body not to absorb nutrients from food effectively         causing ulcerations

Review Questions

1. A nurse is educating a pregnant client about factors that affect the fetal microbiome. Which choice, when
    asked what factors affect their fetus's microbiome, indicate the need further teaching?
     a. The father's microbiome
     b. The mother's microbiome
     c. The child's diet
     d. Interaction with the environment

2. What is the caloric intake a nurse should expect the provider to order for a premature infant?
     a. 2000 kcal/day
     b. 120 kcal/kg/day
     c. 100 kcal/kg/day
     d. 1500 kcal/day

3. The nurse is educating a group of pregnant clients about genetic diseases. Which disease should the nurse
    explain will need lifelong management due to the individual's inability to convert lactose into glucose?
     a. Diverticulitis
     b. Ulcerative colitis
     c. Crohn's disease
     d. Galactosemia

4. The nurse is teaching a client about the nutritional needs of their adolescent child. Which information should
    be included in the education?
     a. Young males need fewer calories than young females do.
     b. Adolescent females require 3000 kcal/day.
364 18 · Suggested Reading

         c. Fast foods need to be supplanted with healthier options.
         d. Adolescents need less iron intake daily than other age groups.

    5. The nurse is teaching an adult client how to maintain good gut bacteria. Which foods would be appropriate for
        the client to include in their diet to maintain good gut bacteria?
         a. Blueberries, strawberries, and kiwi
         b. Salmon and tuna
         c. Broccoli and cauliflower
         d. Yogurt, kimchi, and honey

    6. An older adult reports a problem with constipation. Which dietary recommendation is appropriate for this
        client?
         a. Decrease water intake.
         b. Increase sodium intake.
         c. Decrease calcium intake.
         d. Increase fiber intake.

    7. The nurse is providing teaching to a client with ulcerative colitis. Which nutritional component should be
        adjusted when the client is in remission?
         a. Water intake
         b. Fiber intake
         c. Iron intake
         d. Potassium intake

    8. The nurse is teaching a client about food substitutions to help improve gut health. Which substitution is
        appropriate for milk?
         a. Ice cream
         b. Greek yogurt
         c. Kefir
         d. Kombucha

    9. The nurse is working with a client who has diverticulitis and has been prescribed ciprofloxacin. Which food
        should this client avoid while taking this medication?
         a. Red meat
         b. Milk
         c. Tomatoes
         d. Oatmeal

  10. The nurse is providing discharge education to a client who has been prescribed amoxicillin. Which food
        should the nurse instruct the client to incorporate into their diet to help prevent medication-related nutrient
        depletion?
         a. Beans
         b. Whole grains
         c. Sunflower seeds
         d. Kale

Suggested Reading

Anderson-Haynes, S. (2021, April 21). Diet, disease, and the microbiome. https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/
    diet-disease-and-the-microbiome-2021042122400

de Vos W. M., Tilg H., Van Hul, M., & Cani, P. D. (2022). Gut microbiome and health: Mechanistic insights. Gut,
   71,1020-1032. https://gut.bmj.com/content/71/5/1020.info

Holcombe, M. (2022, June 23). 3 ways to improve your health through your microbiome. https://www.cnn.com/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                18 · Suggested Reading 365

    2022/06/23/health/microbiome-health-wellness/index.html
Hou, K., Wu, Z., Chen, X., Wang, J., Zhang, D., Xiao, C., Zhu, D., Koya, J., Wei, L., Li, J., & Chen, Z. (2022). Microbiota

   in health and diseases. Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy, 7(1), 135. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    s41392-022-00974-4
Leonard, J. (2019). 10 ways to improve gut health. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325293
Weaver, J. (2021, July 12). Fermented-food diet increases microbiome diversity, decreases inflammatory proteins,
   study finds. https://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2021/07/fermented-food-diet-increases-microbiome-
    diversity-lowers-inflammation
366 18 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 19

Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote
Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Wellness

FIGURE 19.1 Proper nutrition promotes a healthy integumentary and musculoskeletal system. (credit: modification of work "Balsamic
Roasted Turkey Salad Ingredients" by Alabama Extension; ACES | Janet Guynn/Flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems
19.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness
19.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness
19.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness
INTRODUCTION These two systems, musculoskeletal and integumentary, are considered together because they
are dependent upon one another to keep the body in homeostasis. The musculoskeletal system comprises bones,
muscles, ligaments, and tendons and is a part of the body's internal environment that supports the muscles,
protects the organs, and aids in movement. The integumentary system encompasses the skin, hair, nails, sweat
glands, sebaceous glands, and nerves on the skin. The integumentary system serves as a barrier to protect the
musculoskeletal system and other systems from the external environment. Subcutaneous fat absorbs impact from
the external environment and protects the musculoskeletal system from trauma. The skin serves as a barrier against
germs that would attempt to invade the body and cause harm (Academic Master, Biology, 2018).
A good example of the relationship between the two systems is seen with pressure wounds. As the outer layer of the
skin suffers irritation and damage, there is potential risk for the progression of the wounds through the
subcutaneous fat, tendons, and even the bones. When this happens, bone inflammation from
368  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     infection--osteomyelitis--occurs. With this relationship in mind, it is imperative that the skin integrity of the client
     always be maintained. Adequate intake of proper nutrients is essential for the musculoskeletal system for bone
     growth and bone health. The quality and amount of nutritional intake affects muscle mass, strength, and the ability
     for muscles to repair themselves after injury. The integumentary system is also dependent on essential dietary
     nutrients to maintain integrity and proper functioning. Many disease processes affect both the musculoskeletal and
     the integumentary systems.

     Consider this case: Mrs. Anne Wilson, a 70-year-old Black woman is referred by the primary care provider to a
     rheumatologist for complaints of pain and swelling in both knees. Anne states that the ibuprofen that was earlier
     prescribed is no longer treating the pain. The nurse at the rheumatologist's office notices that Anne appears anxious
     with a facial grimace and states that she is having 8/10 pain in both knees. The client states that she only got a few
     hours of sleep last night due to the pain. Anne reports that she exercises daily by walking, but she admits that her
     nutritional intake could improve.

     19.1 Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and
     Integumentary Systems

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 19.1.1 Recognize the normal function of the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.
       · 19.1.2 Recognize cues of nutritional impact on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.
       · 19.1.3 Analyze cues of nutritional impact on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.

     Normal Function of the Neurological System

     The impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems cannot be explained without first
     reviewing the normal function of the neurological system. The neurological system and the musculoskeletal system
     relate to one another in that the brain and nerves tell the voluntary muscles what to do. In response to the
     messages sent to the brain through the nerve pathways, muscle fibers become tense and cause the muscles to
     contract.

     The brain is the most complex organ in the body. The brain is divided into lobes each having a specific function in the
     neurological system. The frontal lobes are responsible for imagination, memory, and reasoning. Damage to a frontal
     lobe is often manifested in memory loss and poor judgment and often follows a cerebrovascular accident (CVA).
     When this lobe is not functioning properly, secondary issues related to the musculoskeletal and integumentary
     systems emerge. For example, after injury to the frontal lobe, a client may not recognize the importance of mobility
     and skin care. Therefore, damage to this area of the brain may have detrimental secondary consequences on the
     musculoskeletal and integumentary systems (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2023;
     National Library of Medicine, 2022).

     Important structures in the inner brain that play a part in musculoskeletal and integumentary function, like the
     basal ganglia, initiate and coordinate movements. Diseases of the cells leading into the basal ganglia, such as
     Parkinson's disease, result in disturbance of movement as seen with tremors. The other important structures in the
     inner brain include the hypothalamus, thalamus, and hippocampus, which do not directly affect the musculoskeletal
     or integumentary systems (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2023, National Library of
     Medicine, 2022).

     Assessment of Nutrition and the Function of the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary
     Systems

     Nutrition plays a key role in the development of a healthy musculoskeletal and integumentary system. Nurses are
     taught to holistically view the client during the initial and ongoing assessment to reveal and relay any problems with
     the client that may help the health care provider in diagnosing and treating the client. Delays in diagnosing and
     treating the client with nutritional deficiencies can lead to muscle wasting, bone fractures, skin ulcerations, and so
     much more. Many of the complications of inadequate nutrition are irreversible and even life threatening as related to
     the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems. After surgery and at other times of stress on the body, the
     importance of an accurate nutritional assessment cannot be underestimated.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems                        369

The benefits of eating properly for the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems include healthy skin, muscles,
bones, and teeth, as well as maintaining a healthy weight which, in turn, affects the cardiovascular system, the
endocrine system, and so on. Maintaining a proper body weight through good nutrition leads to healthier joints,
muscles, tendons, and bones because there is less stress on the musculoskeletal system. Musculoskeletal and joint
problems such as osteoarthritis are often worse for people who are overweight (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2022). Maintaining a healthy weight lowers the risk of heart disease, hypertension, stroke, and type 2
diabetes, breathing problems and sleep apnea, anxiety, and other conditions in other body systems.

With all the problems associated with inadequate nutritional intake on the musculoskeletal and integumentary
systems, the nurse has a priority of completing a full intake history of the client and proper follow-up assessment.
From there, the nurse can develop a plan of care for the client. This ensures that the client is assisted in maintaining
physiological and psychological integrity throughout the course of their treatment.

The health history should focus on past surgical history, including possible complications of previous surgeries and a
family medical history as many of the musculoskeletal and integumentary disorders have heredity tendencies. Some
of the most important medical history to obtain in these system categories include history of rheumatoid arthritis or
other autoimmune disorders (when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue).
Osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, osteopenia, scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematous (SLE), and eczema are just
some of the genetically inherited diseases of the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems (Orthopedic
Oncology, 2023).

Normal Function of the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems
Bones, muscles, tendons, ligaments, joints, and connective tissue hold the body together. The main function of the
musculoskeletal system is to support the body. This system also allows for movement of the body as well as
providing protection for internal organs. The bones that comprise the skeletal system store calcium and
phosphorus--minerals important to body function--blood components, and certain fats. The skeletal muscles
attached to bones are empowered by nerves with electrical current from the central nervous system. These nerves
located throughout the muscles allow for the contraction of the muscles. Only two types of muscles, the skeletal
muscles and the smooth muscles, are considered a part of the musculoskeletal system. The skeletal muscles
provide for the movement of the body and the smooth muscles are found in intestinal and vessel walls. Ligaments
and tendons help with body movement by connecting bones together to form joints (LibreTexts Medicine, 2019).

Aging influences the musculoskeletal system. As a person ages, height decreases because calcium, phosphorus,
and other minerals are lost. Fluid decreases between the disks in the vertebrae of the spine, which can cause pain
and deformity. Joints tend to lose cartilage contributing to stiff joints and joint pain. This contributes to
osteoarthritis and worsens its symptoms associated. Working to maintain a healthy musculoskeletal system is
important throughout the lifespan (Academic Senate for California Community Colleges (ASCCC) Open Educational
Resources Initiative, 2021).

     TRENDING TODAY

 Skin, Aging, and the Impact of Food

 As you work through this Trending Today feature, recall that nurses should rely on evidence-based practice
 (EBP), which uses scientific evidence rather than anecdotal evidence, to inform their practice and care of clients.
 Nurses should encourage clients to evaluate nutritional information on social media with the same scrutiny.

  Research shows a link between aging skin and nutrition (Cao et al., 2020). From water to protein and specific
  vitamins and trace elements, several elements play a crucial role not only in aging of the skin, but also in the
  ability of the skin to remain intact and function as a first line of defense against microorganisms.

  On social media, TikTok influencer Joy McCarthy (@joyoushealth) promotes the use of sprouts for detoxifying the
  body, thus enhancing skin appearance. Similarly, Dr. Dray suggests the use of foods to promote collagen
  production, which assists in delaying the aging process by maintaining skin elasticity and moisture.

  Take some time to review the following social media content and think critically about the information provided
  and its appeal to clients:
370  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

         · @joyoushealth (https://openstax.org/r/joyoushealth) (TikTok)
         · The Best Foods for Collagen Production | Dr. Dray (https://openstax.org/r/collagen) (YouTube)

       Now answer the following questions:

       1. Which account did you prefer when viewing or reading? Explain.
       2. What is the purpose of the content you viewed or read?
       3. Do these sources adhere to EBP, and why are the recommendations realistic or unrealistic?
       4. If a client came to you with this information, how would you educate them to critically use these sources?
       5. What alternative sources would you recommend to clients to educate them about this topic?

     The integumentary system is made up of the skin and accessory structures--such as hair, nails, sweat glands, and
     sebaceous glands--and is the largest organ system in the human body. The function of the integumentary system is
     to protect the body from invading microorganisms, chemicals, and other environmental irritants. The skin helps to
     control temperature and regulate electrolytes by preventing dehydration. The skin and its structures play a role in
     storing fats and synthesizing vitamin D. The integumentary system is susceptible to diseases and injuries, many of
     which are life threatening. Maintaining a healthy integumentary system is vital for maintaining good health.
     Musculoskeletal tissue is especially vulnerable to injury (ASCCC Open Educational Resources Initiative, 2021).

     Assessment of the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems
     Nursing assessment of the musculoskeletal system involves the collection of subjective and objective data.
     Subjective data is gathered through a thorough interview of the client's past medical and surgical history, family
     medical history, current medical problems, lifestyle history, and nutritional history. The following interview
     questions are good examples that focus on the musculoskeletal system:

       · Are you experiencing any pain, weakness, swelling, or stiffness in any of your bones/joints?
       · Have you ever been told that you have a long-term musculoskeletal disease such as osteoarthritis or

           rheumatoid arthritis?
       · Have you ever been diagnosed with nerve pain that affects the muscles of any of your extremities?
       · Have you ever had any fractures, sprains, or strains that required medical treatment?
       · Have you ever been told you had tendonitis or bursitis?
       · Have you ever had any orthopedic surgeries?
       · Have you ever had to undergo physical therapy for pain management?
       · What is the list of your current medications including herbs and supplements?

     Objective data is gathered as the nurse observes or inspects the client's posture, movements, gait, deformities,
     muscle tone, and range of motion. Range of motion reflects the client's ability to move their joints actively or
     passively.

     General objective findings within the healthy musculoskeletal system are muscles with no wasting, no edema noted
     over bones and joints, and skin color appropriate for skin tone over bones, joints, ligaments, and muscles.
     Assessment findings should include posture that is well balanced with the head positioned over the shoulders, a
     slight curve in the lower back, and a level pelvis. The knees are symmetrical, the toes face forward when standing,
     and the shoulders and extremities are all symmetrical.

     In healthy individuals, the movement of the musculoskeletal system is not restricted. There is full range of motion
     (ROM), which is defined as the movement potential of the joints using flexion and extension. Movement is fluid and
     smooth with no sounds heard from joints upon movement. There is full symmetrical muscle strength in all
     extremities. The gait is balanced with no shuffling or limping. A center of gravity is maintained when standing--there
     is no leaning or swaying, dragging feet, or waddling. Full ROM is evidenced by no pain.

     The healthy musculoskeletal system is strong and symmetrical. Strong active movement is noted against gravity and
     resistance. Muscle tone is a measure of a muscle's resistance to stretching while at rest. Even when at rest, muscle
     fibers are at least partially contracted, so muscle tone should have no flaccidity.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems                                     371

     MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

  Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/nutrition/pages/19-1-assess-and-analyze-the-impact-
  of-nutrition-on-the-musculoskeletal-and-integumentary-systems)
  Nursing.com and Jon Haws, RN, provide a video review of how to perform a musculoskeletal assessment of the
  spine and upper and lower extremities.

Nursing assessment of the integumentary system can often be done simultaneously with the musculoskeletal
system. If fact, observing for redness and swelling in the joints as already described relates both to the
musculoskeletal and integumentary systems. This is why these systems are grouped together. One system
influences the other and abnormal findings are typically related to both systems. Another example is for the sprain
and strain mentioned earlier--the skin will reflect bruising (ecchymosis) and swelling.

General objective findings within the healthy integumentary system includes normal skin, hair, and nails. Skin
should be distributed over the body in three tissue layers, all intact without any breaks in the skin. Healthy skin is
free of lesions, ulcers, irritations, skin tears, blisters, and sores. The color is appropriate for race with no
disturbances in pigmentation. Birthmarks and moles are smooth and consistent in color. Skin is warm and dry or
appropriate for present environmental factors. Skin temperature does not vary from one site on the body to another.
Normal moisture level is indicated by good skin turgor, with no tenting. To measure skin turgor, pinch up skin on the
back of the hand and observe for tenting (when the skin stands up like a tent).

The hair of a healthy integumentary system is equally distributed in places where hair should be growing. There is
no hair loss or hair growing where it does not belong. Texture is within normal limits for client per genetics,
hormones, and chemical use. There are sufficient oils to prevent breakage. No parasite infestation is noted, and
there is no fungus on the scalp.

The nails are translucent with pinkish tone. The base of the nail is about 160 degrees with normal sized fingertips.
There is no clubbing and no spoon-shaped nails. The nails should be smooth and firm. The nails are clean, with no
material growing under the nails. The cuticles are intact, and the surrounding skin is intact with no redness or
edema (Figure 19.2).

FIGURE 19.2 An assessment includes nail color and shape. (credit: "Fingernails, about 2 mm long, just the right length" by Kommissar/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Tests Used in the Assessment of the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems
During the assessment, nurses and providers use screening tests to determine objective findings in the
372  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     musculoskeletal and integumentary systems. The provider uses this information to determine the diagnostic tests
     needed. The provider combines subjective data with these objective findings to help make a diagnosis. Refer to
     Table 19.1 for screening and diagnostic tests used for the musculoskeletal system.

     Screening Tests for Musculoskeletal System  Diagnostic Tests for Musculoskeletal System

       · Neuropathy impairment score (NIS)         · Radiology and nerve studies
       · Active and passive ROM                        X-ray
       · Bilateral hand grip test                      Computerized tomography (CT) scan
       · Bilateral foot push test                      Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
       · Morse, or other, fall risk assessment         Ultrasound
       · Swollen joint count                           Arthroscopy
       · Auscultation for crepitus                     Electromyography (EMG)
       · Gait assessment                               Bone scan
       · Use of ambulatory device                      Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
       · Use of prosthesis                             Ultrasound

                                                   · Labs
                                                       Creatinine kinase
                                                       Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK)
                                                       Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody
                                                       Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
                                                       Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
                                                       Complete blood count (CBC)
                                                       Serum calcium
                                                       Rheumatoid factor
                                                       C-reactive protein (CRP)
                                                       Tissue biopsy

     TABLE 19.1 Screening and Diagnostic Musculoskeletal Tests (sources: LibreTexts Musculoskeletal Assessment; 2022; Pagana & Pagana,
     2023)

     The nurse's assessment of the integumentary system includes the skin, hair, and nails. Abnormalities found in this
     system often reflect a dysfunction in other body systems. See Table 19.2 for screening tests and diagnostic tests for
     the integumentary system.

     Screening Tests for Integumentary System                      Diagnostic Tests for Integumentary System

       · Capillary refill                                            · Patch testing (a skin test for allergies)
       · Skin turgor test                                            · Biopsy
       · Grading of edema test (pitting test seen in Figure 19.3)    · Scraping (a test for obtaining superficial
       · Staging of pressure ulcers
       · Braden Scale (assessment tool using six categories to           dead skin for testing)
                                                                     · Diascopy (a test for determining
           determine risk for pressure injury)
       · Burn classification                                             blanchability of the skin)
                                                                     · Wood light test (a black light test used to

                                                                         diagnose lesions)
                                                                     · Tzanck testing (a test used to diagnose viral

                                                                         disease with active vesicles)
                                                                     · Culture and sensitivity

     TABLE 19.2 Screening and Diagnostic Integumentary Tests (sources: Bendetti, 2021; Mazzasette, 2021)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                     19.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems        373

FIGURE 19.3 A recurrent erysipelas is evident on an edematous leg. (credit: "Recurrent erysipelas on edematous leg" by Mikael
Häggström/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Anne Wilson, a 70-year-old Black woman is referred by the primary care provider to a rheumatologist for complaints
of pain and swelling in bilateral knees. Anne states that the ibuprofen that was earlier prescribed is no longer
treating the pain. The nurse at the rheumatologist's office notices that Anne appears anxious with a facial grimace.
Anne states that she is having 8 out of 10 pain in both knees and that she only got a few hours of sleep last night due
to the pain. Anne reports that she exercises daily by walking, but she admits that her nutritional plan (meal plan)
could improve.

The provider enters the examination room to see Anne. On assessment, both knees are swollen with no redness or
discoloration noted. The client denies injury to the knees or legs and has no history of falls. The client is taking short,
tentative steps on observance of ambulation. The client admits that legs are stiff. No pain in both feet is reported.
Anne said her primary doctor thinks she has arthritis and needs to see a rheumatologist. Client vitals are listed in the
following table.

Vital Signs

  Temperature:        98.4°F
  Blood pressure:     142/88 mm Hg
  Heart rate:         82 beats/min
  Respiratory rate:   20 breaths/min

TABLE 19.3

1. Based on these findings and client history, what screening tests should the nurse perform?
     a. Morse fall risk assessment
     b. NIS
     c. Passive and active ROM
374  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

              d. Braden scale

         2. What diagnostic testing would the nurse expect the rheumatology provider to order?
              a. X-ray of both knees
              b. Vitamin D level
              c. Tissue biopsy
              d. Serum electrolyte panel

     After x-rays, C-reactive protein, ESR, client history, and physical examination, the client was diagnosed with
     osteoarthritis in both knees.

     Anne is treated with ibuprofen 600 mg, 3 times daily, and instructed to follow up with the provider in 6 weeks for re-
     evaluation to determine if the prescribed nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) is working. Anne is also
     referred to physical therapy for strengthening and gait training. The nurse plans to provide nutritional education
     before discharging the client.

     Analysis of Nutrition and the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems

     A complete health history--including client dietary habits--is essential to any nursing assessment of the
     musculoskeletal and integumentary systems. A person's diet impacts how the body remains in a state of
     homeostasis, how it heals, and how it helps to fight off diseases.

     See Table 19.4 for abnormal objective assessment findings for the musculoskeletal system and nutritional factors
     that are related to the abnormal assessment findings. Nutritional factors related to musculoskeletal disorders are
     shown in Table 19.5.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems                                375

  Abnormal Objective Findings in the Musculoskeletal System

    · Posture
        Kyphosis (an excessive outward curvature of the spine)
        Lordosis (an excessive inward curvature of the spine)
        Scoliosis (a sideways curvature of the spine)
        Intoeing (foot turned inward)
        Genu varum (bowing of legs)

    · Asymmetry of shoulders and extremities

    · Movement
        Limited ROM
        Crepitus (a grating sound produced by friction between bone and cartilage or bone and bone)
        Popping
        Limited muscle strength
        Balance disturbance
        Gait disturbance, including limping, leaning, falling or near falls, shuffling the feet, dragging the feet,
            waddling, swaying
        Pain with movement

    · Rheumatoid arthritis
    · Osteoarthritis (a degenerative joint disease resulting in chronic pain and often edema)
    · Scleroderma
    · Psoriatic arthritis (a long-term inflammatory disease of the joints)
    · SLE
    · Inflammatory joint disease
    · Cellulitis
    · Sprains and strains
    · Muscle soreness

    · Strength
        Alterations in muscle tone
        Muscle atrophy, flaccid muscles
        Asymmetry of strength in extremities
        Fractures
        Osteoporosis
        Osteopenia
        Paget's disease

    · Observation
        Pressure injuries
        Skin tear
        Muscle tear

TABLE 19.4 Nutritional Relationship to Musculoskeletal Abnormalities (sources: Bendetti, 2021; Nursing Skills, 2023; Saeg, 2021)
376  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     Disorder                         Foods and Nutrients
     Inflammation
                                      Anti-inflammatory foods:
                                        · Tomatoes
                                        · Olive oil
                                        · Leafy green vegetables
                                        · Nuts
                                        · Fatty fish
                                        · Fruits
                                            Pineapple (contains a a group of enyzmes called bromelain)

     Muscle and tissue                Foods that aid in the repair of muscle and tissue:
     damage                             · Protein-rich foods
                                            Lean turkey, chicken
                                            Fish
                                            Beans
                                            Peas
                                            Lentils
                                            Tofu
                                            Yogurt
                                            Eggs
                                            Cottage cheese

                                        · Fiber-rich foods
                                            Fruits
                                            Vegetables
                                            Legumes
                                            Whole grains

                                        · Vitamin C
                                            Citrus fruits
                                            Orange juice

                                        · Omega-3 fatty acids
                                            Fatty fish (salmon, tuna)

                                        · Zinc-rich foods
                                            Meat
                                            Poultry
                                            Seafood
                                            Liver

     Bone disorders                   Foods that aid in bone growth and repair:

                                        · Calcium-rich foods
                                            Milk
                                            Cheese
                                            Kale
                                            Yogurt

                                        · Vitamin D
                                            Egg yolk
                                            Fatty fish
                                            Milk

     TABLE 19.5 Nutritional and Musculoskeletal Relationship (sources: Bendetti, 2021; Meacham 2022; Saeg, 2021)

     Pressure injuries must be treated with optimal nutrition for tissue healing. Using the guidelines from Johns Hopkins
     Medicine (2023), pressure injury assessment and classification includes:

     Access for free at openstax.org
                       19.1 · Assess and Analyze the Impact of Nutrition on the Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems  377

  · Stage 1: A red, blue, or purplish area appears on the skin. This area, which looks like a bruise, may be warm to
      the touch, burn, or itch.

  · Stage 2: The area becomes an open sore that looks like an abrasion or blister and can be painful. The skin
      around the wound may be discolored.

  · Stage 3: The wound deepens, with a crater-like appearance, and often has dark patches of skin around its
      edges.

  · Stage 4: The wound extends even deeper to the muscle, bone, or joints. This can cause osteomyelitis, which is a
      serious bone infection. It may also lead to sepsis (a life-threatening inflammatory response to a massive
      infection).

An analysis of nutritional effects on abnormal findings within the integumentary system is listed in Table 19.6. The
nurse should understand the relationship between nutrition and abnormal findings in the integumentary system so
that the client can receive appropriate nutritional education.

Abnormal Objective Findings in the        Related Nutritional      Associated Foods
Integumentary System                      Factors
                                                                     · Liver, egg yolk, salmon, sweet
Hair                                      Overall hair health:           potatoes, cauliflower
                                          biotin
  · Alopecia (hair loss)                  Vitamin B12 (cobalamin)    · Liver, salmon, tuna, yogurt, eggs
  · Hirsutism (an abundance of hair in    Folate                     · Asparagus, oranges, white beans
                                          Iron                       · Liver, beef, chicken, lamb, ham
      places where hair is normally
      scarce or absent)
  · Coarse texture
  · Fine texture
  · Breakage of hair

Hair - Parasite Infections                No related nutritional   · Citrus fruits, strawberries, broccoli
  · Lice, nits, scabies                   factors for parasite
  · Scalp ringworm                        infestations

Skin - Temperature                        No related nutritional
  · Hot or warm, cold, or cool with       factors for skin
      variations in temperature           temperature

Skin - Color                              Pigmentation: vitamin C
  · Skin discoloration: blue, gray, red,
      white, yellow, darkened
  · Presence of pigmentation
      disturbance (vitiligo)
  · Moles or birthmarks

Skin - Moisture Level

· Dry, cracked skin                       Zinc                     · Eggs, meat and poultry, seafood,
                                                                      beans and lentils, whole grains, liver,
· Diaphoretic                                                         potato with skin

· Clammy                                                           · Liver, beef, chicken, lamb, ham

· Leathery
                                                        Iron

                                          Niacin                   · Liver, chicken, turkey, ground beef

                                          Vitamin D                · Egg yolks, fatty fish, milk

                                          Vitamin A                · Carrots, sweet potatoes, spinach

TABLE 19.6 Nutritional Relationship to Integumentary (sources: Marriott et al., 2020; White, 2022)
378  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     Abnormal Objective Findings in the       Related Nutritional          Associated Foods
     Integumentary System                     Factors                        · Water and other liquids

     Skin - Tenting                           Dehydration

       · Tenting (when the skin remains
           raised when pinched on the back
           of the hand)

     Skin - Integrity                         Vitamin A                    · Carrots, sweet potatoes
                                                                           · Spinach
       · Lesions (pustules, vesicles, hives,  Vitamin B1 (thiamin)         · Barley
           wheals, cyst)                      Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)      · Fish, organ meats, potatoes
                                              Vitamin B9 (folate)          · Asparagus, beans, peas
       · Irritations                          Vitamin B12 (cobalamin)      · Liver, salmon, tuna, yogurt, eggs
       · Broken skin
       · Pressure injuries
       · Skin ulcers
       · Skin tears
       · Blisters

                                              Vitamin C                    · Citrus fruits, orange juice

                                              Vitamin D                    · Egg yolks, fatty fish, milk

                                              Vitamin E                    · Olive oil, almonds, peanuts

                                              Zinc                         · Eggs, meat and poultry, seafood

                                                                           · Beans and lentils

                                              Calcium                      · Cheese, milk, yogurt

                                              Copper                       · Liver, oysters, nuts, seeds

                                              Magnesium                    · Bananas, nuts, avocado, legumes

                                              Selenium                     · Seafood, meat

                                              Protein                      · Lean chicken, turkey, fish
                                                                           · Beans, peas, lentils, tofu
                                                                           · Nuts, peanut butter, seeds
                                                                           · Cheese, yogurt, cottage cheese, eggs
                                                                           · Milk or fortified soy

     Nails

                                              Overall nail health: biotin  · Liver, egg yolk, salmon, sweet
                                                                              potatoes, cauliflower

     Nails - Discoloration

     · Yellowing, blue, darkening,            Vitamin B12 deficiency       · Liver, salmon, tuna, yogurt, eggs
        greenish black, white, reddish        causes blue/black nails      · Asparagus, oranges, white beans
        brown
                                              Folate deficiency causes
                                              pigmentation to change
                                              in nails

                                              Iron deficiency causes       · Liver, beef, chicken, lamb, ham

                                              pale nails

     TABLE 19.6 Nutritional Relationship to Integumentary (sources: Marriott et al., 2020; White, 2022)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                               19.2 · Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness       379

Abnormal Objective Findings in the     Related Nutritional     Associated Foods
Integumentary System                   Factors
Nails - Shape
                                       Low oxygen levels
  · Clubbing

· Spoon-shaped                         Iron deficiency         · Liver, chicken, ham, lamb

                                       Vitamin B deficiency    · Legumes, nuts, dairy, fish, lean
                                                                  meats

Nails - Texture                        · Brittle: vitamin A    · Sweet potatoes, pumpkin, carrots
                                          deficiency           · Liver, salmon, tuna, yogurt, eggs
  · Brittle
  · Coarse                             · Ridges: vitamin B12
  · Notched                               deficiency
  · Pitting
  · Ridges
  · Capillary refill: prolonged (more

      than 3 seconds)

Nails - Condition

· Fungus, dirt, lack grooming          No related nutritional

                                       factors

TABLE 19.6 Nutritional Relationship to Integumentary (sources: Marriott et al., 2020; White, 2022)

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Vitiligo
Vitiligo--a skin condition where the skin loses its pigmentation--physically affects all races and sexes equally,
about 1% of the population globally; however, the psychological impact on clients with darker skin tones is
much greater. Because this skin disease is more visible in darker skin tones, many clients struggle with self-
esteem and confidence after developing vitiligo (Cleveland Clinic, 2022). The nurse works to offer emotional
support by recommending support groups for their clients with vitiligo.

Vitamin B12 has been shown to be useful for repigmentation in clients with vitiligo. Meat, eggs, and dairy
products are good sources of Vitamin B12. Folic acid has also been proven to treat vitiligo. Although Vitamin D is
thought to play a role in vitiligo, there is insufficient evidence to indicate that a low Vitamin D could cause vitiligo.
Zinc is thought to inhibit melanocyte destruction and may be a useful mineral in the treatment of vitiligo.

19.2 Plan Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 19.2.1 Prioritize hypotheses of nutritional habits that optimize musculoskeletal and integumentary
      wellness.

  · 19.2.2 Generate solutions to optimize musculoskeletal and integumentary wellness utilizing nutritional
      habits.

Planning Nutritional Goals

The nurse is responsible for educating the client on nutritional strategies to impact musculoskeletal and
integumentary wellness. Based on the client's history and current medical diagnosis, the nurse will prioritize
hypotheses of nutritional habits (or assess expected client responses of nutritional habits) to optimize the well-
being of the client. In doing so, the nurse will plan nutritional goals for the client and focus on assisting the client to
380  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     meet the goals.

     Nutrition is an important lifestyle factor related to many long-term diseases. The musculoskeletal and
     integumentary systems are no exception. Long-term consumption of low nutrient foods may contribute to
     musculoskeletal pain and may also lead to obesity, homeostasis, inflammation, and sensitization of the central
     nervous system. Therefore, it is essential that proper nutrition be a priority in planning for better health that is
     related to the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.

     Calcium and vitamin D are essential to good bone health, and it is important that clients follow the recommended
     daily allowances. Because more foods are being fortified with calcium and vitamin D, clients may not realize they are
     consuming these micronutrients at unsafe levels. For example, a buildup of calcium can increase the risk for kidney
     stones, cardiac issues, and prostate cancer.

     For people over age 50, at least 1200 mg of calcium per day is recommended. Excess vitamin D can cause kidney
     damage and dangerous serum calcium levels. Recommended vitamin D levels for adults to age 70 years is 600 IU
     and above 70 years, 800 IU (Mayo Clinic, 2021). See Table 19.7 for calcium and vitamin D food sources.

     Food Sources of Calcium                                  Food Sources of Vitamin D

     Milk                                                     Egg yolk

     Yogurt                                                   Mushrooms

     Fortified orange juice                                   Oily fish (swordfish, herring)

     Cheese                                                   Fortified milk

     Sardines                                                 Fortified orange juice

     Ice cream                                                Fortified cereals

     Tofu

     Soy

     Bread

     Pudding

       Broccoli

     TABLE 19.7 Food Sources of Calcium and Vitamin D (source: Campbell, 2021)

     Other vitamins and minerals essential to include in planning nutritional goals for the musculoskeletal system are
     phosphorus, magnesium, vitamin K, vitamin C, and vitamin A. Phosphorus is a major mineral found in bone and
     needed for bone health. It can be consumed through such foods as dairy products and meat, as well as shellfish,
     beans, sunflower seeds, lentils, sardines, and cheese. Magnesium improves overall bone strength and is found in
     spinach, bananas, nuts and seeds, avocado, and chickpeas. Vitamin K is essential to bone formation, and it channels
     calcium into the bones. Foods containing vitamin K include leafy green vegetables, kiwi, and pumpkin. Vitamin C is
     necessary in the synthesis of collagen, which is the main protein in bone. Vegetables, citrus fruits, and tomatoes are
     high in vitamin C. Vitamin A is important for bone growth and can be found in liver, eggs, leafy green vegetables, and
     carrots (Campbell, 2021).

     Planning nutritional goals for integumentary health is very important as related to wound healing, inflammation, and
     dermatologic disease processes. The primary focus is on protein because this is the important nutrient needed for
     tissue repair. An important nutritional goal during wound healing is to stay well hydrated. Hydration helps skin
     maintain its integrity; the loss of skin elasticity caused by dehydration makes the skin more susceptible to
     infections, thus impeding the healing process (Campbell 2023). In setting nutritional goals that include protein,
     these food items may be suggested:

     · Salads (tuna, salmon, egg, and grilled chicken salad)
     · Nuts
     · Milk
     · Cottage cheese
     · Tuna and salmon
     · Peanut butter

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness                               381

  · Greek yogurt
  · Whole grains
  · Protein shakes (if food cannot be tolerated)

Identifying Challenges to Nutritional Goals

One big challenge to any nutritional plan is making sure the client can understand and follow the plan. Does the
client have financial means to purchase and prepare specific foods? Often, fast foods and non-nutritious foods are
more convenient and much less expensive. Is the client able to read nutrition labels? Is there a challenge to finding
necessary food items in the area in which the client lives? Does the client have transportation or internet services for
ordering food? If the client is unable to follow the plan for any of the reasons listed, the nurse should provide
information on assistance programs or make a referral to another agency to assist the client in these matters.
Motivation is also often a challenge for any nutritional goal. The client must understand how they will benefit from
the diet plan. The nurse should clearly identify potential complications the client ignores nutritional goals.

Maintaining a diet rich in vitamin D is challenging even if a client has the means and the motivation to follow the diet.
Our bodies naturally make vitamin D in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight. However, because of the importance
of protecting our skin by using sunscreen, we are blocking our skin's ability to make vitamin D. Therefore, vitamin D
needs to come in the form of nutrition or added supplements for most people.

Consuming a diet with nutrient rich calories is often a challenge for the client during wound or tissue healing. The
client is often more immobile during such times, and the client may worry about gaining weight. The nurse can be a
vital resource for the client by educating them on the difference between consuming empty calories and nutrient-
rich calories. The client must understand the importance of nutrition and the positive impact that nutrient-rich
calories play in the tissue and wound healing process.

19.3 Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 19.3.1 Assess the client for readiness to learn.
  · 19.3.2 Teach nutritional strategies to optimize musculoskeletal and integumentary wellness.

Holistic Nursing Assessment of the Client

Maintaining overall health within the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems is critical to holistic health. One
way to attain this goal is to review specific nutritional plans with the client. Some plans, such as gluten free or
Mediterranean, are found to be helpful in decreasing the symptoms associated with musculoskeletal and
integumentary disorders. Some research suggests there is an inflammatory immune response related to gluten--a
protein found in wheat, barley, and rye grains. Some people may find that eating gluten makes their rheumatoid
arthritis symptoms flare up and that reducing or eliminating gluten helps relieve their symptoms. Another anti-
inflammatory nutritional plan, the Mediterranean diet, which emphasizes fresh fruits and vegetables, fish, whole
grains, nuts, and mono- and polyunsaturated fats, is helpful for reducing inflammation and works well to reduce
arthritis symptoms. This diet plan includes omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin C, fiber-rich foods, polyphenols, and other
known inflammation fighters. Polyphenols, found in various foods, are organic compounds that contribute to the
food's color and smell. The nurse should ensure the client understands the premise behind the nutritional plan and
that they can read and interpret food labels and ingredients properly.

The client must also be assessed for readiness to learn. This can be accomplished through a holistic
assessment--an in-depth client assessment that delves into:

  · Physiological health--Physical condition, physical limitations, medical conditions, past medical and surgical
      history, and current medications

  · Psychological health--Mental health condition, cognitive level, anxiety, stress
  · Social and environmental--Support systems, living conditions, financial barriers, access to resources
  · Cultural factors--Traditions, languages, set of beliefs
  · Spiritual factors--Alcohol consumption, dietary choices, procedures allowed, advanced directives
382  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     By working with the client to establish holistic goals for good health, client/nurse communication is enhanced, and
     trust is established. Holistic nursing provides a deeper respect for the client and helps them gain control over their
     lifestyle changes.

     As a part of the physiological health assessment, the nurse should determine the client's list of medications. As a
     part of client teaching, the nurse should educate the client about the medications that have been prescribed for
     treatment. Some of the most ordered medications for musculoskeletal disorders include NSAIDS like ibuprofen,
     diclofenac, naproxen, indomethacin, meloxicam, and others.

     Client Teaching

     When a client is hospitalized, teaching starts at admission and is an ongoing process throughout the stay until
     discharge. Education should be provided in small segments for better client retention. Nurses should speak in a
     language that the client can understand, refraining from using complex medical terminology. In some instances,
     return demonstration is needed right before discharge. The nurse should educate according to the learning style of
     the client and should include the caretakers who will be assisting the client once home (Morris, 2022).

     Client teaching should always include nutritionally related teaching strategies. Too often at discharge, the nurse
     focuses on the physical problem exclusively. Nutritional client education that focuses on the musculoskeletal and
     integumentary system is a more holistic approach to treatment. See Table 19.8 for important nutritional teaching
     concerning both the integumentary and musculoskeletal systems.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                          19.3 · Implement Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness           383

Function                  Nutritional Importance                           Nutrients to Support System

Integumentary System        · Unhealthy eating impacts the skin and leads    · Foods high in water content
                                to malnutrition. This impacts the body's         such as fruits and
  · First line of               homeostasis in relation to protection,           vegetables help to prevent
      defense for the           thermoregulation, sensory, endocrine and         dehydration and dry skin,
      body against              immune functions.                                promoting skin integrity
      environmental
      trauma and            · A healthy diet helps to maintain and repair    · Foods with anti-
      pathogens                 body tissue.                                     inflammatory properties
                                                                                 Nuts
  · Skin has                                                                     Fruits (blackberries,
      thermoregulation                                                               blueberries, avocados,
      properties as well                                                             grapes, cherries)
      as sensory,                                                                Turmeric
      endocrine and                                                              Omega-3 fatty acids
      immune functions                                                               (salmon)
                                                                                 Green tea
                                                                                 Olive oil

                                                                           · Foods that promote wound

                                                                              healing
                                                                               Proteins (cottage cheese,

                                                                                  beef, salmon, tuna,

                                                                                  chicken breast, beans,

                                                                                  nuts)
                                                                               Whole grains
                                                                               Vitamin C (citrus fruits,

                                                                                  broccoli)
                                                                               Vitamin A (carrots,

                                                                                  apricots)
                                                                               Zinc (shellfish, eggs,

                                                                                  poultry)
                                                                               Iron (red meat, dark

                                                                                  green leafy vegetables)

TABLE 19.8 Nutritional Teaching for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems (sources: Campbell, 2023; Cleveland Clinic, 2023;
Opentextbc.ca 2013)
384  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     Function                         Nutritional Importance                           Nutrients to Support System

     Musculoskeletal System                                                              · Foods with anti-
                                                                                             inflammatory properties:
     · Supports the                   · Malnutrition can severely impair the                 Nuts
        body's weight and                musculoskeletal system.                             Fruits (blackberries,
        provides stability                                                                       blueberries, avocados,
        and movement                  · Proper nutrition is important to minimize                grapes, cherries)
                                         normal bone loss that occurs over time.             Turmeric
                                                                                             Omega-3 fatty acids
                                      · A healthy diet promotes healthy weight                   (salmon)
                                         which decreases the strain on bones, joints,        Green tea
                                         muscles and ligaments.                              Olive oil

                                      · Proper nutrition assists to decrease
                                         inflammation, promote bone marrow
                                         production, and maintain overall mobility.

                                                                                       · Maintenance of bone and

                                                                                          muscle mass and

                                                                                          strengthens bones:
                                                                                           Vitamin D (milk, cheese)
                                                                                           Fruits
                                                                                           Vegetables
                                                                                           Zinc (pumpkin seeds,

                                                                                              lentils)
                                                                                           Magnesium (bananas,

                                                                                              dark chocolate, whole

                                                                                              grains, leafy green

                                                                                              vegetables)
                                                                                           Phosphorus (whole

                                                                                              wheat, cheese)

                                                                                       · Promotes bone formation:
                                                                                           Proteins (cottage cheese,

                                                                                              beef, salmon, tuna,

                                                                                              chicken breast, beans)
                                                                                           Greek yogurt

     TABLE 19.8 Nutritional Teaching for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems (sources: Campbell, 2023; Cleveland Clinic, 2023;
     Opentextbc.ca 2013)

     As seen in the table above, both the musculoskeletal and the integumentary systems are affected by inflammation.
     Therefore, anti-inflammatory foods are important to consider for both systems. The muscles of the musculoskeletal
     system can become inflamed due to injury, infection, or overuse. Likewise, the soft tissue and skin of the
     integumentary system can become inflamed due to injury or infection. The injured muscle often involves the
     surrounding tissue and skin. Bones that are injured (fractures) often manifest signs in the integumentary system,
     such as bruising and discoloration. The injured tendons and ligaments of the musculoskeletal system manifest signs
     in the integumentary system, such as ecchymosis and edema. These are just a few examples of how the
     musculoskeletal system and the integumentary system are connected to one another.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     The nurse prepares to instruct the client on nutritional strategies to manage her arthritis. Client teaching for Anne

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.4 · Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness                                385

includes the reinforcement teaching of a nutritional plan that has anti-inflammatory properties for her osteoarthritis
with edema in the knees. Along with nutritional education, the nurse instructs the client to stay as active as
possible, doing stretching exercises daily as prescribed by the physical therapist to maintain or gain ROM in lower
extremities. The nurse instructs Anne to pay close attention to the skin surrounding her knees, observing for warmth
or redness. Anne is encouraged to report these integumentary symptoms if they occur because they could indicate
septic arthritis of the knees.

    3. From what is known about nutrition and the impact that it has on the musculoskeletal system, which of the
        following foods would you expect the nurse to include in dietary teaching for the client?
         a. Leafy green vegetables
         b. Dairy products
         c. Red meat
         d. Protein shakes

    4. After the nurse finishes the instructions, which of the following statements by the client indicates additional
        education is needed?
         a. "I will try to incorporate more berries into my diet."
         b. "I will stop eating nuts."
         c. "I will try to eat more salmon and tuna."
         d. "I will eat fewer carbohydrates."

19.4 Evaluate Nutritional Strategies to Impact Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Wellness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 19.4.1 Evaluate a nutritional plan for its effectiveness on musculoskeletal and integumentary wellness.
  · 19.4.2 Modify a nutritional plan to promote musculoskeletal and integumentary wellness.

Evaluating the Client's Compliance with the Meal Plan

Evaluation is an important part of the nursing process. After the client has integrated nutritional strategies into their
eating habits, the nurse should go back and evaluate the effectiveness of the plan. This is accomplished through
objective and subjective findings. Barriers to compliance may include a client's inability to read, write, and perform
simple math. Finances, resources, transportation, and support are also barriers to client nutritional compliance.

A client's compliance with the meal plan can, to some degree, be evaluated through their improvement of symptoms
related to the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems. Objective ways to evaluate compliance with a meal plan
are monitoring client weight and laboratory test results. Other objective findings include improvement in wounds,
fractures, injuries, and nail and hair quality. Radiology procedures showing regeneration of bone or no extension in
bone loss are also objective findings.

Subjective data from the client or caregivers must also be considered in determining client nutritional compliance.
In other words, the nurse needs to listen to the client and caregivers to determine if compliance is being met.

Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Nutritional Plan

The effectiveness of a nutritional plan can be determined by many factors such as weight variance, changes in pain
and edema, alterations in muscle strength and tone, and absence or presence of fatigue. DEXA (dual x-ray
absorptiometry) scans that measure bone density can be used as a follow up to the initial scan to determine if bone
loss is stable or progressing. Continual monitoring of client labs is an effective way to evaluate whether the
nutritional plan is working. Labs for the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems are outlined in Table 19.9.
386  19 · Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

     Labs for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary  Indications
     Systems
                                                   · Inflammation and infection
       · White blood count (WBC)                   · Inflammation
       · Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)      · Infection
       · C-reactive protein (CRP)
       · Culture and sensitivity

     · Vitamins A and D, and calcium             · Fractures
                                                 · Osteoporosis
                                                 · Osteopenia
                                                 · Paget's disease

     · Antinuclear antibody (ANA)                · Autoimmune disorders
     · Rheumatoid factor (RF)
     · Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP)
     · Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
     · Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)

     · Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)                · Bone formation

     · Plasma histamine                          · Immune disorders

     TABLE 19.9 Labs for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Systems (source: Pagana & Pagana, 2023)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         19 · Chapter Summary 387

Chapter Summary

· The musculoskeletal system includes the bones of          bone formation, bone health, fracture healing,
   the skeleton and the cartilage, ligaments, and           wound healing, and hair and nail health.
   other connective tissues and muscles.                 · Nurse assessment and screening tests for the
                                                            musculoskeletal and integumentary systems are
· The integumentary system includes the skin, hair,         essential for the overall success of client care.
   nails, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, and nerves     · Client teaching, including nutritional meal
   on the skin.                                             planning, is important to the overall care of the
                                                            musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.
· There is a relationship between the neurological       · The client must be assessed for readiness to learn
   system and the musculoskeletal system in that the        before educating the client about lifestyle changes
   brain and nerves tell the voluntary muscles what         including nutrition.
   to do.                                                · Evaluation of nutritional strategies include client
                                                            adherence. The nurse must be able to recognize
· Nutrition plays a key role in the development and         barriers to adherence with overall client health
   maintenance of a healthy musculoskeletal and             care.
   integumentary system.

· Within the musculoskeletal and integumentary
   systems, nutrition affects a person's immune
   system, inflammatory response, level of edema,

Key Terms

alopecia hair loss                                           stretching while in a passive resting state
autoimmune disorder occurs when the body's               musculoskeletal system the bones of the skeleton

    immune system attacks and destroys healthy body          and the cartilages, ligaments, and other connective
    tissue                                                   tissues and muscles
basal ganglia a part of the brain that starts and        osteoarthritis a degenerative joint disease resulting
    coordinate movements; diseases of the cells leading      in chronic pain and often edema
    into the basal ganglia include Parkinson's disease   patch testing a skin test for allergies
    that results in tremors                              polyphenols beneficial plant compounds with
Braden scale an assessment tool using six categories         antioxidant properties
    to determine pressure injury risk                    psoriatic arthritis a long-term inflammatory disease
crepitus a grating sound produced by friction                of the joints
    between bone and cartilage or bone and bone          range of motion (ROM) reflects the client's ability to
diascopy a test for determining how quickly the skin         move their joints actively or passively
    blanches under pressure                              scoliosis a sideways curvature of the spine
genu varum bowing of legs                                scraping a technique for obtaining superficial dead
hirsutism an abundance of hair in places where hair          skin for testing
    is normally scarce or absent                         tenting when the skin remains raised after being
integumentary system the body system that                    pinched on the back of the hand
    includes the skin, hair, nails, sweat glands,        Tzanck testing a test used to diagnose viral disease
    sebaceous glands, and nerves on the skin                 with active vesicles
intoeing foot turned inward                              vitiligo skin pigmentation disturbance
kyphosis an excessive outward curvature of the spine     wood light test a black light test used to diagnose
lordosis an excessive inward curvature of the spine          lesions
muscle tone a measure of a muscle's resistance to

Review Questions

1. The nurse is educating a client on ways to promote bone health after the client suffered a stress fracture.
    Foods containing which of the following vitamins are the priority for this client?
     a. Vitamin D
     b. Vitamin B12
     c. Vitamin C
     d. Vitamin E

2. During an assessment, the nurse notes the client has tenting. What does this indicate?
388 19 · Review Questions

         a. Poor muscle tone
         b. Poor circulation
         c. Poor skin integrity
         d. Poor hydration

    3. The nurse is educating the client with a torn bicep muscle on the effects of nutrition on musculoskeletal
        health. What recommendation do you expect the nurse to make?
         a. Increase protein intake
         b. Increase vitamin D intake
         c. Include foods high in biotin
         d. Include foods high in iron

    4. Which client would most likely benefit from consuming bromelain?
         a. A 40-year-old marathon runner with sore muscles in legs
         b. A 78-year-old client with a stage 3 pressure ulcer
         c. An 83-year-old client with osteoporosis
         d. A 65-year-old client with edema in their right knee due to osteoarthritis

    5. A client with a stage 2 pressure injury was prescribed protein shakes twice daily. Upon return to the office for
        a recheck, the pressure ulcer changed to stage 1. Which of the following findings supports the conclusion the
        client has improved?
         a. A blister has now formed at the site of the pressure injury.
         b. The site of the pressure injury shows some healthy adipose tissue.
         c. The site of the pressure injury is red but intact.
         d. The pressure injury diameter is smaller but deeper.

    6. The client has returned to the clinic for a follow-up appointment after being diagnosed with osteoporosis.
        Which of the following statements by the client indicates they have followed the recommended diet to
        manage their condition?
         a. "I have been eating more fruit than I used to."
         b. "I try to eat several servings of dairy products each day."
         c. "I don't like to eat fish."
         d. "I have switched from eating French fries to baked potatoes."

    7. The nurse is caring for a client who is prescribed a gluten-free diet to manage their dermatitis herpetiformis.
        Which foods require modification when conforming to a gluten-free diet?
         a. Fresh fruit and vegetables
         b. Bread and pasta
         c. Brown and wild rice
         d. Fish and poultry

    8. During an admission assessment, the nurse is assessing the client's fingernails. Which of the following
        findings would be concerning?
         a. Capillary refill < 2 seconds
         b. Smooth nails
         c. Clubbing of nails
         d. Translucent color with pinkish tone

    9. The nurse is providing nutritional instruction to a client with a surgical wound that is slow to heal. Which of
        the following statements by the client indicates the client understands the recommended diet strategies?
         a. "I will eat smaller, more frequent meals."
         b. "I will drink water throughout the day."
         c. "I will limit my intake of dairy products."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                19 · Suggested Reading 389

         d. "I will eat several servings of fruits and vegetables each day."

  10. The nurse is working with a client who is experiencing alopecia. Which of the following nutrients, found in
        liver and egg yolks, could the nurse recommend?
         a. Folate
         b. Zinc
         c. Selenium
         d. Biotin

Suggested Reading

Benedetti, J. (2021, December 16). Foods that Fight Inflammation. Harvard Health Publishing. Retrieved May 3,
    2023, from https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/foods-that-fight-inflammation

Campbell, B. (2021). Calcium Nutrition and Bone Health. Orthoinfo. https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/staying-healthy/
    calcium-nutrition-and-bone-health/

Johns Hopkins Medicine (2023, May 13). Vitamin D and Calcium. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/
    wellness-and-prevention/vitamin-d-and-calcium

Mayo Clinic. (2021, December 11). Nutrition and Healthy Eating. Retrieved May 13, 2023, from
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/gluten-free-diet/
    art-20048530

Travers, J. (2020). The Bone Strength Plan. Welbeck Balance. London.
390 19 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 20

Special Nutritional Considerations for
Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

FIGURE 20.1 Tomatoes contain essential micronutrients such as vitamin A, vitamin C, phosphorus, and potassium. (credit: modification of
work "Foods Vegetables in Bulacan displayed for sale in Baliuag, Bulacan Public Market" by Judgefloro/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
20.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan
20.2 Nutrition and Chronic Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Illness
20.3 Treatments and Nutrition
INTRODUCTION Musculoskeletal and integumentary changes can affect other organ systems, and they also
become evident as the body ages. Aging muscles and skin can cause changes in a person's mobility and overall
wellness. Decreases in bone mass and density can result in fractures and illness. The chapter on Applying Clinical
Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness covers the important role of
nutrition in musculoskeletal and integumentary health and wellness. This chapter will introduce special
considerations across the lifespan because nutritional needs change over time. Preventing and mitigating
complications of the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems, such as fractures, poor wound healing, physical
disability, disease progression, poor quality of life, and hospital admissions, can often be achieved through
implementing appropriate nutrition and adequate physical activity.
Consider this case: Meet Maria, a 20-year-old, and her newborn baby, Jose. To explore the concepts presented in
this chapter, the unfolding case study will follow Jose as he grows from a newborn to an older adult.
392  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     20.1 The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness
     Across the Lifespan

     LEARNING OUTCOMES
     By the end of this section, you should be able to:

       · 20.1.1 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during
           pregnancy.

       · 20.1.2 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during
           infancy.

       · 20.1.3 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during
           childhood.

       · 20.1.4 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during
           adolescence.

       · 20.1.5 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during
           adulthood.

       · 20.1.6 Describe the impact of nutrition on the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems during later
           adulthood.

     The Healthy Pregnant Client and Fetus

     Pregnant clients are encouraged to eat a healthy, balanced diet, not just for their own health and well-being but also
     for the health and well-being of the growing fetus. Nutrition plays a critical role in maintaining musculoskeletal and
     integumentary health during pregnancy.

     Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is essential for developing and maintaining healthy bones and teeth in
     both the pregnant client and the developing fetus (Azzolino et al., 2021). During pregnancy, the demand for calcium
     increases to support fetal skeletal development. Insufficient calcium intake may lead to decreased maternal bone
     density as well as decreased bone density and teeth firmness of the child later in life (Tihtonen et al., 2021).

     Protein is vital for the growth and repair of muscles and the development of the fetal musculoskeletal system.
     Adequate protein intake is necessary to meet these demands for both the pregnant client and the fetus.

     Maintaining proper hydration during pregnancy helps keep the skin hydrated, reducing the risk for dryness, itching,
     and stretch marks. Moreover, sufficient water intake is crucial for fetal development. Table 20.1 highlights some of
     the important ways staying hydrated during pregnancy benefits the growing fetus.

     Benefit to  Explanation
     the Fetus

     Collagen    Water is essential to produce collagen, a protein needed for the development of skin and bones.
     production

     Nutrient    Proper hydration enables efficient transport of essential nutrients to the growing fetus. Adequate
     transport   maternal blood volume and circulation to and from the placenta are necessary for nutrients to be
                 transported to the growing fetus and waste products removed.

     Amniotic The amniotic fluid is responsible for thermoregulation in utero, and a stable temperature ensures

     fluid       appropriate fetal growth and development. Additionally, amniotic fluid cushions the growing fetus,

     production allowing for essential movements that allow the fetus to develop strong bones and muscles.

     TABLE 20.1 Hydration Benefits for the Fetus

     Consuming a well-balanced diet rich in essential nutrients such as vitamins A, C, and E and the mineral zinc can
     promote healthy skin during pregnancy. These nutrients play a role in collagen synthesis, essential for skin elasticity
     and wound healing. Foods such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats can provide these
     necessary nutrients.

     Omega-3 fatty acids, particularly docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are crucial for developing the fetal skin and nervous
     system. Including dietary sources of omega-3 fatty acids, such as fatty fish and flaxseed, can support the
     integumentary health of both the pregnant client and the developing baby (American College of Obstetricians and
     Gynecologists, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                        20.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan  393

The nurse should encourage pregnant clients to maintain a balanced and varied diet that includes a wide range of
nutrients. Referral to a registered dietitian may be recommended to ensure proper nutritional intake during
pregnancy.

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part A

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study will evolve
throughout the chapter.

Maria delivers a healthy baby and names him Jose. Maria's diet was suboptimal during pregnancy because of
hyperemesis gravidarum and lack of appetite, and it lacked adequate folic acid, vitamin D, and calcium. Because of
her severe vomiting, Maria could not take her prenatal vitamin supplements. Maria has decided that she will
breastfeed.

    1. What information might indicate that the baby is at increased risk for musculoskeletal and integumentary
        issues later in infancy and throughout adulthood?
         a. The baby will be breastfed.
         b. The mother did not consume enough whole grains during the pregnancy.
         c. The mother did not consume many dairy products during the pregnancy.
         d. The baby is male.

    2. Which body system might be most affected by suboptimal intake of vitamin D and calcium?
         a. Musculoskeletal
         b. Neurologic
         c. Integumentary
         d. Hematologic

Vitamin D
Approximately 99% of the calcium within the body is stored in bone (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2022).
Vitamin D mediates the storage and uptake of maternal calcium and, as such, is essential for fetal bone
development. Vitamin D is absorbed through the skin and ingested in various foods. There is a correlation between
low maternal vitamin D and osteopenia in newborns and decreased bone density in childhood (Azzolino et al.,
2021). Consequently, it is important to monitor vitamin D levels in the pregnant client. Supplementation may be
necessary when levels are not in the expected range.

The Pregnant Client with Integumentary or Musculoskeletal Illness
Table 20.2 outlines some of the musculoskeletal and integumentary conditions that can develop because of
physiologic changes during pregnancy.

Condition Manifestations                                               Treatments

Musculoskeletal System

Diastasis  The growing uterus can put pressure on the abdominal        The pregnant client may wear an
recti      muscles, leading to separation and a visible bulge in the   abdominal binder for support.
           abdomen. The client is who pregnant client may
           experience weakness and back pain and may have
           difficulty regaining physical strength following delivery.

Carpal     Hormonal changes and fluid retention in the pregnant This condition usually resolves after

tunnel     client can lead to overly stretchy joints and tendons,      delivery, but the pregnant client may

syndrome swelling, and compression of the median nerve in the          wear a hand and wrist brace for

           wrist. This often manifests as numbness, tingling, or       support.

           pain in the hands and fingers.

TABLE 20.2 Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Conditions Resulting from Physiologic Changes During Pregnancy
394  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     Condition Manifestations                                                 Treatments

     Musculoskeletal System

     Lower back   Weight gain, changes in posture, and hormonal shifts        The pregnant client may wear a pelvic
     and pelvic   can lead to lower back pain and stretching of the pubic     and abdominal support belt and rest
     girdle pain  symphysis.                                                  whenever necessary but should avoid
                                                                              NSAIDs for pain relief.

     Integumentary System

     Pruritic     PUPPP is a skin condition of unknown origin that occurs     There is no significant health risk for
     urticarial   in some pregnant clients, most commonly during the          the pregnant client or the fetus, so
     papules      third trimester. It is characterized by itchy, red, raised  treatment is supportive and may
     and          bumps and hives that most commonly appear on the            include creams and emollients,
     plaques of   abdomen, thighs, buttocks, and arms.                        corticosteroids, antihistamines, and
     pregnancy                                                                cool compresses.
     (PUPPP)

     Stretch      Because the skin naturally stretches to accommodate         Stretch marks appear as purplish-red
     marks        weight gain and the growing breasts and abdomen,            lines that, with time, fade to silvery-
                  stretch marks often develop.                                white lines. They are permanent.

     Linea nigra Hormonal changes in some pregnant clients cause a            During the postpartum period, the

                  benign dark line to form down the center of the             linea nigra will disappear slowly over a

                  abdomen from the umbilicus to the pubis symphysis           few months as the hormones of

                  (Figure 20.2).                                              pregnancy exit the individual's system.

     TABLE 20.2 Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Conditions Resulting from Physiologic Changes During Pregnancy

     FIGURE 20.2 This individual in third trimester exhibits a linea nigra, a dark line that appears on the abdomen from the umbilicus to the
     pubis symphysis. (credit: "photo of hand, woman, round, trunk, female, leg, love, finger, child, arm, baby, muscle, chest, pregnancy,
     maternity" by PxHere, CC0 Public Domain)

     Impact of Maternal Health During Pregnancy
     Proper nutrition in pregnancy is even more important for pregnant clients in poor health, which can result from
     underlying medical conditions or malnutrition. A pregnant client in poor health may be at higher risk for nutrient
     deficiencies, such as deficiencies of calcium or vitamin D, which can negatively affect bone strength and density.
     Insufficient nutrient intake may increase the likelihood of conditions such as osteoporosis, fractures, or impaired
     bone formation in the pregnant client and the developing fetus. Inadequate protein intake can lead to muscle
     wasting, weakness, and reduced muscle function in pregnant clients with poor health, thereby affecting their overall
     physical strength and ability to perform daily activities (Azzolino et al., 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
               20.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan           395

Poor health may also increase the risk for nutrient deficiencies, such as iron, folate, vitamin B12, or vitamin C. These
nutrients are essential for various processes, including red blood cell formation, collagen synthesis, and tissue
repair. Deficiencies in these nutrients can lead to anemia, impaired wound healing, weakened connective tissues,
and compromised overall musculoskeletal health.

Some important foods for musculoskeletal health in pregnancy that the nurse can recommend include beans, peas,
beef, pork, fish, poultry, milk, cheese, dairy products, nuts, and seeds (March of Dimes, 2020).

Prenatal vitamins play a key role in supporting the maternal and fetal musculoskeletal systems during pregnancy
and in the postpartum period. Table 20.3 highlights the importance of prenatal vitamins and their impact on the
musculoskeletal systems of the pregnant client and the fetus.

Benefit        Explanation

Fetal bone     Adequate calcium intake during pregnancy is essential for the developing fetus's bones.
development

Prevention of  Folic acid may prevent neural tube abnormalities in the fetus.
birth
abnormalities

Maternal       If maternal calcium stores are low during pregnancy, the fetus may draw calcium from maternal

calcium        calcium stores, further exacerbating hypocalcemia in the pregnant client and increasing the risk

stores         for fractures. Additionally, maternal calcium levels drop during lactation. Continuing prenatal

               vitamins in the postpartum period is one way to increase maternal calcium intake and stores.

TABLE 20.3 Prenatal Vitamin Benefits Related to the Musculoskeletal System

Infancy

Infancy is a time of rapid musculoskeletal and integumentary growth, so dietary considerations are critical to ensure
healthy bones, muscles, and skin. Breastfeeding does not provide an infant with enough vitamin D. To prevent
musculoskeletal disorders and to promote healthy skeletal growth, it is recommended that all breastfed infants
receive vitamin D supplementation. Supplementation with 400 IU of vitamin D per day should begin in the first few
days of life and should be provided to exclusively breastfed infants and breastfed infants supplemented with
commercial formula (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021). Vitamin D supplementation should
continue until the infant is weaned and has adequate intake of vitamin D-rich foods.

Regular dental checkups are important for the infant. The infant should see a dentist as soon as their first tooth
erupts, and some dentists recommend a visit even before this time to help them get used to the environment.
Regular fluoride supplementation becomes necessary through water or toothpaste when an infant begins to eat
solid foods. Standard formulas contain fluoride that a breastfed infant does not receive, so breastfed infants need
supplemental fluoride after 6 months of age. Nurses should encourage parents to begin brushing their infant's teeth
as they erupt, using fluoride toothpaste according to their dentist's recommendations (American Academy of
Pediatric Dentistry, 2023).

It is also important for infants to begin to "exercise" their muscles and bones as soon as possible for optimal growth
and development. As soon as a baby is born, a parent should encourage supervised "tummy time." This activity
helps infants build the strength necessary for rolling over, crawling, and exploring the world. It also helps infants
strengthen their neck muscles and develop head control and can be introduced around 3-4 months old.

Osteopenia, or low bone density, is common in preterm newborns. It can also occur in newborns whose mothers
were deficient in calcium and vitamin D. Osteopenia is most likely in an infant born before 30 weeks' gestation
because the majority of calcium uptake occurs during the third trimester of fetal life. A preterm newborn with
osteopenia may exhibit no symptoms but is at increased risk for fractures. Osteopenia and the risk for fracture
continue through the preterm infant's first year of life.

Newborns identified as high risk for developing osteopenia or fractures, such as preterm infants, are monitored and
may receive fortifiers with their feedings to help them retain calcium and phosphorus (American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2022).
396  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part B

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
     Study Part A.

     Maria's infant, Jose, is now 6 months old and is still being breastfed.

         3. Which statement by the client indicates that further nursing education is necessary regarding the child's
             musculoskeletal health?
              a. "My baby is now 6 months old and does not need to continue their vitamin D supplement."
              b. "My baby will not be walking for some time but putting them in a bouncer seat can help them develop the
                   skill."
              c. "I like to provide lots of opportunities for play for my baby, and they love to be on their tummy."
              d. "My baby doesn't have any teeth yet, but I'll make a dentist appointment as soon as they get them!"

     4. The client asks the nurse if the baby needs vitamin D supplementation if the baby is given commercial
         formula from time to time. How should the nurse respond?
          a. "You will need to continue vitamin D supplementation until the baby is fully weaned and taking in
               adequate vitamin D-rich foods regardless of whether or not you are supplementing."
          b. "Commercial formula contains adequate vitamin D, so you do not need to give the baby vitamin D on the
               days you supplement with formula."
          c. "Commercial formula does not contain any vitamin D."
          d. "You should not supplement your baby with commercial formula and should exclusively breastfeed, as
               that is what's best for a growing infant."

     Childhood

     During childhood, the bones and muscles grow and develop rapidly. The effect of malnutrition in these body systems
     can have lifelong effects. Therefore, nurses should teach parents and caregivers about essential nutrients and ways
     to ensure that their children receive adequate amounts for growth.

     Vitamin D and Calcium
     Vitamin D and calcium levels are not routinely monitored in children, so the nurse must assess for any signs of
     deficiency and instruct parents on appropriate intake. Children with vitamin D deficiency can develop a condition
     known as rickets, characterized by frequent fractures and weak bones, although this condition is rare. Children with
     rickets are at increased risk for fractures (Chanchlani et al., 2020). Table 20.4 lists foods that are high in vitamin D
     and calcium.

       Foods High in Vitamin D                                                             Foods High in Calcium
       Vitamin D-fortified foods, such as milk, orange juice, and cereal                   Dairy products
       Fatty fish, such as salmon, trout, and sardines                                     Sardines
       Egg yolks                                                                           Leafy green vegetables
       Mushrooms                                                                           Tofu
       Cod liver oil                                                                       Almonds

     TABLE 20.4 Foods High in Vitamin D and Calcium

     Fluoride
     Fluoride is an important mineral for bone health and for dental health in particular because it stimulates new bone
     formation and inhibits the progression of dental caries (cavities). It is naturally present in water and many foods.
     However, since 1962 the U.S. Public Health Service has recommended that public water be supplemented with
     fluoride to promote oral hygiene and tooth health in the overall U.S. population (Office of Dietary Supplements,
     2022). Though fluoride occurs in water naturally, the fluoridation of public water supplies first began in 1945. Well

     Access for free at openstax.org
                        20.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan  397

water may not contain adequate fluoride, which is important information for nurses to give clients who have private
well water as their main water source. Most bottled water does not contain fluoride. The American Academy of
Pediatric Dentistry (2023) recommends the use of fluoride for children and has determined that it is a safe and
effective way to reduce the incidence of dental caries.

Nurses should teach parents to begin brushing their child's teeth twice a day as soon as a tooth erupts. Table 20.5
provides guidelines on the amount of toothpaste to use.

Age Range               Amount of Toothpaste

Younger than 3 years old Use a small smear of fluoride toothpaste no larger than a grain of rice twice a day.

3-6 years old           Use a pea-sized amount of fluoride toothpaste twice a day.

Older than 6 years old  Use fluoride toothpaste according to the manufacturer's recommendations.

TABLE 20.5 Amount of Toothpaste to Use According to Age (source: Thornton-Evans et al., 2019)

Protein and Iron
Protein, one of the body's major tissue building blocks, is essential for muscle development, maintenance, and
repair. Children are constantly growing; therefore, ensuring a diet that includes adequate amounts of protein is
essential for adequate muscle growth. Meats, beans, tofu, and peanut butter all contain protein.

Protein also helps bones grow and develop. Collagen, for example, is a protein that provides bone strength and
flexibility. It is also important for healthy skin. Children need to consume foods that contain the building blocks of
collagen, such as fish, poultry, meat, eggs, dairy, legumes, and soy.

Iron is necessary to produce hemoglobin, which carries oxygen to all parts of the body. Muscles are vascular and
need an adequate oxygen supply during growth and development. Foods rich in iron include red meats, leafy green
vegetables, lentils, and iron-fortified cereals.

Obesity in Childhood
Obesity is on the rise across all populations and is especially dangerous in childhood because health habits are
established early in life. The development of obesity in childhood is complicated. Social determinants of health as
well as lifestyle choices have contributed to obesity in children.

Obesity leads to multisystemic issues, but two notable factors influence the healthy development of bones in obese
children. First, inactivity due to obesity can prevent a child from participating in healthy activities. This continuing
inactivity affects metabolism as well as the healthy development of bone during weight-bearing exercises. Second,
an overweight child may have an unbalanced diet and could be lacking in vitamin D, calcium, and other nutrients
essential for healthy bone development.

Children who are overweight or obese have additional stress on their skeletal system. In addition to increasing the
risk for acute injuries, the additional weight can lead to chronic musculoskeletal conditions in the bones and joints
and may increase the individual's risk for early orthopedic surgery (Nowicki et al., 2019).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Part C

Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up to Case
Study Parts A and B.

Jose is now 6 years old and has presented for a yearly checkup. Jose is overweight for their height. The nurse is
doing a diet review with Maria, and learns that Jose's daily diet includes the following:

  · Breakfast - toaster pastries
  · Lunch - boxed macaroni and cheese, a juice box, and mandarin oranges from a can
  · Dinner - chicken nuggets, french fries, and a juice box

Jose does not like to participate in gym class because the activities are "too hard" and prefers to play on a tablet for
398  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     about 2 hours a day.

         5. Which of the following is the highest priority right now to promote the child's musculoskeletal health?
              a. The child should begin exercising twice daily.
              b. The nurse should teach the mother about components of a healthy diet for children.
              c. The child should be excused from gym class and referred to a specialist.
              d. The child should drink whole milk instead of juice boxes with meals.

         6. The mother asks the nurse to recommend foods that promote healthy bone development. Which of the
             following foods would be the best choice?
              a. Brown rice
              b. Legumes
              c. Red meats
              d. Spinach

     Adolescence

     Adolescence is an important time for musculoskeletal development in an individual's life. Maintaining an active
     lifestyle during adolescence has been shown to positively influence skeletal development. During adolescence,
     bone mass and density are especially receptive to exercise, making this period crucial for skeletal development.
     Females achieve up to 90% of their peak bone mass by age 18 and males by age 20. Calcium, vitamin D, and vitamin
     C are essential during these years. Musculoskeletal injuries are a leading cause of hospitalization for adolescents
     and children. Both underlying conditions and sports injuries contribute to such injuries during adolescence
     (American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 2016).

     Adolescence is also thought to be a key time for muscle development. Leading an active lifestyle and avoiding
     saturated fats and highly processed sugars during adolescence can promote healthy body mass distribution later in
     life (Azzolino et al., 2021).

       SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       Increased Nutritional Needs for Adolescent Athletes
       Adolescent athletes have increased nutritional needs because they are performing intense physical activity
       while still growing and developing. As a result of their increased energy needs, they must consume adequate
       amounts of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Carbohydrates come in a variety of forms, but it is important that
       adolescent athletes avoid highly processed sugars, which increase risk for diabetes and obesity. For optimal
       performance, they should strive to consume whole grains, fruits, legumes, and vegetables.

     Protein helps restore muscle lost through exercise, so the athlete should consume adequate amounts of fish,
     poultry, meat, and other protein sources. The protein needs of adolescent athletes can vary depending on factors
     such as age, sex, body size, activity level, and training intensity. However, in general, the protein requirements for
     adolescent athletes are higher than those of their more sedentary peers because of the increased demands of
     physical activity and muscle development. Nurses can estimate the recommended daily protein intake for
     adolescent athletes based on their body weight; adolescent athletes should consume approximately 10-30% of
     their daily calories from protein (Klemm, 2020). Protein shakes are not necessary for healthy adolescent athletes,
     and they should strive to get their protein from natural food sources.

     Adulthood

     Adulthood is a time for optimal health and health preservation. During adulthood, it is important to eat a variety of
     nutrient-rich foods containing protein, calcium, and vitamin D and remain physically active to maintain bone density
     and mass. Healthy adults have no special requirements for supplementation, but they should aim to ingest
     adequate micronutrients and macronutrients to maintain healthy bones, muscles, and skin.

     Barriers to physical activity during adulthood include increased pressures and time constraints, especially for
     students, working adults, and those with families. The convenience of highly processed foods has contributed to a

     Access for free at openstax.org
                           20.1 · The Impact of Nutrition on Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness Across the Lifespan  399

rise in cancers and obesity throughout the world (Isaksen & Dankel, 2023; Hall et al., 2019). Choosing healthier
alternatives to fast food is a great way for adults to improve their overall nutrition and well-being and to set a
healthy example for children.

Many adults now reach for shakes and protein powders for convenience over whole foods. While protein powders
are convenient, they are unnecessary for most individuals (Gelsomin, 2020). Most individuals, even active athletes,
can obtain the necessary protein requirements for a healthy musculoskeletal system through diet alone. The risks
and disadvantages of using protein supplements are related to the actual content of the product (Harvard Health
Publishing, 2022). The FDA does not regulate the nutritional content of these products, so the actual ingredients
may vary from the label and may include contaminants. In addition to the protein, the supplements may contain a
lot of sugar and calories.

Table 20.6 lists ways that adults can strive to maintain optimal musculoskeletal and integumentary health and
prevent illness.

Action                     Rationale

Good posture               Developing good posture helps keep core muscles toned and can prevent injury and
                           back and neck pain.

Workplace ergonomics       The average adult who works full time spends many of their waking hours at work.
                           They should try to incorporate physical activity into their daily routine. Employers
                           should be encouraged to promote healthy practices, such as workstations that
                           promote proper posture.

Regular physical activity  Regular physical activity, at any age, helps maintain strong muscles, which support
                           healthy bones, and prevent pain and injury associated with aging.

Use of sunscreen           Using sunscreen helps keep the skin from prematurely aging and can help prevent
                           skin cancers associated with sun exposure.

Regular checkups           Getting regular checkups by primary care providers and dermatologists can help
                           individuals ensure optimal health.

Weight management          Maintaining a healthy weight prevents musculoskeletal injury due to
                           malnourishment or increased pressure of joints due to extra weight.

Avoidance of alcohol,      Avoiding alcohol, drugs, and smoking can prevent many illnesses associated with

substance misuse, and      the musculoskeletal and integumentary systems and may decrease the risk for

smoking                    some cancers.

TABLE 20.6 Actions for Optimal Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

Lactation
Dietary considerations for a client who is breastfeeding consist of increasing caloric intake by an additional 330-400
calories per day to a total of 2,000-2,800 calories per day (CDC, 2022). Additionally, clients who are lactating
women may need iodine and choline supplements because increased amounts of those nutrients are needed--290
mcg of iodine and 550 mg of choline (CDC, 2022). Maternal bone density temporarily decreases during lactation, but
bone loss is usually regained following weaning. Cases of osteoporosis are rare (National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 2023b).

The impact of breastfeeding on the musculoskeletal system is highly individualized and depends on overall diet,
hydration, and physical activity. During lactation (and throughout the lifespan), individuals should strive for adequate
nutrition, including calcium and vitamin D, regular weight-bearing exercise, and a healthy lifestyle (CDC, 2021).

Menopause
Menopause occurs in middle adulthood and is associated with an increased risk for osteoporosis. During
menopause, estrogen, which helps prevent bone breakdown, decreases, which in turn leads to decreases in bone
density and bone mass. Some clients may develop fractures as a result. Therefore, the health care provider should
monitor bone density and encourage women to consume the recommended daily intake for calcium and vitamin D.
Weight-bearing exercise and maintenance of a healthy weight also help prevent age-related osteoporotic changes
during and after menopause. This is important because bone fractures are associated with significant decreases in
400  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     quality of life as well as increased mortality risk (Endocrine Society, 2022).

     Later Adulthood

     As the body ages, muscle mass progressively declines. This breakdown of skeletal muscle mass is known as
     sarcopenia (Azzolino et al., 2021). The strength and functionality of the muscles begin to decline as well (Figure
     20.3). Bone mass and density also begin to diminish, which can lead to increased risk for fractures and decreased
     mobility (Azzolini, 2021). For older adults with sarcopenia, dietary interventions are effective for building muscle
     mass. Table 20.7 highlights some effective ways the older adult with sarcopenia can increase muscle mass.

     FIGURE 20.3 Muscle atrophy that occurs with aging can lead to joint problems because the muscles that stabilize bones and joints are
     weakened. This can cause problems with locomotion and balance and can cause various injuries due to falls. (modification of work from
     OpenStax: Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Action               Result

     Manage chronic       Many chronic conditions can lead to a sedentary lifestyle, which, in turn, can lead to
     conditions.          muscle loss. By managing these conditions, the older adult may be able to become more
                          active.

     Spread protein       Spreading protein intake throughout the day may stimulate muscle protein synthesis more
     intake throughout    efficiently.
     the day.

     Incorporate          Leucine is an essential amino acid and stimulates muscle synthesis. Soy products, dairy
     leucine-rich foods.  products, turkey, fish, and chicken are leucine-rich foods.

     Drink protein        Protein shakes can be a convenient way to increase protein consumption. However, they
     shakes.              should be part of a comprehensive plan for sarcopenia and not the only treatment.

     TABLE 20.7 Interventions for Older Adults With Sarcopenia (source: Jang et al., 2023)

     In addition to musculoskeletal breakdown, the skin becomes thinner and more fragile with age. When older adults
     lack adequate protein intake, several factors can lead to the development of pressure ulcers: Because protein intake
     is needed for the development of collagen, which is itself a protein that provides structural support to the skin,
     insufficient protein can lead to skin that is thinner and more fragile, increasing the risk for shearing and wounds.
     Older adults who are bedbound or use a wheelchair are at even greater risk for pressure ulcers and wounds. In
     addition, protein plays an important role in skin regeneration and wound healing; if wounds and tissue are not
     regenerating fast enough, pressure ulcers are more likely to develop. For these reasons, nurses should encourage
     adequate protein intake to help promote integumentary health in this population.

     Osteoporosis
     Osteoporosis in older adults results from natural decreases in bone mass and bone mineral density. It develops
     when the osteoclasts outpace the osteoblasts, resulting in more bone breakdown than buildup. These changes
     increase the risk for fracture in the older adult. Osteoporosis is a silent disease in which symptoms typically do not
     appear until an acute fracture occurs. Although it can occur in all people, osteoporosis is much more common in
     older females, and the risk for fracture is higher in older females than in older males. Modifiable risk factors for
     osteoporosis include vitamin D deficiency, low calcium intake, excessive consumption of alcohol, and smoking.

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.2 · Nutrition and Chronic Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Illness                                                  401

Individuals with an average risk for fractures should perform 150-300 minutes of weight-bearing exercise a week,
and consume the recommended daily allowance of dietary calcium and vitamin D for bone health (The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021). There is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of
calcium and vitamin D supplements for average-risk individuals. Clients at higher risk for fractures because of
comorbid conditions or medication regimens, should consult with their health care provider regarding their need for
supplementation. Combined calcium and vitamin D supplementation is recommended for individuals at high risk for
vitamin C and vitamin D insufficiency (Reid & Bolland, 2020).

Several tools are available for osteoporosis screening in older adults. One of the most common risk assessments is
the FRAX assessment, which is used to estimate a person's risk for a bone fracture within 10 years. This
information can help the nurse and client plan care and implement strategies to help mitigate risks in the home and
other environments (University of Sheffield, n.d.).

     FRAX ASSESSMENT

  The FRAX assessment is a widely used tool (https://openstax.org/r/frax) to identify an individual's risk for a major
  fracture within 10 years. It is used together with bone mineral density testing. This tool was developed through a
  collaborative effort led by the World Health Organization and the Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases at the
  University of Sheffield in the United Kingdom. It is continually updated to include current research and best
  practices.

Osteoporosis in Males
Osteoporosis is more common in postmenopausal females, but following a fracture later in life, males statistically
experience more significant morbidity and mortality than females do (Burmeister et al., 2021). The increase in age-
related factures starts later in males because they start with greater bone mass and their rate of bone loss is slower
(National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 2023a). The older adult male should strive to
consume 1200-1500 mg of calcium daily and between 800-2000 IU of vitamin D daily to help decrease their risk
for osteoporosis (Burmeister et al., 2021).

20.2 Nutrition and Chronic Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Illness

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 20.2.1 Discuss the impact of nutrition on musculoskeletal and integumentary illness.

Nutritional Requirements for Optimal Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

Diet is an important factor to consider for preserving muscle mass. Protein and amino acids support muscle
synthesis and help maintain healthy muscle mass in all individuals. The nurse should teach the client with
decreased muscle mass the importance of maintaining adequate protein intake. Additionally, various studies have
shown that certain individuals experiencing low muscle mass due to malnutrition can benefit from oral nutritional
supplements (Prado et al., 2022). An assessment by a health care provider will allow them to help a client decide
which supplements are appropriate for their individualized needs.

One of the most important ways an individual of any age can maintain optimal musculoskeletal and integumentary
health is through a healthy diet and exercise and by maintaining a healthy body weight and composition. In addition
to monitoring a client's weight, measuring body mass index (BMI) and waist-hip ratio (WHR) are examples of
noninvasive tools used to screen clients for obesity. Not only do underweight and overweight individuals have a
greater risk for musculoskeletal problems, but because adipose tissue is part of the integumentary system, weight is
intimately tied to this body system.

Nutrition and Skin Integrity

As explained previously, the relationship between pressure injuries (also known as pressure ulcer, pressure injury,
decubitus) and the aging process in the older adult is complex. Although aging results in thinner and more fragile
skin, other variables can add to an older adult's increased risk for skin breakdown and wounds. Some older adults
live sedentary lifestyles that contribute not only to increased pressure on certain areas of the skin but also to
402  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     deconditioning of the muscles. Older adults may have unintended weight loss. In addition, older adults can
     experience malnutrition for many reasons, leading to insufficient intake of macronutrients and micronutrients.
     Because nutrition and adequate hydration are essential for wound healing, malnutrition can in turn increase the risk
     for developing wounds and pressure injuries and may interfere with wound healing (Munoz, 2019).

     Even small periods of malnutrition can cause delayed wound healing. Therefore, in addition to a healthy, balanced
     diet, health care providers usually recommend oral nutritional supplements with added protein and amino acids for
     clients with delayed wound healing due to malnutrition (Manley & Mitchell, 2022).

     Nurses should encourage the use of a standardized nutritional risk assessment tool for older adults with wounds
     in their care practice setting. These tools, such as the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA), can help the nurse
     identify clients at risk for delayed wound healing and can help identify targeted areas of nutrition education for older
     adults with delayed wound healing (Fulton et al., 2016).

     The MNA has been validated and is highly sensitive; it has demonstrated good reliability and accuracy in identifying
     older adults who are malnourished or at risk for malnutrition. It is typically administered by health care
     professionals, and it can be used in various health care settings, including hospitals, nursing homes, and community
     care settings. The assessment considers various factors that influence nutritional status, including dietary intake,
     mobility, weight loss, and psychological factors. The MNA questionnaire portion consists of questions that cover a
     range of topics, such as appetite, weight loss, mobility, and chronic diseases. The questions aim to gather
     information about the individual's dietary habits, recent weight changes, and ability to perform daily activities.
     Additionally, the MNA includes anthropometric measurements such as BMI, calf circumference, and mid-arm
     circumference, which provide objective data on muscle and fat stores.

     Based on the responses to the MNA questionnaire and the measurements taken, individuals are categorized into
     one of three groups:

       · Well-nourished: Individuals who have good nutritional status and no apparent risk for malnutrition
       · At risk for malnutrition: Individuals who show signs of poor nutritional status or have certain risk factors for

           malnutrition
       · Malnourished: Individuals who are already malnourished or have severe nutritional deficiencies

     The MNA can help health care professionals make informed decisions regarding nutritional interventions for clients,
     such as the need for dietary modifications, oral nutritional supplements, or referral to a dietitian for further
     assessment and management.

          MINI NUTRITIONAL ASSESSMENT

       The MNA was developed more than two decades ago by the Nestlé Nutrition Institute. Nurses can use this tool in
       a variety of settings to identify clients at risk for malnutrition or delayed wound healing and to implement
       appropriate interventions. The short version of the assessment is available at this site (https://openstax.org/r/
       whttps), which includes a video on its use.

             UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Part D

     Read the following clinical scenario and then answer the questions that follow. This case study is a follow-up from
     Case Study Parts A, B, and C.

     Time flies! Jose is now 74 years old and has a pressure injury. Read through the following summary of Jose's visit to
     the wound clinic.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                20.3 · Treatments and Nutrition                                       403

Vital Signs                       Nurse's Note

  Temperature:         98.6° F    · 74-year-old presents for initial visit and evaluation of stage 2 pressure
  Blood pressure:                    ulcer on right hip. Reports that wound has been present for 4 months,
  Heart rate:          122/68        that it causes severe pain, and that it started when bedbound due to a
  Respiratory rate:    mm Hg         right knee replacement in December. Over the past 4 months, reports
                                     occasional sadness due to loss of mobility. Is able to transfer from bed
  Pain:                80 beats/     to chair but cannot leave the house like they used to. Experiencing a
                       min           decrease in appetite recently because they can no longer cook for
  BMI:                               themselves and don't like the frozen meals their daughter buys.
  Calf circumference:  14            Estimates they have lost approximately 10 pounds in the last 4 months.
                       breaths/
TABLE 20.8             min

                       6/10 in
                       right hip
                       decubitus

                       18.5

                       29 cm

7. Which of the following interventions would promote a healthy integumentary system and better wound-
    healing outcomes?
     a. Taking prescribed oral nutritional supplements
     b. Repeating the MNA screening at regular intervals
     c. Switching from skim milk to 2% milk
     d. Eating less red meat

8. The nurse is preparing to complete the Mini Nutrition Assessment (MNA) for the client. Which of the following
    is a potential classification based on the results?
     a. Obese
     b. Underweight
     c. Overweight
     d. Malnourished

20.3 Treatments and Nutrition

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · 20.3.1 Identify drug-food interactions related to musculoskeletal and integumentary disorders.
  · 20.3.2 Identify treatments and medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies in clients with

      musculoskeletal and integumentary disorders.

Drug-Food Interactions in Musculoskeletal and Integumentary System Disorders

Drug-food interactions can occur in individuals with musculoskeletal and integumentary system disorders. The most
common medications that often interact with food are bisphosphonates and tetracycline antibiotics.

Bisphosphonates are medications commonly used to treat osteoporosis and other bone-related conditions. Nurses
should instruct clients to take these medications on an empty stomach with a full glass of water; avoid consuming
any food, beverages (except water), or other medications for at least 30 minutes to an hour after taking the
medication; and remain upright for at least 30 minutes after taking these medications because they may irritate the
esophagus. Food, especially calcium-rich foods, can interfere with the absorption of bisphosphonates (Ganesan et
al., 2023).

Tetracycline antibiotics, such as doxycycline, can form insoluble complexes with calcium found in dairy products
and calcium supplements. These complexes reduce the absorption of the antibiotic and decrease its effectiveness.
To avoid this interaction, nurses should instruct clients to avoid taking tetracycline antibiotics within 2 hours of
ingesting calcium-rich foods or supplements. In addition, nurses should inform pregnant clients that tetracycline
404  20 · Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Health

     staining of teeth may occur in the children of individuals who take this medication during pregnancy (DailyMed,
     2018).

     Medications That Can Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

     Nurses should know that chronic use of certain medications can cause nutritional deficiencies and negatively affect
     the musculoskeletal system. Not all individuals who take these drugs will develop nutritional deficiencies or
     musculoskeletal problems, but the risk increases with long-term use. Table 20.9 outlines some of the most common
     medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies related to the musculoskeletal system.

     Medication/      Musculoskeletal Effect                           Considerations
     Class
     Corticosteroids  Long-term use of corticosteroids, such as        These medications can interfere with
                      prednisone, can lead to decreased calcium        vitamin D metabolism, further affecting
     Antacids and     absorption and increased calcium excretion,      bone health.
     proton pump      which can result in bone loss and osteoporosis.
     inhibitors       Long-term use of antacids or PPIs can impair     PPI use may lead to hypomagnesemia and
     (PPIs)           the absorption of calcium, magnesium, and        hypocalcemia due to decreased absorption
                      vitamin B12, which are important for             of these minerals; therefore, magnesium
                      maintaining bone health.                         and calcium levels may need to be
                                                                       monitored in some individuals.
     Loop diuretics   Loop diuretics (such as furosemide) can          Electrolyte levels should be monitored in
                      increase urinary excretion of calcium,           clients taking loop diuretics.
                      magnesium, and potassium. Prolonged use of
                      these medications may lead to electrolyte        Nurses should inform clients about the
                      imbalances and negatively affect bone density.   increased risk for fractures and teach ways
                                                                       to modify activities as appropriate.
     Anticonvulsant   Some anticonvulsant drugs, including phenytoin
     medications      and phenobarbital, may interfere with the
                      metabolism of vitamin D and calcium,
                      potentially leading to bone loss and an
                      increased risk for fractures.

     TABLE 20.9 Medications That May Cause Nutritional Deficiencies

     SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

     Medications That Increase the Risk for Osteoporosis
     In addition to knowing which medications may cause vitamin and nutrient deficiencies, the nurse should be
     aware that certain medications increase a person's risk for osteoporosis. These medications include:

       · Corticosteroids, which are used to treat inflammation
       · Antiseizure medications, which are used to prevent seizures and treat other conditions such as neuropathic

           pain
       · Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, which are used for cancers and some gender-affirming

           treatments
       · Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate, which is a contraceptive injection containing the hormone progestin
       · Some medications used to treat cancer (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2022)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            20 · Chapter Summary 405

Chapter Summary

· Clients who are pregnant should consume the                  progressive declines occur as part of the hormonal
   recommended daily amounts of calcium and                    changes related to menopause.
   vitamin D to support fetal skeletal development.         · Clients with impaired skin integrity may need oral
                                                               supplements containing protein to promote
· Infants who are breastfed should receive 400 IU              wound-healing.
   vitamin D daily to prevent musculoskeletal               · Bisphosphonates are a class of medications used
   disorders and promote healthy skeletal growth.              to treat osteoporosis and other bone-related
                                                               conditions.
· Consuming calcium and vitamin D to promote                · Some medications including corticosteroids,
   bone growth continues to be important throughout            antacids, proton pump inhibitors, and loop
   childhood as females achieve up to 90% of their             diuretics, and some anticonvulsant medications
   peak bone mass by age 18 and males by age 20.               can cause nutritional deficiencies that can
                                                               negatively affect the musculoskeletal system.
· In adulthood, females have a higher risk for
   osteoporosis and fractures. Temporary declines in
   bone density occur during lactation, and

Key Terms

bisphosphonates medications commonly used to                osteopenia low bone density
    treat osteoporosis and other bone-related               pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy
    conditions
                                                                (PUPPS) a skin condition of unknown origin that
fluoride an important mineral for bone health; it               occurs most commonly during the third trimester of
    stimulates new bone formation and inhibits the              pregnancy and is characterized by itchy, red, raised
    formation and progression of cavities                       bumps and hives that most commonly appear on
                                                                the abdomen, thighs, buttocks, and arms
FRAX assessment a standardized assessment used              sarcopenia loss of skeletal muscle mass
    to estimate a person's risk for a bone fracture within  standardized nutritional risk assessment tool a
    10 years                                                    research-based tool used to assess clients'
                                                                nutritional status
menopause a shift in hormones in a middle adult
    woman's life that results in physiologic changes,
    including cessation of the menstrual cycle

Review Questions

1. The nurse is educating a client about the FRAX assessment. Which statement by the client indicates the need
    for further teaching?
     a. "The FRAX will tell my doctor if I have osteoporosis."
     b. "The FRAX will tell my doctor if I'm at risk for a fracture."
     c. "The results of the FRAX will help the nurse develop my plan of care."
     d. "The FRAX is a risk assessment for osteoporosis."

2. The nurse is reviewing a client's chart and notes their current medications. Which classification of medication
    increases the client's risk for fracture?
     a. Antibiotics
     b. Antidepressants
     c. NSAIDs
     d. Corticosteroids

3. The nurse is teaching ways to promote healthy teeth in children. Which of the following practices is
    recommended for children?
     a. Brush teeth once a day in the morning.
     b. Introduce fluoride toothpaste at 3 years of age.
     c. Brush teeth with a fluoride toothpaste.
     d. Schedule the first dental visit at 1 year of age.

4. The nurse is evaluating a client with PUPPP at a postpartum appointment. The client reports being very itchy.
    Which objective data support the diagnosis of PUPPP?
406 20 · Suggested Reading

         a. Flat lesions in the vaginal area
         b. No visible rash, but the client reports itchy skin
         c. Silvery-white lines on the breasts
         d. Raised hives on the torso

    5. The nurse is caring for an adolescent client who participates in sports after school 4 or 5 times a week for 2-4
        hours. The adolescent reports fatigue and sore muscles. What should the nurse suggest to this client?
         a. "Drink a soda to increase your energy level after exercise."
         b. "Don't exercise until your symptoms go away."
         c. "Try to eat a combination of protein and complex carbohydrates."
         d. "Avoid whole grains, fruits, legumes, and vegetables."

    6. The nurse is caring for a client with newly diagnosed osteoporosis who was prescribed bisphosphonate.
        Which of the following should the nurse teach the client to avoid eating after taking the medication because it
        can interfere with the medication's absorption?
         a. Coffee
         b. Oranges
         c. Milk
         d. Grapefruit

    7. The nurse is caring for a pregnant client who lives in a higher latitude part of the country that receives less
        direct sunlight. Which laboratory value should the nurse expect the health care provider to be monitoring as a
        priority of care with this client?
         a. Albumin level
         b. Calcium level
         c. Magnesium level
         d. Vitamin D level

    8. The nurse is caring for a menopausal client who had a FRAX assessment that indicated a high risk for fracture
        in the next 10 years. What should the nurse encourage the client to do now to help mitigate this risk?
         a. Ask their health care provider to prescribe an estrogen supplement.
         b. Ask their health care provider to check their calcium and vitamin D levels.
         c. Include extra protein in their diet.
         d. Get daily weight-bearing exercise such as walking.

    9. The nurse is caring for an older adult client and recognizes which musculoskeletal manifestation is most likely
        to benefit from increasing leucine consumption?
         a. Osteomyelitis
         b. Sarcopenia
         c. Fractures
         d. Osteopenia

  10. The nurse is caring for a preterm newborn born at 28 weeks' gestation. Which musculoskeletal manifestation
        is most likely to be observed in this infant?
         a. Osteoporosis
         b. Osteopenia
         c. Hip dysplasia
         d. Club foot

Suggested Reading

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). Cow's milk and milk alternatives. https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/
    infantandtoddlernutrition/foods-and-drinks/cows-milk-and-milk-alternatives.html

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                20 · Suggested Reading 407

Cleveland Clinic. (2022). Vitamin deficiency. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/15050-vitamin-d-
    vitamin-d-deficiency

Cleveland Clinic. (2023, January 31). What to eat when you're trying to heal. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/
    foods-to-help-healing/

Nestlé Nutrition Institute. (n.d.). What is the MNA®? https://www.mna-elderly.com
408 20 · Suggested Reading
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 A · Apps Frequently Used to Support Nutrition Wellness 409

APPENDIX A

Apps Frequently Used to Support Nutrition Wellness

The apps in Table A1 were identified by various sources, such as BuyersGuide.org, Medical News Today, and
Active.com. This table does not serve as an exhaustive list.

Overall Nutrition Apps

PlateJoy                  Develops nutritionally sound meal plans with associated shopping lists based on
(https://openstax.org/r/  personal data input.
PlateJoy)

Yummly                    Offers meal planning, recipes, and easy reads to introduce food exploration.
(https://openstax.org/r/
yummly)

Lifesum                   Focuses on healthy weight through self-care and better food selection options;
(https://openstax.org/r/  tracks food and exercise and develops health goals. Recipes available.
lifesum)

Ate                       Food journal that promotes mindful eating, exploring driving forces behind food
(https://openstax.org/r/  selection and consumption.
youate)

Weight-Loss Programs

NOOM                      Exploring the psychology behind what, when, and why certain foods are eaten.
(https://openstax.org/r/  Provides challenges to promote healthy weight and lifestyle with the goal of
noom)                     integration into consistent healthy decisions.

Nutrisystem               Provides meal and snack delivery based on healthy weight goal. Promotes healthy
(https://openstax.org/r/  food substitution.
nutrisystem)

Keto Cycle                Focus on weight loss via mindful integration of ketogenic diet. Meal prep included.
(https://openstax.org/r/  Keto-nutritional approaches are not appropriate for everyone.
ketocycle)

DoFasting                 Promotes intermittent fasting to lose weight, attain healthy BMI, and improve gut
(https://openstax.org/r/  health. Provides recipes, education, and workouts. Fasting nutritional approaches
dofasting)                are not appropriate for everyone.

Recipes for Specific Pathologies

Diabetic App              Diabetic food recipes that assist with blood glucose stabilization.
(https://openstax.org/r/
playdiabetic)

Kidney Diet               Renal recipes focusing on tracking phosphorus, protein, and potassium.
(https://openstax.org/r/
playkidney)

Anti Inflammatory Diet    Anti-inflammatory recipes designed to maximize gut health as a precursor to
Recipes                   holistic health promotion.
(https://openstax.org/r/
playanti)

  Meal Tracking

TABLE A1 Nutritional Wellness Apps and Websites
410 A · Apps Frequently Used to Support Nutrition Wellness

Weight Watchers                  Provides personal, flexible, nutritionally sound meal plans while encouraging
(https://openstax.org/r/         lifestyle changes to promote health habits.
weightwatchers)

G-Plans                          Meal tracking and planning with focus on metabolic body type, exercise tracking,
(https://openstax.org/r/         peer support, and artificial intelligence interactions.
gplanscom)

MyFitnessPal                     Food diary that includes the ability to scan barcodes, provides recipes, tracks health
(https://openstax.org/r/         habits, and provides peer support.
myfitnesspal)

Other

BMI Calculator                   Allows for quick BMI calculation.
(https://openstax.org/r/
healthharvardedu)

Water Reminder                   Promotes mindfulness of hydration.
(https://openstax.org/r/
playgooglestore)

Quenza                           Designed for the personal nutrition coach, provides a digital format to share
(https://openstax.org/r/         exercises and track client progress; includes video support; and offers peer
quenzacomblog)                   inspiration. Offers a 30-day free trial.

Nutrition coaching               Provides virtual nutritional coaching from a registered dietician using a personalized
(https://openstax.org/r/         plan, coaching, and compliance monitoring.
heatherbauer)

Whisk                            A free meal planner tool with recipes, meal planning, and grocery list creation tools.
(https://openstax.org/r/
whiskcom)

TABLE A1 Nutritional Wellness Apps and Websites

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     Answer Key 411

ANSWER KEY

Chapter 1

Review Questions

    1. b. 10 grams of added sugars indicates this food has a significant amount of added sugar (20% of the
        recommended amount). Current dietary guidelines recommend limiting sugar consumption.

    2. b. According to MyPlate, carbohydrates (fruits and vegetables) comprise the largest portion of the plate.
    3. c. Although all the clients have nutritional concerns, a client recently diagnosed with a myocardial infarction

        (a "heart attack") has an immediate need for diet instruction related to their new diagnosis.
    4. b. WIC is designed to provide food assistance to low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and non-breastfeeding

        postpartum women and infants and children up to age 5 who are at nutritional risk.
    5. b. Diets and nutritional counseling should reflect scientific findings supported by research.
    6. a. Clients who do not have a steady income may not be able to get food when needed. These clients should

        be screened for food insecurity.
    7. d. Measuring the client's WHR at a follow-up visit can provide objective data that reflects the client's progress

        toward a nutrition-related goal.
    8. c. Employment status is a nonmedical factor that influences health.
    9. a. Educational materials should be developed so that readers with lower literacy levels can understand the

        content.
  10. d. This response acknowledges the client's feelings and initiates the process of educating the client on how to

        evaluate nutrition information on social media.

Chapter 2

Review Questions

1. d. Arsenic is heavy metal and will not clear by boiling, so purchasing water is the best choice.

2. a. Water does not contain any energy and is calorie free.

3. b. The Mediterranean diet is high in complex carbohydrates (fruits, vegetables, beans, legumes, nuts, and

seeds) as well as fish, seafood, and poultry and includes moderate amounts of dairy products.

4. a. The individual who is lactose intolerant should consume lactose-free dairy products.

5. d. Omega-3 fatty acids play a role in heart health and are found in salmon, eggs, soybeans, flaxseed, and

canola oil.

6. d. The client who is well hydrated will have pale or light-colored urine.

7. c. Soy is the only complete protein listed. Oats, barley, and wheat are incomplete proteins and do not include

all essential amino acids.

8. c. Pasta with a plain red sauce is the lowest-fat item on the list and contains less than 3 g of fat per serving.

9. a. During exercise, circulating glucose is the first source of energy used. When this energy source is depleted,

glycogen stored in skeletal muscle is used, followed by fat.

10. b. The client with stage 3 chronic kidney disease should consume no more than 0.6 g/kg of body weight daily.

Therefore,                  of protein daily.

Chapter 3

Unfolding Case Study

    1. d. The RDA for sodium is 2300 mg. The client's diet consists of highly processed foods, all of which are high in
        sodium.

    2. c. Fruits and vegetables contain high amounts of vitamins A and C.
    3. d. Fruit and vegetable smoothies provide a nutrient-dense alternative to a processed food (macaroni and

        cheese and toaster pastries) without resorting to a supplement (gummy vitamin).
412 Answer Key

    4. a. Vitamins C and E have direct influence on creating a robust immune system.

Review Questions

    1. a. Vitamin A is the only fat-soluble vitamin listed and is stored in the tissue. It can result in toxicity.
    2. a. Chromium may facilitate the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins by increasing the

        effectiveness of insulin. The precise mechanism for this activity has yet to be identified.
    3. d. Supplement labels are limited in the health claims they can make. They cannot mention a specific health

        condition.
    4. c. Vitamin D deficiency is related to rickets in young children.
    5. d. Excess water-soluble vitamins are excreted in the urine; they are not stored in fatty tissue or the liver.
    6. c. To reduce the risk for fetal neural tube defects in early pregnancy, clients of childbearing age and clients

        who are pregnant should consume adequate amounts of folate.
    7. c. Calcium and phosphorus contribute to the structure of healthy bones and teeth.
    8. b. Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of goiter. Iodine is required to produce thyroid hormone,

        without which the thyroid overworks and increases in size.
    9. a. For the best retention of a vitamin, use less water, cook for a shorter time, and lower the temperature.
  10. d. The client with chronic alcohol exposure is likely to have a thiamine deficiency.

Chapter 4

Review Questions

    1. a. Because the gastrointestinal tract is a long, hollow tube, closing off the tube in any area causes any
        contents to flow backward. Stool will backflow into the stomach because it cannot move forward to the anus
        to exit the body.

    2. c. Tympany on percussion signifies air, and emptiness in an area would indicate flatus.
    3. a. The client's symptoms are associated with epiglottitis, and using a tongue blade, depressor, or

        laryngoscope to exam the throat or mouth could trigger a laryngospasm and respiratory distress.
    4. d. The large intestine, or colon, is where the most water is absorbed.
    5. b. The guaiac test detects blood in the stool.
    6. b. Hyposecretion of hydrochloric acid and protective mucus occurs in older adults and decreases absorption

        of vitamin B12.
    7. a. Palm oil is a saturated fat that can cause gut imbalance, raise bad cholesterol, increase the risk for colon

        cancer, and promote heart disease.
    8. b. Yogurt with active yeast cultures has been shown to support the microbiome and prevent some of the side

        effects related to long-term antibiotic use.
    9. c. Lactobacillus has been shown to be supportive of the microbiome while the others are known to be

        harmful.
  10. d. Gut homeostasis is supported by eating whole grains, unless the person has a sensitivity to gluten.

Chapter 5

Unfolding Case Study

    1. d. Diets high in processed foods, red meats, and refined sugars have all been shown to lead to cognitive
        decline.

    2. b. Cerebral blood flow should be evaluated with a PET scan to determine whether poor blood flow could be
        contributing to changes in cognitive status.

    3. a. Consuming 1.1-1.6 g of omega-3 fatty acids daily has been shown to optimize brain function in clients over
        51 years of age.

    4. c. Omega-3 fatty acids are found largely in colorful fruits and vegetables, as well as in fortified cereals and
        beverages. Fruits, such as grapes, apples, pears, cherries, and berries; dark chocolate; legumes; red wine;
        tea; and coffee are also good sources.

    5. c. The client's going to their dietitian appointment shows adherence to the prescribed plan. Signs of
        nonadherence include alcohol use; increased BMI; increased total cholesterol; increased blood pressure; low

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 413

        intake of fruits, vegetables, and fiber; and high intake of processed sugars.
    6. c. Tau proteins can become tangled and accumulate in the brain and cause dysfunction.
    7. b. Because of rising food costs, it may be helpful to use an air fryer to avoid deep-frying foods while

        maintaining the client's current food preferences, such as fried foods, and increasing adherence to the meal
        plan.
    8. b. Cerebral blood flow should be evaluated with a PET scan to determine whether poor blood flow could be
        contributing to Jamal's changes in cognitive status.

Review Questions

    1. b. Supplements given via nasogastric tube can provide enteral nutrition for clients with dysphagia who are at
        risk for aspiration.

    2. c. The client is hyponatremic due to the head injury and is conserving fluids. In addition to fluid restriction,
        medications may be administered to correct SIADH.

    3. a. The progression of Alzheimer's disease may be slowed by the consistent intake of polyphenols, and
        colored berries are a rich source of polyphenols.

    4. a. All other choices may result in inflammation and can cause further damage to the myelin sheath of nerve
        cells.

    5. b. The ketogenic diet is low in carbohydrates, and a low-carbohydrate diet has been shown to reduce the
        incidence of seizures.

    6. b. Dehydration is common among older adults because of a diminished sense of thirst; vigorous exercise can
        cause rapid dehydration, and hydration is the priority to assess.

    7. d. Although supplements may be beneficial in some cases, most nutrients are best absorbed when they are
        consumed as regular food. Even though many Americans do not eat a healthy diet, it is best to evaluate
        current dietary patterns and offer changes before recommending dietary supplements.

    8. c. Evidence supports a cognitive benefit of intermittent fasting in Parkinson's disease as well as epilepsy,
        stroke, and Alzheimer's disease.

    9. c. The National Institutes of Health recommends 1.1-1.6 g of omega-3 fatty acids daily for a 52-year-old
        adult.

  10. c. Tau proteins provide structural support to the microtubules in the neuron but can become tangled due to
        phosphorylation.

Chapter 6

Unfolding Case Study

    1. b. Decreased muscle mass is associated with the aging process.
    2. a. Older adults are at high risk for dehydration which can affect the body's ability to absorb nutrients.
    3. b. Complex carbohydrates, such as those found in fresh fruit, vegetables, and high-fiber cereal grains, are

        recommended for the management of cognitive decline.
    4. d. Supplementing the diet with micronutrients has been shown to improve cognition in some studies of

        clients with Alzheimer's disease, but the best health benefits have been verified with a varied multinutrient-
        rich diet rather than with supplements alone.

Review Questions

    1. d. Chicken and lentils are two sources of protein; 71 g of protein a day is often recommended during the first
        trimester of pregnancy to promote fetal neurological development.

    2. c. The ketogenic diet is low in carbohydrates, and carbohydrates are associated with increased symptoms
        among clients with MS. A ketogenic diet may improve their concentration, attention, and memory.

    3. a. Clients taking phenytoin are at risk for vitamin D and biotin deficiencies.
    4. b. Nutritional deficiencies, especially of the omega-3 fatty acids, iron, zinc, and B12, are more common among

        vegetarians and vegans.
    5. a. Drooling and coughing are symptoms of dysphagia, and the client will require a dysphagia screening.
    6. d. Polyphenols obtained from fresh fruits and vegetables have been shown to improve neurological function

        and slow cognitive decline in clients with degenerative conditions including Alzheimer's disease.
414 Answer Key

    7. b. Ketogenic diets can reduce seizures that have not previously responded to drug therapy.
    8. c. Lactating mothers should not restrict carbohydrate intake. They need to eat fruits, vegetables, and complex

        carbohydrates including whole-grain foods, such as cereals, breads, pastas, and oatmeal.
    9. a. Flavonoids inhibit growth of pathogens in the gut microbiome and have a strong antioxidant effect.
  10. d. Follow a balanced diet to decrease the risk for weight gain. Taking antidepressants is associated with

        weight gain.

Chapter 7

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. Although all these questions can provide information about the client's nutrition, it is most important to
        identify if the client has had changes in their weight or appetite which can directly reflect her current physical
        health.

    2. c. The client is presenting with symptoms of hypothyroidism. Sea salt, kosher salt, and other specialty salts
        either do not contain iodine or contain only minimal amounts. Using iodized table salt is necessary to
        maintain adequate iodine intake to promote thyroid health.

    3. b. Although iodine deficiency is not the primary cause of the client's hypothyroidism, ensuring adequate
        iodine intake can still be beneficial for thyroid health. Educating the client about incorporating iodine-rich
        foods, such as dairy products, and iodized salt into her diet can help support her thyroid function alongside
        her medical treatment for hypothyroidism. Seafood is another good source of iodine, but the client's cultural
        background may limit the amount of seafood she consumes.

    4. a. A low-sodium diet can help manage the client's elevated blood pressure alongside other lifestyle changes.
        Educating her on sodium reduction strategies, such as limiting processed foods and using herbs and spices
        instead of salt, will empower her to make healthier choices.

    5. a. Eating more fruits and vegetables while reducing processed food intake is a positive dietary change that
        supports the client's endocrine health. This statement indicates that she has successfully incorporated the
        recommended changes to her diet to manage her hypothyroidism and type 2 diabetes.

    6. a. A decrease in TSH level would indicate an improvement in the client's hypothyroidism management, while
        improved blood glucose control would reflect better management of her type 2 diabetes. These outcomes
        would demonstrate the effectiveness of the care plan in addressing her endocrine health concerns.

Review Questions

    1. c. Clients with Cushing's syndrome should limit carbohydrate and salt intake. Increased salt intake can
        worsen fluid retention and weight gain. Protein intake is recommended to promote structural integrity and
        wound healing in these clients.

    2. a. Tuna and salmon, and other fatty fish, are good sources of vitamin D. The client should try to incorporate
        these foods into their diet.

    3. b. Diabetes is a condition characterized by high blood glucose levels, and a diet high in fiber and complex
        carbohydrates can help to regulate blood glucose levels and optimize endocrine wellness.

    4. d. Eating a diet low in processed and packaged foods helps to optimize endocrine wellness. PCOS is a
        condition characterized by hormonal imbalances, and a diet low in processed and packaged foods can help to
        optimize endocrine wellness by reducing the intake of harmful additives and stabilizing blood glucose levels.

    5. c. Hypoglycemia is characterized by low blood glucose levels, and a diet high in protein and healthy fats can
        help to optimize endocrine wellness by stabilizing blood glucose levels.

    6. c. Clients with Addison's disease should increase their calcium and vitamin D intake to help decrease their
        risk of osteoporosis secondary to corticosteroid use.

    7. b. Assessing a client's prior knowledge of a condition and associated interventions is an appropriate method
        to determine their readiness to learn.

    8. c. Hemoglobin A1C is a lab test that measures how well the client's glucose has been controlled over a
        3-month period. An increased hemoglobin A1C level indicates that the client's diet needs to be adjusted.

    9. d. Cabbage and other cruciferous vegetables can interfere with the body's ability to use iodine.
  10. d. Unsalted nuts do not have iodized salt, making it a low-iodine food choice. Clients with hyperthyroidism

        need to limit their sources of iodine.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 415

Chapter 8

Unfolding Case Study

    1. d. Blood glucose levels are heavily influenced by carbohydrate intake.
    2. a. A healthy diet includes protein from lean sources such as chicken or seafood. Cheeseburgers are high in

        saturated fat, which can worsen insulin resistance.
    3. d. Having gestational diabetes increases a person's risk for developing type 2 diabetes later in life.
    4. b. Nuts include both healthy dietary fiber and healthy fats.
    5. c. Sarah's hemoglobin A1C result indicates that she may have developed diabetes.
    6. b. Sarah will need to continue to eat lean proteins, fruits, vegetables, and high-fiber foods to manage her

        blood glucose levels.

Review Questions

    1. c. Protein, in the form of lean meat and dairy products, is essential for growth and development. It plays an
        anabolic role similar to that of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor.

    2. a. Kale is a leafy green vegetable that is a key source of anti-inflammatory micronutrients.
    3. d. Clients can take antagonist medications to lower cholecystokinin levels to stimulate appetite.
    4. b. Fish is an iodine-rich food and a good choice for a client with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
    5. c. Sodium should be limited to 2300 mg/day to decrease the risk for cardiovascular disease and hypertension

        associated with diabetes.
    6. b. Clients with diabetes should restrict saturated fats to less than 10% of daily intake.
    7. a. Alcohol consumption causes variability in blood glucose levels.
    8. b. Insulin and other medications used to manage diabetes require coordination with meals to maintain proper

        blood glucose levels.
    9. d. Levothyroxine should be taken on an empty stomach and timed to avoid interaction with certain foods and

        supplements that can inhibit absorption.
  10. c. Loop diuretics, such as furosemide, cause the parathyroid gland to decrease the production of parathyroid

        hormone, which is important in maintaining bone stability.

Chapter 9

Unfolding Case Study

    1. c. The Mini Nutritional Assessment is a nutritional screening tool for older clients.
    2. a. The client will need education regarding foods rich in iron to consume at home.
    3. b. Using Maslow's hierarchy of needs framework, understanding the physical environment should be the first

        consideration. It is essential to understand if the client will be cooking or eating prepared meals before
        considering other options.
    4. d. Eating smaller portions more frequently is a strategy that can overcome decreased food intake that occurs
        due to getting full quickly. Although hypertension and diabetes are not risk factors for worsening anemia,
        decreased taste is a physiological consequence of the change in density of taste buds that occurs with aging.
    5. a. A holistic approach to client teaching includes spiritual influences, emotional influences, physical
        influences, and social determinants of health.
    6. b. The client's cognitive functioning will determine if a caregiver needs to be present for the educational
        session.
    7. c. Ms. Foster is choosing food options and making plans for meals. She will be in the action stage of change
        once she begins modifying her diet.
    8. a. The nurse should recognize that change is a cyclic process and that successes and failures are expected.

Review Questions

    1. a. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin necessary for the synthesis and activation of coagulation factors II
        (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X.

    2. c. Folate deficiency in pregnancy can lead to macrocytic anemia in mothers and neural tube defects in
        fetuses.
416 Answer Key

    3. b. Long-term alcohol use can cause the malabsorption of Vitamin B12.
    4. c. These are all possible signs of scurvy, or vitamin C deficiency.
    5. c. Iron is better absorbed when taken with vitamin C, found in orange juice, and on an empty stomach.
    6. a. An older adult with anemia is likely to experience hypotension and/or lightheadedness, which is a

        significant risk for falls.
    7. a. Animal meat, fish, eggs, and dairy are sources of vitamin B12.
    8. a. Health literacy is the only modifiable psychosocial factor listed.
    9. a. Providing written material before determining the client's preferred learning style, without assessing their

        preference and without giving time to ask questions, is not consistent with holistic nursing care.
  10. a. The nurse should consider that a change in behavior typically takes 6 months to achieve.

Chapter 10

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. The recommended dose is 3-6 mg/kg/day for 2-3 months; 3 mg/kg/dose twice daily is equal to 6 mg/kg/
        day. Dividing the total daily dose will decrease gastrointestinal side effects.

    2. a. Having the client identify their food likes and dislikes is a collaborative strategy the nurse can use to
        develop a diet plan. Adolescents are more likely to adhere to diet modifications if they are partners in
        developing their nutritional plan.

    3. d. Taking iron with orange juice will increase gastrointestinal absorption. Taking iron with milk, tea, or coffee
        can decrease its absorption. Antacids should be taken 2 hours before or 4 hours after taking iron for better
        absorption because iron is better absorbed in an acidic environment. Missed doses of iron should not be
        made up.

    4. c. Feeling weak and dizzy may be a sign of low hemoglobin or worsening anemia. This can occur if oral iron is
        not absorbed sufficiently by the body.

Review Questions

    1. b. Common nutritional deficiencies affecting all ages include iron; vitamins B12, D, and K; and folate.
    2. a. The groups most frequently affected by anemia are pregnant individuals, infants and toddlers, female

        adolescents, and older adults.
    3. b. Infants and children have increased nutrient demands due to rapid physical and cognitive growth, resulting

        in rapid cell turnover.
    4. b. Decreased sun exposure is one of several risk factors for vitamin D deficiency.
    5. b. Zinc deficiency occurs in 31% of children between ages 1 and 3 years and can cause decreased immunity

        and increased infections. Foods rich in zinc include eggs and dairy products, which the child is not consuming.
    6. c. Clients with sickle cell disease are at high risk for vitamin D deficiency, which can increase their risk of

        disease-related effects.
    7. c. Older adults who consume excessive amounts of alcohol, live alone, smoke, or are obese are at risk for

        folate deficiency.
    8. b. Sickle cell disease is the most common inherited blood disorder in the United States. Clients with this

        disease are prone to micronutrient and macronutrient deficiencies.
    9. d. Iron-fortified foods such as breakfast cereals should be limited because this client is at risk for iron

        overload after the transfusion.
  10. c. The Mediterranean diet includes various foods and spices with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant

        properties.

Chapter 11

Unfolding Case Study

    1. c. The client's blood pressure meets the criteria for hypertension, which is a systolic blood pressure greater
        than or equal to 129 mm Hg and/or a diastolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 80 mm Hg. Peripheral
        vascular disease causes blood return issues, while peripheral arterial disease will cause ischemia and blood
        flow restrictions. This client has symptoms of erectile dysfunction which can be directly related to the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 417

        decreased blood flow caused by hypertension.
    2. a. An electrocardiogram evaluates the electrical function of the heart and can provide initial indication of

        heart disease or heart damage.
    3. c. Increasing fiber intake has several health benefits. It lowers cholesterol and blood pressure and decreases

        the risk of heart disease.
    4. d. A cheeseburger contains red meat and cheese, both of which contain saturated fats that contribute to heart

        disease.
    5. a. It appears that the changes are effective, as the client's blood pressure is coming down. The goal of the

        diet is to reduce blood pressure and, secondarily, cholesterol levels. Cholesterol can be affected by much
        more than just diet, and it may take more than 3 months for levels to decrease.
    6. a. The client's BMI was never an issue, so they do not have to lose a lot of weight. However, the client needed
        to lessen their waist size and is currently on track with that goal.

Review Questions

    1. a. The DASH diet has beneficial effects for clients with heart disease, including decreasing sodium intake to
        control hypertension.

    2. d. Hypertension is defined as a systolic blood pressure greater than 129 mm Hg and/or a diastolic blood
        pressure greater than 80 mm Hg.

    3. c. A heart-healthy diet, such as the DASH diet, promotes increasing intake of fruits, including pineapple.
    4. a. The client's body mass index (BMI) has decreased from 30 kg/m2, in the obese range, to 29 kg/m2, in the

        overweight range.
    5. c. The HDL level of 48 mg/dL falls within the normal range of greater than 40 mg/dL.
    6. a. Coffee should be avoided because caffeine can trigger or aggravate atrial fibrillation.
    7. c. Torsades de pointes is primarily caused by an extremely low magnesium level, so the priority of care with

        this client is to monitor their serum magnesium level.
    8. d. A high serum potassium level may cause peaked tall or high T-wave ECG.
    9. b. Oatmeal is not only low in cholesterol but is high in fiber, which helps to lower LDL.
  10. a. Whole milk is high in fat and cholesterol. The DASH diet promotes fat-free or low-fat dairy products.

Chapter 12

Unfolding Case Study

    1. b. The client's hypertension is concerning, because individuals who are already predisposed to high blood
        pressure before pregnancy are at an increased risk for having more complications during pregnancy due to
        the increase in vascular volume and increased stress on the body.

    2. d. Tara needs to avoid fried foods, undercooked foods, and foods high in fat. The steak is cooked properly and
        broccoli is a good source of nutrients.

    3. c. To help with heart health in both the client and fetus, the best answer choice is to increase fruits and
        vegetables.

    4. b. High blood pressure is associated with pre-eclampsia, which can cause premature birth.
    5. a. The client's BMI places them in the severe obesity BMI category.
    6. b. To help encourage good food choices, involve children in preparing meals.
    7. d. Apples would be the best choice, because the other options are high in fat and sodium.
    8. a. Foods high in fiber can help lower cholesterol levels.
    9. d. The client is taking furosemide, which is a diuretic. Diuretics increase the risk for water-soluble vitamin

        deficiencies particularly if the client is not able to eat a varied, nutrient-rich diet.
  10. b. The choice for a healthy heart diet is to choose grilled or baked protein with vegetables and low to no sugar

        substances.

Review Questions

    1. b. The pregnant client who has a pre-existing heart condition will need to increase calories by 340 calories
        daily to gain the necessary amount of weight but not an excessive amount that can strain their cardiovascular
        system.
418 Answer Key

    2. b. Infants can be introduced to pureed fruits and vegetables and infant cereals at 6 months.
    3. c. The banana is the best choice for the snack as it is low in fat and sugar.
    4. b. Adults should strive for an intake of less than 2300 mg of sodium daily.
    5. a. Social media and peers can strongly influence adolescent eating habits.
    6. c. Long-term complications of eating disorders cause electrolyte imbalances, prolong QT intervals, which can

        cause arrhythmias, and can eventually lead to heart failure due to the stress on the heart.
    7. b. Red meat and full-fat dairy products can elevate cholesterol levels.
    8. c. Shrimp is a lean source of protein, whole grain rice is a complex carbohydrate, and vegetables are an

        excellent source of nutrients.
    9. a. Clients who are taking warfarin should be instructed to have a consistent intake of leafy green vegetables,

        which can affect the clotting factors associated with the warfarin.
  10. d. A meal of grilled chicken, onions, green peppers, and avocado with corn tortillas is lower in fat than the

        other choices.

Chapter 13

Unfolding Case Study

    1. b. The pulmonary or respiratory system comprises the upper airways, the lower airways, lungs, and alveolar
        sacs. The primary function of the pulmonary system is to ensure adequate oxygenation throughout the body.

    2. c. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) can induce bronchospasm in
        clients who are sensitive and have had reactions to these medications in the past.

    3. b. Processed meats and aged cheeses are high in histamines and can cause increased mucus production,
        which can worsen asthma symptoms.

    4. a. Protein drinks provide high protein amounts in low-volume portions to provide the nutritional components
        necessary for muscle synthesis and improved muscle strength.

    5. a. Eating protein, found in foods like cheese and nuts, at least twice daily will help with strong respiratory
        muscles.

    6. c. Obesity alters the mechanics of the pulmonary system leading to dyspnea, wheezing, airway
        hyperresponsiveness, and increased work of breathing.

Review Questions

    1. c. Fatigue is a common symptom of COPD that can make it difficult for the client to prepare and eat nutritious
        foods.

    2. c. Albumin is the primary protein of the body. Decreased levels may indicate chronic disease, malabsorption,
        malnutrition with low protein, or dilution by IV fluids. Follow-on diagnostics would be pre-albumin and blood
        urea nitrogen.

    3. b. The process of gas exchange is when oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged in the alveoli of the lungs.
    4. a. Calcium and vitamin D intake reduce the risk of osteoporosis and kyphoscoliosis that decrease the size and

        diameter of the rib cage and reduce lung capacity.
    5. c. The client should eat high-protein, calorie-dense meals to maintain nutritional status and prevent weight

        loss that results from increased work of breathing.
    6. a. A primary goal of nutrition therapy for pulmonary wellness is to maintain adequate respiratory function to

        decrease or prevent malnutrition and obesity. Healthy body weight will help preserve muscle strength and
        help maintain the integrity of the immune system.
    7. d. The client should eat smaller, more frequent meals. Larger meals should be consumed earlier in the day
        when the client is less tired.
    8. c. Crackles indicate crepitus, or air trapped in and under the skin.
    9. d. While all of these findings can indicate the client is knowledgeable of and is following the prescribed
        nutritional plan, actually maintaining the recommended weight is an objective measure that indicates
        adherence.
  10. d. ACE inhibitors are known to induce nighttime coughing.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 419

Chapter 14

Unfolding Case Study

    1. b. The client grew up eating foods from their sources and cooking at home, and he participated in frequent
        exercise that provided him with a solid foundation in healthy lifestyle choices.

    2. a. The client grew up with the foundational knowledge of eating healthy food and exercising, so the nurse can
        use this information in the dietary education plan.

    3. a. Construction work, smoking, and selecting fast food are risk factors for chronic respiratory disease.
    4. b. Smoking cessation and eating better improves pulmonary health.
    5. c. The client's note from last year indicates altered respiratory function and a low-quality diet, and since

        nutritional counseling was not addressed during that visit, the nurse should instruct the client during this visit.
    6. d. Pneumonia is a potential complication as the mucosal lining thickens and cough pressure declines in

        clients with COPD.

Review Questions

    1. c. Pregnant women should consume a balanced diet that includes protein to support the physiological
        changes of the mother and the growth of the fetus.

    2. d. Omega-3 fatty acids are essential to the development and function of the pulmonary system during
        infancy.

    3. c. Cognitive and behavioral defects may occur in the fetus whose mother is malnourished.
    4. b. Foods containing caffeine, like coffee, can potentiate the effects of the bronchodilator leading to tremors,

        nervousness, anxiety, and heart palpitation.
    5. a. A pregnant client needs protein, vitamins A, D, E, and omega-3 fatty acids for proper lung function and

        development of the fetus.
    6. d. Nutrition plays a role in supporting the immune system, which prevents and treats infections while also

        repairing lung tissue.
    7. c. Consuming fruits and vegetable is linked to a decreased risk for developing asthma and a decreased risk for

        experiencing asthma symptoms such as wheezing.
    8. a. A diet high in saturated fats has been linked with worsening airway inflammation and lung function.
    9. d. The main goal of an anti-inflammatory diet is to minimize the duration of and decrease the risk for

        infection. An anti-inflammatory diet supports the immune system and lung function and decreases oxidation.
  10. a. Long-term oxygen therapy in COPD clients causes nutritional deficiencies, because low oxygenation to the

        gastrointestinal tract decreases its ability to function and absorb nutrients.

Chapter 15

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. Lunch meats are high in sodium and fat which should be avoided in clients with CKD stage 2, hypertension,
        obesity, and diabetes.

    2. b. Fruit salad has the lowest added sugar and carbohydrates. It also is better for the client's weight.
    3. c. Subjective and objective data illustrate that the client is doing what the plan requires, but the plan clearly is

        not adequate for the client's needs. The client has advanced from stage 2 CKD to stage 3 CKD despite having
        lost weight, having blood pressure and blood sugar levels within defined limits, presenting no symptoms of
        fluid overload even with the advancement in CKD stage, and using a food log to demonstrate dietary
        adherence.
    4. a. The client does not have symptoms of heart failure, fluid overload, or edema, and will need a diet high in
        calcium and magnesium.
    5. b. Symptoms of heart failure create a need to change the plan. In stage 3, if heart failure is present, additional
        dietary measures are implemented. If they are not present, the same diet can be followed.
    6. a. Proteins should be restricted to plant-based proteins and lean, low-fat meat sources.

Review Questions

    1. a. Calcium levels are affected by the kidney through its relationship with the parathyroid gland and the
420 Answer Key

        production of calcitriol, but not from direct reabsorption.
    2. a. A serum creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dL is above the normal range of 0.74-1.35 mg/dL for adult males and

        requires prompt attention. The other laboratory values are within normal range.
    3. b. Since the PVR is the amount of urine left in the bladder after the client has urinated, the nurse should scan

        the bladder immediately after the client has urinated.
    4. d. Complex carbohydrates are found in foods such as whole grains, fruits, and vegetables.
    5. b. The client with CKD should be instructed to use plant sources of protein before animal sources.
    6. a. Engagement and participation in creating the plan is the single most important step toward client

        adherence to the plan because if the client has no desire or motivation to follow the plan it will not matter if
        they have the means to or not.
    7. c. The client with CKD who is on dialysis should restrict fluid intake.
    8. d. They should sip fluids slowly and savor them and not gulp them down quickly.
    9. a. Vanilla ice cream is low in phosphorus.
  10. a. Salt substitutes are dangerously high in potassium and should always be avoided when on a potassium
        restricted diet. Salt substitutions are acceptable.

Chapter 16

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. 130 kcal/kg/day is the highest daily recommended amount for a preterm infant. 130 × 1 kg = 130 calories
        daily

    2. d. Carbohydrate is the preferred energy source for the body.
    3. a. Protein and calories will be the biggest concerns at this age because she will need them to develop and

        grow appropriately; however, she cannot take in so much that her kidneys will be overloaded and her glucose
        out of range.
    4. d. To prevent additional issues like UTIs, kidney stones, and hypertension, which can impact already-poor
        kidney health, the client should eat a low-sodium, heart-healthy, high-fiber diet, and Ramen noodles are
        extremely high in sodium.
    5. b. Education on preventing STIs should start at age 10 to help ensure renal health. UTIs resulting from STIs
        can spread silently and asymptomatically, depending on the cause, which could lead to pyelonephritis and
        damage Kayla's already weakened kidneys.
    6. a. The requirement is 2,000 calories daily for an adolescent female.
    7. d. Fetal intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a risk for a client with these health conditions.
    8. b. The client's original CKD stage was stage 3, which is associated with the GFR range of 30 to 59 mL/min/
        1.73 m2. During pregnancy, the range is expected to increase, so a lower range would be something to
        address immediately. At 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, the client would require dialysis as an immediate intervention.

Review Questions

    1. a. The GFR increases in early pregnancy, causing a hyperfiltrative state, so a decreased GFR would be
        considered abnormal.

    2. c. The pregnant client should avoid or limit caffeine intake to promote fetal health.
    3. d. Protein is extremely important in growth and development and in repair of muscles and injury, but it is still

        restricted in the diet of clients with CKD.
    4. d. Females are at risk for anemia. The recommended daily iron intake for female adolescents aged 14 to 18

        years, including those with CKD, is 15 mg.
    5. a. Coffee, tea, colas, energy drinks, and brown chocolate all contain caffeine, which contains an acid that acts

        as a bladder irritant and can aggravate OAB symptoms.
    6. b. The client with calcium stones should avoid foods high in oxalate, such as rhubarb, beets, and potatoes.
    7. c. Protein intake, particularly from red meat or canned sources, can increase the risk of kidney stone

        development.
    8. a. Increased intake of vegetables, especially cruciferous vegetables, decreases the risk of developing renal

        cancer.
    9. c. The client with stage 4 CKD should restrict intake of potassium as well as that of magnesium, phosphorus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 421

        and sodium.
  10. a. The Mediterranean diet, which includes an emphasis on fresh fruits, can decrease lower urinary tract

        symptoms.

Chapter 17

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. Vitamin A deficiency is not associated with any of the client's symptoms and could be ruled out based on
        the assessment data. Based on the findings, the health care provider orders laboratory tests to determine the
        client's potassium, magnesium, and vitamin B12 levels.

    2. a. The health care provider would be expected to check the client's iron level. Iron deficiency can cause
        tongue redness and inflammation and pallor. The provider decides to order a complete metabolic panel and
        vitamin B12, iron, and magnesium levels.

    3. d. Protein deficiency can cause weight loss, poor appetite, pallor, hair loss, and dry, brittle nails.
    4. b. Quinoa is a seed grouped with whole grain that is high in protein and is a good protein option in a

        vegetarian diet.
    5. d. With Crohn's disease, and when a client has many bowel movements daily, absorption becomes a problem.

        In particular, iron, calcium, and vitamin D are not absorbed properly in this disease process.
    6. c. The nurse should expect supplementation to be ordered. Enteral supplementation will likely be used, but if

        that is not sufficient, parenteral supplementation may be considered.

Review Questions

    1. b. Digestion includes mastication, which requires the teeth to be in working condition.
    2. c. Palpating the abdomen can reveal any pain, guarding, or tenderness present in the gastrointestinal organs.
    3. b. Angular cheilitis, or fissures and crusts in the corners of the lips, can indicate vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin

        B12, or iron deficiency.
    4. c. Tofu is a plant-based protein that can be an option in a vegetarian diet.
    5. a. Edamame is a plant-based source of both protein and iron.
    6. b. Eating yogurt and other probiotic foods supports the gut's normal microbial growth.
    7. d. Oranges have vitamin C and help create an acidic environment that increases iron absorption.
    8. b. Vitamin C assists with iron absorption and should be included in the nutritional plan.
    9. b. Ecchymosis, or bruising, is consistent with vitamin K deficiency because vitamin K is needed for adequate

        blood clotting.
  10. a. For vegan clients, protein options such as quinoa, tofu, and edamame are appropriate suggestions.

Chapter 18

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a. Breastfeeding increases the chances that an infant will absorb the proper nutrients because the nutrients
        provided in breast milk are more bioavailable than those in formula.

    2. d. Children with galactosemia need to be on a lactose-free diet their entire lives to prevent life-threatening
        problems.

    3. b. The problems that Hein faced in pregnancy drastically altered her microbiome and contributed to her
        infant's low birth weight and birth at 37 weeks' gestation. These complications all increased her infant's risk
        for Crohn's disease.

    4. a. High-fiber foods such as beans should be avoided during inflammatory phases of the disease because they
        can irritate the inflamed intestinal lining.

Review Questions

    1. a. The father's microbiome is not shown to be a contributing factor to the child's microbiome.
    2. b. Premature newborns need more calories per kilogram of body weight than a full-term infant does and

        should get 110-135 kcal/kg/day.
    3. d. Galactosemia is a genetic disease in which the individual lacks the proper enzymes to convert lactose into
422 Answer Key

        glucose.
    4. c. Adolescents like to be autonomous, but many tend to prefer convenience foods such as fast food. Parents

        should be instructed to provide a healthy diet whenever possible rather than simply incorporating healthy
        items into unhealthy diet.
    5. d. Consuming prebiotic or probiotic foods is conducive to maintaining good gut bacteria. Yogurt, kimchi, and
        honey are examples of prebiotic foods.
    6. d. Increasing water and fiber intake is important to prevent and manage constipation, a frequent problem
        among older adults.
    7. b. The client should be on a high-fiber diet when not in exacerbation but should be on a low-fiber diet due to
        inflammatory cycles.
    8. c. Kefir has anti-inflammatory properties that will help protect the microbiome.
    9. b. Ciprofloxacin, frequently used for diverticulitis, should not be taken with calcium-rich or calcium-fortified
        foods because the calcium can hinder ciprofloxacin's absorption.
  10. d. Kale can help prevent vitamin K deficiency. Amoxicillin is known to deplete vitamin K and vitamin B12.

Chapter 19

Unfolding Case Study

    1. c. Often, a client with age-related degenerative disorders such as osteoarthritis will have limited ROM and
        increased pain upon ROM of the joints. This simple screening provides valuable information for the diagnosis
        of osteoarthritis as well as the treatment parameters for the client.

    2. a. The provider would start with an x-ray of both knees to evaluate for any soft tissue changes and signs of
        arthritis.

    3. a. Leafy green vegetables have anti-inflammatory properties. Because the client has osteoarthritis with
        edema in both knees, these nutrients should be included in the diet.

    4. b. Nuts and seeds have anti-inflammatory properties that can be beneficial for clients with arthritis.

Review Questions

    1. a. Adequate vitamin D intake is necessary for strong bones and the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis.
    2. d. Good skin turgor indicates a normal moisture level in the skin. Tenting, when the skin remains stretched

        out like a tent when pinched, is a sign of decreased moisture in the skin.
    3. a. Protein aids in the repair of muscles and tissue.
    4. d. Bromelain is a group of enzymes found in pineapples and is believed to reduce swelling and pain.
    5. c. The pressure ulcer changed from a stage 2 ulcer to a stage 1 ulcer, which indicates improvement. Stage 1

        pressure injuries are reddened, but not open.
    6. b. Foods rich in calcium and vitamin D, such as dairy products, are important for bone health and the

        treatment of osteoporosis.
    7. b. Bread and pasta contain gluten and would not be included in a gluten-free diet.
    8. c. Clubbing of nails, when nails look wider or swollen, is often seen with chronic obstructive pulmonary

        disease (COPD).
    9. b. The client understands hydration, like drinking water throughout the day, promotes skin integrity and

        wound healing.
  10. d. Biotin is found in foods such as liver and cooked egg yolks, and it is important in the promotion of hair and

        nail health.

Chapter 20

Unfolding Case Study

    1. c. Adequate intake of dairy products helps ensure that enough calcium is consumed, which is necessary to
        support musculoskeletal and integumentary growth and development in the fetus.

    2. a. Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is essential for developing and maintaining healthy bones and
        teeth in both the pregnant client and the developing fetus.

    3. a. Breastfed infants should continue vitamin D supplementation until they are taking in enough vitamin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 423

        D-fortified solids or vitamin D-rich foods.
    4. a. Breastfeeding does not provide an infant with enough vitamin D. To prevent musculoskeletal disorders and

        to promote healthy skeletal growth, experts recommend that all infants receive vitamin D supplementation.
    5. b. The mother urgently needs to change this child's diet so that they can achieve a healthy weight. Being

        overweight places additional strain on a child's skeletal system putting them at increased risk for injury and
        may make them reluctant to participate in physical activity.
    6. d. Leafy green vegetables are a good source of calcium, which promotes healthy bone development in the
        growing child.
    7. a. Oral nutritional supplements with added protein and amino acids are recommended for clients with
        delayed wound healing due to malnutrition.
    8. d. Based on the findings, the MNA classifies individuals as either well-nourished, at risk for malnutrition, or
        malnourished.

Review Questions

    1. a. The FRAX does not diagnose osteoporosis, but it can estimate a person's risk for a bone fracture within 10
        years. This information can help the nurse and client plan care and implement strategies to help mitigate
        risks in the home and other environments.

    2. d. Corticosteroids, as well as antacids, proton pump inhibitors, anticonvulsants, and loop diuretics, can affect
        bone health with long-term use.

    3. c. Starting in infancy, parents should brush their children's teeth at least twice a day with a fluoride
        toothpaste according to their dentist's recommendations. The first dental visit should occur no later than the
        eruption of the first tooth, which happens well before 1 year of age in most children.

    4. d. Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) is characterized by itchy, red, raised bumps
        and hives that most commonly appear on the abdomen, thighs, buttocks, and arms.

    5. c. Adolescent athletes have increased nutritional needs and should consume adequate amounts of complex
        carbohydrates, proteins, and fats while avoiding processed sugars.

    6. c. Food, especially calcium-rich foods, can interfere with the absorption of bisphosphonates.
    7. d. There is a correlation between low maternal vitamin D and osteopenia in newborns and decreased bone

        density in childhood. Consequently, it is important to monitor vitamin D levels in the pregnant client.
    8. d. Weight-bearing exercise and maintenance of a healthy weight help prevent age-related osteoporotic

        changes in menopausal individuals.
    9. b. Older adults with sarcopenia, or low muscle mass, should incorporate leucine-rich foods to stimulate

        muscle synthesis.
  10. b. Osteopenia may be present in an infant born before 30 weeks' gestation because the majority of calcium

        uptake occurs during the third trimester of fetal life.
424 Answer Key
Access for free at openstax.org
            References 425

REFERENCES

Chapter 1 Introduction to Nutrition for Nurses

Agusala, B. (2022, January 26). 9 diet fads to try (or skip completely) in 2022. UT Southwestern Medical Center.
    https://utswmed.org/medblog/diets-best-and-worst/

American Heart Association. (2023). The American Heart Association diet and lifestyle recommendations.
    https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/aha-diet-and-lifestyle-
    recommendations

American Medical Association. (2023, June 14). AMA adopts new policy clarifying role of BMI as a measure in
   medicine [Press release]. https://apastyle.apa.org/style-grammar-guidelines/references/examples/press-
    release-references

Bendowska, A. & Baum, E. (2023). The significance of cooperation in interdisciplinary health care teams as
   perceived by Polish medical students. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 20(2), DOI: https://doi.org/
    10.3390%2Fijerph20020954

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. (2022, September 30). What dieticians and nutritionists do.
    Occupational outlook handbook. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/dietitians-and-nutritionists.htm#tab-2

Callahan, A., Leonard, H., & Powell, T. (2021). Nutrition: Science and everyday application. Creative Commons.
    https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/nutritionscience/

Calorie Calculator, (2023). https://www.calculator.net/calorie-calculator.html

Center for Integrative Nutrition (n.d.). Integrative nutrition. https://cih.ucsd.edu/medicine/integrative-nutrition-
    overview

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). About nutrition. https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/about-nutrition/
    index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a). Defining Adult Overweight & Obesity. https://www.cdc.gov/
    obesity/basics/adult-defining.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). Populations and vulnerabilities. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/
    tracking/topics/PopulationsVulnerabilities.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023). Healthy People. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people/
   index.htm Chien L. Y. (2019). Evidence-based practice and nursing research. The Journal of Nursing Research:
   JNR, 27(4), e29. https://doi.org/10.1097/jnr.0000000000000346

Clem & Thyme Nutrition. (2023). The best nutritionists to follow on social media in 2022. Clem & Thyme Nutrition
    Wellness. https://clemandthyme.com/2022/03/25/the-best-nutritionists-to-follow-on-social-media-in-2022/

County Health Rankings & Roadmaps (n.d.). https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/

Davis, C. & Saltos, E. (n.d.). Dietary recommendations and how they have changed over time. In USDA/ERS (pp.
    33-50). https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/42215/5831_aib750b_1_.pdf

Devine, A., & Lawlis, T. (2019). Nutrition and vulnerable groups. Nutrients, 11(5), 1066. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu11051066

Diet, culture, timeline.(2023). https://dietculturetimeline.com/2000s/

Digitalis. (N.D.) Pros and cons of social media in healthcare. The Digitalis Blog: Cutting Edge Healthcare Marketing.
    ed from https://digitalismedical.com/blog/pros-and-cons-of-social-media-in-healthcare/
426 References

English, Emily. (n.d.). The dangers of social media. Emily English Nutrition. https://www.emilyenglish.com/blog/
    socialmediaandnutrition

Feeding America (2023). Hunger and food insecurity. https://www.feedingamerica.org/hunger-in-america/food-
    insecurity

Gattu, R., Paik, G., Wang, Y., Ray, P., Lichenstein, R., & Black., M. (2019). The Hunger Vital Sign identifies household
   food insecurity among children in emergency departments and primary care. Children (Basel, Switzerland), 6(10),
    107. https://doi.org/10.3390/children6100107

Gbareen, M., Barnoy, S. & Theilla, M. (2021). Subjective and objective nutritional assessment: nurses' role and the
   effect of cultural differences. BMC Nurs 20 (157). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-021-00683-3

Global Wellness Institute (n.d.). What is wellness? https://globalwellnessinstitute.org/what-is-wellness/

Hendler, C. (2022, August 5). 10 tactics to improve patient teaching. https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/expert-
    insights/ten-tactics-to-improve-patient-teaching

HHS https://health.gov/sites/default/files/2019-09/Health_Literacy_Action_Plan.pdf

Ignatavicius, D., & Silvestri, L. (2023). Getting ready for the next-generation NCLEX (NGN): How to shift from the
   nursing process to clinical judgment in nursing. https://evolve.elsevier.com/education/expertise/next-generation-
    nclex/ngn-transitioning-from-the-nursing-process-to-clinical-judgment/#article-anchor-bottom

Jahns, L., Davis-Shaw, W., Lichtenstein, A. H., Murphy, S. P., Conrad, Z., & Nielsen, F. (2018). The history and future
   of dietary guidance in America. Adv Nutr. 9(2):136-147. https://doi: 10.1093/advances/nmx025. PMID:
    29659693; PMCID: PMC5916427.

Johns Hopkins Sheridan Libraries (2023, February 26). Evaluating information. Johns Hopkins University.
    https://guides.library.jhu.edu/evaluate/social-media

Jorgensen, M. (2022, October 12). What is evidence-based nutrition? Trifecta Nutrition. Retrieved 1/4/2023 from
    https://www.trifectanutrition.com/blog/what-is-evidence-based-nutrition

Kabata, P., Winniczuk-Kabata, D., Kabata, P. M., Jakiewicz, J., & Polom, K. (2022). Can social media profiles be a
   reliable source of information on nutrition and dietetics? Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 10(2), 397.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10020397

Kahm Clinic. (2022, January 25). The connection between social media, eating disorders, and diet culture.
    https://www.thekahmclinic.com/blog/the-connection-between-social-media-eating-disorders-and-diet-culture.

King, H. (2019, October 8). Hippocrates now: Quoting the father of medicine. https://blogs.bmj.com/medical-
    humanities/2019/10/08/hippocrates-now-quoting-the-father-of-medicine/

Lam, C. & Patel, P. (2022). Food, drug, and cosmetic act. In StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls
    Publishinghttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK585046/

Mattes, R., Rowe, S., Ohlhorst, S., Brown, A., Hoffman, D., Liska, D., Feskens, E., Dhillon, J., Tucker, K., Epstein, L.,
    Neufeld, L., Kelley, M., Fukagawa, N., Sunde, R., Zeisel, S., Basile, A., Borth, L., & Jackson, E. (2022). Valuing the
   Diversity of Research Methods to Advance Nutrition Science. Advances in nutrition (Bethesda, Md.), 13(4),
    1324-1393. https://doi.org/10.1093/advances/nmac043

Mozaffarian D, Rosenberg I, Uauy R. (2018). History of modern nutrition science-implications for current research,
   dietary guidelines, and food policy. BMJ.;361:k2392. doi: 10.1136/bmj.k2392.

National Council of State Boards of Nursing, Inc. (2019). NGN Talks: Clinical Judgment Measurement Model.
    https://www.ncsbn.org/video/ngn-talks-clinical-judgment-measurement-model

National Council of State Boards of Nursing, Inc. (2023). Clinical judgment measurement model. Next generation
    NCLEX. https://www.nclex.com/clinical-judgment-measurement-model

National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities (n.d.). Food Accessibility, Insecurity, and Health
   Outcomes. https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/resources/understanding-health-disparities/food-accessibility-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 427

    insecurity-and-health-outcomes.html

North Dakota State University. (2019). Finding the truth 1: Reliable nutrition and health information.
    https://www.ndsu.edu/agriculture/extension/publications/finding-truth-i-reliable-nutrition-and-health-
    information Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990. Public Law No: 101-535, (1990).
    https://www.congress.gov/bill/101st-congress/house-bill/3562

OSU Extension Service. (2023). About food hero. https://www.foodhero.org/about-food-hero.

Stillerman, K. (2019, June 6). "Big Food" Companies spend big money in hopes of shaping the Dietary Guidelines for
   Americans. The Equation. https://blog.ucsusa.org/karen-perry-stillerman/big-food-companies-spend-big-
    money-in-hopes-of-shaping-the-dietary-guidelines-for-americans/

Thornton, L. (2019). A Brief History and Overview of Holistic Nursing. Integrative medicine (Encinitas, Calif.), 18(4),
    32-33.

Toney-Butler, T., & Thayer, J. (2023). Nursing process. In StatPearls [Internet] StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499937/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (n.d.). Learn how to eat healthy with MyPlate. https://www.myplate.gov/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2021). MyPlate/MiPlato. https://www.fns.usda.gov/resource/myplate-miplato

U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Health and Human Services (n.d.). History of the Dietary Guidelines.
    https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/about-dietary-guidelines/history-dietary-guidelines

U.S. Department of Agriculture and Health and Human Services. (2020). Dietary guidelines for Americans.
    https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/

U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service (n.d.) The role of the USDA Food and Nutrition Service.
    https://www.fns.usda.gov/

U.S. Department of Agriculture Science. (n.d.). Nutrition.gov. https://www.nutrition.gov.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2010).
   National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy. Washington, DC: Author. https://health.gov/our-work/national-
    health-initiatives/health-literacy/national-action-plan-improve-health-literacy

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2021,
   October 26). Health literacy and health equity: Connecting the dots. https://health.gov/news/202110/health-
    literacy-and-health-equity-connecting-dots

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (n.d.). Browse
   evidence-based resources. Healthy People 2030. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
    https://health.gov/healthypeople/tools-action/browse-evidence-based-resources#social-determinants-of-
    health

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (n.d.). Nutrition
   and healthy eating. Healthy People 2030. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://health.gov/
    healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/nutrition-and-healthy-eating

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (2018). FDA History. https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-history

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (n.d.) The new nutrition facts label: What's in it for you? https://www.fda.gov/
    food/nutrition-education-resources-materials/new-nutrition-facts-label

Van De Walle, G. (2019). What Is the Waist-to-Hip Ratio? Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/health/waist-to-
    hip-ratio

Weill Cornell Medicine. (n.d.) The Food and Drug Administration: the continued history of drug advertising.
    https://library.weill.cornell.edu/about-us/snake%C2%A0oil%C2%A0-social%C2%A0media-drug-advertising-
    your-health/food-and-drug-administration-continued
428 References

World Health Organization (n.d). Constitution. https://www.who.int/about/governance/constitution

Yinusa G., Scammell, J., Murphy, J., Ford, G., & Baron, S. Multidisciplinary provision of food and nutritional care to
   hospitalized adult in-patients: a scoping review. (2021). J Multidisciplinary Healthcare.;14:459-491.
    https://doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S255256

Chapter 2 A Holistic View of Macronutrients

Alzahrani, M., AlGhrab, S., Althwabi, M., Sudan, A., Jurays, N., Alalyani, F., Bin Fudhayl, S., Alfahadi, M., Asiri, Y., &
   Alshahrani, A. (2022). Awareness of Lactose Intolerance Disorder in Saudi Arabia Population. Journal of Family
   Medicine & Primary Care, 11(6), 3118-3124. https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_2247_21

American Diabetes Association. (2019) 5. Lifestyle management: Standards of medical care in diabetes--2019.
   Diabetes Care, 42(Suppl. 1), S46-S60. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc19-S005

American Heart Association. (2018). Mono-unsaturated fats from plants, not animals may reduce risk of death from
   heart disease and other causes. ScienceDaily, 21 March 2018. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/03/
    180321162252.htm

American Heart Association. (2021, November 21). Saturated fat. https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-
    eating/eat-smart/fats/saturated-fats

American Kidney Fund. (2022, October 26). Stages of kidney disease. https://www.kidneyfund.org/all-about-
    kidneys/stages-kidney-disease

Amico, A., Wootan, M. G., Jacobson, M. F., Leung, C., & Willet, A. W. (2021). The demise of artificial trans fat: A
   history of a public health achievement. Milbank Quarterly, 99(3), 746-770. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    1468-0009.12515

Amiri, M., Ghiasvand, R., Kaviani, M., Forbes, S. C., & Salehi-Abargouei, A. (2019). Chocolate milk for recovery from
   exercise: A systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. European Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 73(6), 835-849. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41430-018-0187-x

Ampong, I., Watkins, A., Gutierrez-Merino, J., Ikwuobe, J., & Griffiths, H. R. (2020). Dietary protein insufficiency: An
   important consideration in fatty liver disease? British Journal of Nutrition, 123(6), 601-609. https://doi.org/
    10.1017/s0007114519003064

Atkinson, F. S., Brand-Miller, J. C., Foster-Powell, K., Buyken, A. E., & Goletzke, J. (2021). International tables of
   glycemic index and glycemic load values 2021: A systematic review. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   114(5), 1625-1632. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqab233

Bendsen, N. T., Christensen, R., Bartels, E. M., & Astrup, A. (2011). Consumption of industrial and ruminant trans
   fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. European
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 65(7), 773-783. https://doi.org/10.1038/ejcn.2011.34

Beslay, M., Srour, B., Méjean, C., Allès, B., Fiolet, T., Debras, C., Chazelas, E., Deschasaux, M., Wendeu-Foyet, M. G.,
    Hercberg, S., Galan, P., Monteiro, C. A., Deschamps, V., Calixto Andrade, G., Kesse-Guyot, E., Julia, C., & Touvier,
    M. (2020). Ultra-processed food intake in association with BMI change and risk of overweight and obesity: A
   prospective analysis of the French NutriNet-Santé cohort. PLoS Medicine, 17(8), e1003256. https://doi.org/
    10.1371/journal.pmed.1003256

Borer, K. T. (2023). Are gastrointestinal signals the principal guides to human appetite and energy balance? Medical
   Research Archives, 11(1), 10.18103/mra.v11i1.3548. https://doi.org/10.18103/mra.v11i1.3548

Catanzaro, R., Sciuto, M., & Marotta, F. (2021). Lactose intolerance: an update on its pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
   treatment. Nutrition Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nutres.2021.02.003

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, November 3). Bottled Water. https://www.cdc.gov/fluoridation/
    faqs/bottled_water.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). Boil water advisory. https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/
    emergency/drinking/drinking-water-advisories/boil-water-advisory.html

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 429

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Making water safe in an emergency. https://www.cdc.gov/
    healthywater/emergency/making-water-safe.html

Charles, S. (2022, February 25). Difference between glycemic index and glycemic load. Verywell Health.
    https://www.verywellhealth.com/glycemic-index-vs-load-5214363

Clark, C., Imran, J., Madni, T., & Wolf, S. E. (2017). Nutrition and metabolism in burn patients. Burns & Trauma, 5(1),
    1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186%2Fs41038-017-0076-x

Clemente-Suárez VJ, Mielgo-Ayuso J, Martín-Rodríguez A, Ramos-Campo DJ, Redondo-Flórez L, Tornero-Aguilera
   JF. (2022, September 15). The Burden of Carbohydrates in Health and Disease. Nutrients, 14(18):3809. doi:
    10.3390/nu14183809. PMID: 36145184; PMCID: PMC9505863.

Currenti, W., Godos, J., Alanazi, A. M., Grosso, G., Cincione, R. I., Vignera, S. L., Buscemi, S., & Galvano,
    F. (2022). Dietary fats and cardio-metabolic outcomes in a cohort of Italian
   adults. Nutrients, 14(4294), 4294. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14204294

Dickerson, R. N. (2016). Nitrogen balance and protein requirements for critically ill older patients. Nutrients, 8(4),
    226. https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fnu8040226

Dupuis, C., Bret, A., Janer, A., Guido, O., Bouzgarrou, R., Dopeux, L., Hernandez, G., Mascle, O., Calvet, L., Thouy, F.,
    Grapin, K., Couhault, P., Kinda, F., Laurichesse, G., Bonnet, B., Adda, M., Boirie, Y., & Souweine, B. (2022).
    Association of nitrogen balance trajectories with clinical outcomes in critically ill COVID-19 patients: A
   retrospective cohort study. Clinical Nutrition, 41(12), 2895-2902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2022.08.023

Fiolet, T., Srour, B., Sellem, L., Kesse-Guyot, E., Allès, B., Méjean, C., Deschasaux, M., Fassier, P., Latino-Martel, P.,
    Beslay, M., Hercberg, S., Lavalette, C., Monteiro, C. A., & Touvier, M. (2018). Consumption of ultra-processed
   foods and cancer risk: Results from NutriNet-Santé prospective cohort. The British Medical Journal, 360, k322.
    https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.k322

Garden-Robinson, J., & Christenson, J. (2019). Teens and protein: How much do you need? North Dakota State
    University. https://www.ndsu.edu/agriculture/extension/publications/teens-and-protein-how-much-do-you-
    need

Gebhardt, S.E., & Thomas, R.G. (2022, October). Nutritive Value of Foods. United States Department of Agriculture,
   Agricultural Research Service. Home and Garden Bulletin, 72. https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/80400525/
    data/hg72/hg72_2002.pdf

Gordon, B., & Klemm, S. (2022, June 23). How much water do you need? The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.
    https://www.eatright.org/health/essential-nutrients/water/how-much-water-do-you-need

Guasch-Ferré, M., Zong, G., Willett, W. C., Zock, P. L., Wanders, A. J., Hu, F. B., & Sun, Q. (2019). Associations of
    monounsaturated fatty acids from plant and animal sources with total and cause-specific mortality in two U.S.
   prospective cohort studies. Circulation Research, 124(8), 1266-1275. https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/
    10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.313996

Guilbeau, J., & Watson, C. S. (2022). Assessment and management of vitamin D deficiency. Women's Healthcare: A
   Clinical Journal for NPs, 10(1), 36-40.

Hauser, M. E., McMacken, M., Lim, A., & Shetty, P. (2022). Nutrition--An evidence-based, practical approach to
   chronic disease prevention and treatment. Journal of Family Practice, 71(Suppl. 1), S5-S16. https://doi-
    org.ezproxy.gvsu.edu/10.12788/jfp.0292

Iwayama, K., Tanabe, Y., Yajima, K., Tanji, F., Onishi, T., & Takahashi, H. (2023). Preexercise high-fat meal following
    carbohydrate loading attenuates glycogen utilization during endurance exercise in male recreational
   runners. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 37(3), 661-668. https://doi.org/10.1519/
    jsc.0000000000004311

Katoch, G. K., Nain, N., Kaur, S., & Rasane, P. (2022). Lactose intolerance, and its dietary management: An update,
   Journal of the American Nutrition Association, 41:4, 424-434. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    07315724.2021.1891587
430 References

Kris-Etherton, P. M., & Krauss, R. M. (2020). Public health guidelines should recommend reducing saturated fat
   consumption as much as possible: YES. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 112(1), 13-18.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqaa110

Liu, A. G., Ford, N. A., Hu, F. B., Zelman, K. M., Mozaffarian, D., & Kris-Etherton, P. M. (2016). A healthy approach to
   dietary fats: Understanding the science and taking action to reduce consumer confusion. Nutrition Journal, 16(1),
    53. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937-017-0271-4

Llavero-Valero, M., Escalada-San Martín, J., Martínez-González, M. A., Basterra-Gortari, F. J., de la Fuente-Arrillaga,
    C., & Bes-Rastrollo, M. (2021). Ultra-processed foods and type-2 diabetes risk in the SUN project: A prospective
   cohort study. Clinical Nutrition, 40(5), 2817-2824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2021.03.039

MacDonald, C. J., Madkia, A.-L., Mounier-Vehier, C., Severi, G., & Boutron-Ruault, M.-C. (2022). Associations
    between saturated fat intake and other dietary macronutrients and incident hypertension in a prospective study
   of French women. European Journal of Nutrition, 62(3), 1207-1215. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00394-022-03053-0

McDermott, B. P., Anderson, S. A., Armstrong, L. E., Casa, D. J., Cheuvront, S. N., Cooper, L., Kenney, W. L., O'Connor,
    F. G., & Roberts, W. O. (2017). National Athletic Trainers' Association position statement: Fluid replacement for
   the physically active. Journal of Athletic Training, 52(9), 877-895. https://doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-52.9.02

Metropulos, M. (2023, June 23). What to know about soy. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320472#types-and-uses

Munoz, N., & Posthauer, M. E. (2022). Nutrition strategies for pressure injury management: Implementing the 2019
   International Clinical Practice Guideline. Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 37(3), 567-582. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    ncp.10762

Munoz-Urtubia, N., Vega-Munoz, A., Estrada-Munoz, C., Salazar-Sepulveda, G., Contreras-Barraza, N., & Castillo, D.
   (2023). Healthy Behavior and Sports Drinks: A Systematic Review. NUTRIENTS, 15(13), 2915. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu15132915

National Kidney Foundation of Hawaii. (n.d.). Understanding the Renal Diet: Protein. https://kidneyhi.org/dietitian-
    blog/how-much-protein-do-i-need-on-a-ckd-diet/

Precker, M. (2022, January 27). Sound the fiber alarm! Most of us need more of it in our diet. American Heart
    Association News. https://www.heart.org/en/news/2022/01/27/sound-the-fiber-alarm-most-of-us-need-more-
    of-it-in-our-diet

Quagliani D, Felt-Gunderson P. Closing America's Fiber Intake Gap: Communication Strategies From a Food and
    Fiber Summit. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2016 Jul 7;11(1):80-85. doi: 10.1177/1559827615588079. PMID:
    30202317; PMCID: PMC6124841.

Rajan, E. (2023, April 12). Can you recommend a diet after gallbladder removal? Mayo Clinic.
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/cholecystectomy/expert-answers/gallbladder-removal-diet/
    faq-20057813

Seal, C. J., Courtin, C. M., Venema, K., & de Vries, J. (2021). Health benefits of whole grain: Effects on dietary
   carbohydrate quality, the gut microbiome, and consequences of processing. Comprehensive Reviews in Food
   Science and Food Safety, 20(3), 2742-2768. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12728

Shoaibinobarian, N., Danehchin, L., Mozafarinia, M., Hekmatdoost, A., Eghtesad, S., Masoudi, S., Mohammadi, Z.,
    Mard, A., Paridar, Y., Abolnezhadian, F., Malihi, R., Rahimi, Z., Cheraghian, B., Mir-Nasseri, M. M., Shayesteh, A. A.,
    & Poustchi, H. (2023). The association between DASH diet adherence and cardiovascular risk
   factors. International Journal of Preventive Medicine, 14, 24. https://doi.org/10.4103/ijpvm.ijpvm_336_21

Teicholz, N. (2023) A short history of saturated fat: The making and unmaking of a scientific consensus. Current
   Opinion in Endocrinology, Diabetes and Obesity 30(1), 65-71. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    med.0000000000000791

Thomas, D. T., Erdman, K. A., & Burke, L. M. (2016). American College of Sports Medicine joint position statement.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 431

   Nutrition and athletic performance. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 48(3) 543-568. https://doi.org/
    10.1249/mss.0000000000000852

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2022). Food Sources of Dietary Fiber. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/
    2020-2025-dietary-guidelines-online-materials/food-sources-select-nutrients/food-0

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2022, November 7). How much (dietary) fiber should I eat? Ask USDA.
    https://ask.usda.gov/s/article/How-much-dietary-fiber-should-I-eat

U.S. Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service. (2019). FoodData Central. fdc.nal.usda.gov

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for
    Americans, 2020-2025. 9th Edition. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2023). Private drinking water wells. https://www.epa.gov/privatewells

Watson, S. (2023). Do air fryers have health benefits? WebMD. https://www.webmd.com/food-recipes/air-fryers

Wood, B., Williams, O., Baker, P., & Sacks, G. (2023, April 19). Behind the "creative destruction" of human diets: An
    analysis of the structure and market dynamics of the ultra-processed food manufacturing industry and
   implications for public health. Journal of Agrarian Change. 23(4), 1-33. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12545

Yi-Bing Zhu, Yan Yao, Yuan Xu, & Hui-Bin Huang. (2022). Nitrogen balance and outcomes in critically ill patients: A
    systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Nutrition, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.961207

Chapter 3 A Holistic View of Micronutrients

Abiri, B., & Vafa, M. (2021). Vitamin C and cancer: The role of vitamin C in disease progression and quality of life in
   cancer patients. Nutrition & Cancer, 73(8), 1282-1292. https://doi.org/10.1080/01635581.2020.1795692

Ami, N., Bernstein, M., Boucher, F., Rieder, M., & Parker, L. (2016). Folate and neural tube defects: The role of
   supplements and food fortification. Paediatrics & Child Health (1205-7088), 21(3), 1-7. https://doi.org/10.1093/
    pch/21.3.145

Cowan, A., Tooze, J., Gahche, J, Bhadra, A, Carroll, R., & Bailey, R. (2020). Trends in overall and micronutrient-
   containing dietary supplement use in adults and children, NHANES 2007-2018. The Journal of Nutrition. doi:
    https://doi.org/10.1093.jn/nxac168

Crist, B. L., Alekel, D. L., Ritland, L. M., Hanson, L. N., Genschel, U., & Reddy, M. B. (2009). Association of oxidative
   stress, iron, and centralized fat mass in healthy postmenopausal women. Journal of Women's Health
   (15409996), 18(6), 795-801. https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2008.0988

Cuskelly, G. J., Mooney, K. M., & Young, I. S. (2007). Folate and vitamin B12: friendly or enemy nutrients for the
   elderly. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 66(4 pp.548-558), 548-558. https://doi.org/10.1210/endocr/
    bqaa218

Dimitrov, V., Barbier, C., Ismailova, A., Wang, Y., Dmowski, K., Salehi-Tabar, R., Memari, B., Groulx-Boivin, E., &
    White, J. H. (2021). Vitamin D-regulated gene expression profiles: Species-specificity and cell-specific effects on
   metabolism and immunity. Endocrinology 162(2), bqaa218. https://doi.org/10.1210/endocr/bqaa218

Farag, M. A., Abib, B., Qin, Z., Ze, X., & Ali, S. E. (2023). Dietary macrominerals: Updated review of their role and
   orchestration in human nutrition throughout the life cycle with sex differences. Current Research in Food Science,
   6, 100450. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crfs.2023.100450

Fletcher, J. (2019). What are the six essential nutrients? Medical News Today. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/
    articles/326132

Hand, I., Noble, L., & Abrams, S. A. (2022). Vitamin K and the newborn infant. Pediatrics, 149(3), 1-6.
    https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2021-056036

Hanna, M., Jaqua, E., Nguyen, V., & Clay, J. (2022). B vitamins: functions and uses in medicine. Permanente Journal,
   26(2), 89-97. https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/21.204
432 References

Harguth, A. (2022). Why take vitamin and mineral supplements? Mayo Clinic Health System.
    https://www.mayoclinichealthsystem.org/hometown-health/speaking-of-health/why-take-vitamin-and-mineral-
    supplement.

Ingenbleek, Y., & Kimura, H. (2013). Nutritional essentiality of sulfur in health and disease. Nutrition Reviews, 71(7),
    413-432. https://doi.org/10.1111/nure.12050

Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Panel on Dietary Antioxidants and Related Compounds. Dietary Reference Intakes for
    Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000.
    Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK225483/ doi: 10.17226/9810

Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Committee on Use of Dietary Reference Intakes in Nutrition Labeling. Dietary Reference
    Intakes: Guiding Principles for Nutrition Labeling and Fortification. Washington (DC): National Academies Press
    (U.S.); 2003. 3, Overview of Food Fortification in the United States and Canada. Available from:
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK208880/

Leung, A. M., Braverman, L. E., & Pearce, E. N. (2012). History of U.S. iodine fortification and supplementation.
   Nutrients, 4(11), 1740-1746. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu4111740

Lykkesfeldt, J., & Tveden-Nyborg, P. (2019). The pharmacokinetics of vitamin C. Nutrients, 11(10). https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu11102412

Mishra, S., Stierman, B., Gahche, J. J., & Potischman, N. (2021, February 01). Dietary supplement use among adults:
    United States, 2017-2018. NCHS Data Brief, no. 399. National Center for Health Statistics (U.S.); Division of
    Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys; NIH Office of Dietary Supplements Statistics. https://doi.org/
    10.15620/cdc:101131.

Murphy, S. P., Yates, A. A., Atkinson, S. A., Barr, S. I., & Dwyer, J. (2016). History of nutrition: The long road leading to
   the dietary reference intakes for the United States and Canada. Advances in Nutrition 7(1), 157-168.
    https://doi.org/10.3945/an.115.010322

National Institutes of Health. (2021a). Pantothenic Acid. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/PantothenicAcid-
    HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2021b). Vitamin C. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminC-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2021c). Vitamin E. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminE-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health (2021d). Vitamin K. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminK-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022a). Biotin. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Biotin-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022b). Choline. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Choline-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022c). Folate. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Folate-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022d). Niacin. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Niacin-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022e). Riboflavin. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Riboflavin-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2022f). Vitamin A and Carotenoids. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminA-

    HealthProfessional/
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2023).

    https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/data.html
National Institutes of Health. (2023a). Multivitamin/mineral supplements. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/MVMS-

    HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2023b). Thiamin. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Thiamin-HealthProfessional/
National Institutes of Health. (2023c). Vitamin B12. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/

    VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 433

National Institutes of Health. (2023d). Vitamin B6. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB6-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023e). Vitamin D. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health, National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (2018). Vitamins and
    minerals. https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/vitamins-and-minerals

National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements. (1994). Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act
    of 1994 Public Law 103-417 103rd Congress. https://ods.od.nih.gov/About/DSHEA_Wording.aspx

Newman, J. C., McBurney, M. I., Hunt, K. J., Malek, A. M., & Marriott, B. P. (2020). Modeling possible outcomes of
   updated Daily Values on nutrient intakes of the United States adult population. Nutrients, 12(1), 210.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12010210

Ofoedu, C.E., Iwouno, J.O., Ofoedu, E.O., Ogueke, C.C., Igwe, V.S. Agunwah, I.M., Ofoedum, A.F., Chacha, J.F.,
    Muobike, O.P., Agunbiade, A.O., Njoku, N.E., Nwakaudu, A.A., Odimegwu,N.E., Ndukauba, O.E., Ogbonna, C.U.,
    Naibaho, J., Korus, M. & Okpala, C.O.R.. (2021). Revisiting food-sourced vitamins for consumer diet and health
    needs: a perspective review, from vitamin classification, metabolic functions, absorption, utilization, to balancing
   nutritional requirements. PeerJ, 9, e11940. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.11940

Reddy, P. & Jialal, I. (2022). Biochemistry, fat soluble vitamins. In StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534869

Rosenbloom, M. (2023, September 11). Vitamin Toxicity Clinical Presentation. Medscape.
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/819426-clinical?form=fpf

Seres, D. (2023). What supplements do you need? Probably none. Columbia University Irving School of Medicine.
    https://www.cuimc.columbia.edu/news/what-supplements-do-you-need-probably-none

Sjoqvist, F., & Bottiger, Y. (2010). Historical perspectives: drug interactions-it all began with cheese. Journal of
   Internal Medicine, 268(6), 512-515. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02300.x

Soliman, N. M. S. E. D., Kotby, A. A., Shabaan, M. A., & Eid, E. M. (2022). Serum chloride and serum sodium
   derangements in children on prolonged furosemide therapy and their effect on diuretic response. Egyptian
   Pediatric Association Gazette, 70(1). https://doi-org.ezproxy.gvsu.edu/10.1186/s43054-022-00116-z

Taylor, C. M., & Emmett, P. M. (2019). Picky eating in children: causes and consequences. The Proceedings of the
   Nutrition Society, 78(2), 161-169. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0029665118002586

United Nations. (2019). The State of the World's Children 2019: Children, Food and Nutrition-Growing Well in a
   Changing World. United Nations. https://www.google.com/books/edition/
    The_State_of_the_World_s_Children_2019/CG38DwAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (n.d.). Evolution of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans Process and Products: 1980
    to Present. (n.d.). https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/media/799

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for
    Americans, 2020-2025. 9th Edition. December 2020. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022a). Daily Value on the New Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels.
    https://www.fda.gov/food/new-nutrition-facts-label/daily-value-new-nutrition-and-supplement-facts-labels

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022b). Information for Consumers on Using Dietary Supplements.
    https://www.fda.gov/food/dietary-supplements/information-consumers-using-dietary-supplements

van Gool, J. D., Hirche, H., Lax, H., & Schaepdrijver, L. D. (2020). Fallacies of clinical studies on folic acid hazards in
   subjects with a low vitamin B12 status. Critical Reviews in Toxicology, 50(2), 177-187. https://doi-
    org.ezproxy.gvsu.edu/10.1080/10408444.2020.1727842

Weyh, C., Krüger, K., Peeling, P., & Castell, L. (2022). The role of minerals in the optimal functioning of the immune
   system. Nutrients, 14(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14030644
434 References

Chapter 4 The Digestive Process

Afzaal, M., Saeed, F., Shah, Y., Hussain., M., Rabail, R., Socol, C., Hassoun, A., Pateiro, M., Lorenzo, J., Rusu, A., &
   Aadil, R. (2022). Human Gut Microbiota in Health and Disease: Unveiling the Relationship. Frontiers in
   Microbiology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.999001

American Stroke Association. (n.d.). Stroke Symptoms. https://www.stroke.org/en/about-stroke/stroke-symptoms

Austin Gastroenterology. (2019). Upper Vs. Lower GI Tract: What They Are? Retrieved from
    https://www.austingastro.com/2019/03/01/upper-vs-lower-gi-tract-what-are-they/

Bartel, M. (2022). Effects of Ageing on the Digestive System. https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/digestive-
    disorders/biology-of-the-digestive-system/effects-of-aging-on-the-digestive-system

Baton Rouge General (Mayo Clinic Care Network). (2023). Fad Diets and Colon Cancer. Are They Worth the Risk?
    Retrieved from https://www.brgeneral.org/news-blog/2023/march/fad-diets-and-colon-cancer-are-they-worth-
    the-ri/

Benakis, C. & Liesz, A. (2022). The Gut-Brain Axis in Ischemic Stroke: Its Relevance in Pathology and as a
   Therapeutic Target. Neurological Research and Practice, 4(57). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s42466-022-00222-8. https://neurolrespract.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s42466-022-00222-8

Bhupathiraju, S., & Hu, F. (2023). Nutrient-Drug Interactions. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/nutritional-disorders/nutrition-general-considerations/nutrient-drug-interactions

Boston Children's Hospital. (2022). Anorectal Malformation. https://www.childrenshospital.org/conditions/
    anorectal-malformation

Chen, R., Yu, Y., Li, W., Liu, Y., Chen, F., Zhou, Q., Xia, Z., & Ma, D. (2020). Gastrointestinal Symptoms Associated with
   Unfavorable Prognosis of COVID-19 Patients: A Retrospective Study. Frontiers in Medicine. DOI: https://doi.org/
    10.3389/fmed.2020.608259. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.2020.608259/full

Cleveland Clinic. (2022a). Digestive System. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/7041-digestive-system

Cleveland Clinic. (2022b). Gastrointestinal Diseases. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/
    7040-gastrointestinal-diseases

Cleveland Clinic. (2022c). Gastrointestinal Manifestations of COVID-19. https://consultqd.clevelandclinic.org/
    gastrointestinal-manifestations-of-covid-19/

Cochran, W. (2022a). Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/
    pediatrics/gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/hypertrophic-pyloric-stenosis

Cochran, W. (2022b). Intussusception. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pediatrics/
    gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/intussusception

Cochran, W. (2022c). Meconium Ileus. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pediatrics/
    gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/meconium-ileus

Cochran, W. (2022d). Meconium Plug Syndrome (Small Left Colon Syndrome). Merck Manual.
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pediatrics/gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/
    meconium-plug-syndrome

Cochran, W. (2022e). Necrotizing Enterocolitis. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/
    pediatrics/gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/necrotizing-enterocolitis

Cochran, W. (2022f). Neonatal Cholestasis. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/
    pediatrics/gastrointestinal-disorders-in-neonates-and-infants/neonatal-cholestasis

Columbia University Irving Medical Center (n.d.). Congenital Malformations of the Digestive Tract.
    https://columbiasurgery.org/conditions-and-treatments/congenital-malformations-of-the-digestive-tract

Ding, J., Jin, Z., Yang, X., Lou, J., Shan, W., Hu, Y., Du, Q., Liao, Q., Xie, R., & Xu, J. (2020). Role of Gut Microbiota Via

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 435

   the Gut-Liver-Brain Axis in Digestive Diseases. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 26(40), 6141-6162. DOI:
    10.3748/wjg.v26.i40.6141. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7596643/

eBioMedicine. (2022). The Dynamics of the Immune System and Gut in the Pathophysiology of Multiple Sclerosis.
   The Lancet, 83(104273). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104273. https://www.thelancet.com/
    journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(22)00455-8/fulltext

French, K. (2022). Dozens of Gut Bacteria Associated with Multiple Sclerosis. https://www.ucsf.edu/news/2022/09/
    423676/dozens-gut-bacteria-associated-multiple-sclerosis

Gantan, E., & Wiedrich, L. (2022). Neonatal Evaluation. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK558943/

GI Associates and Endoscopy Center. (2022a). From the Brain to the Gut (Microbiome). https://gi.md/resources/
    articles/from-the-brain-to-the-gut-microbiome

GI Associates and Endoscopy Center. (2022b). Understanding the Structures of the Digestive System. https://gi.md/
    resources/articles/understanding-the-structures-of-the-digestive-system

Guerra, A., & Waseem, M. (2022). Epiglottitis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK430960/

Gunnars, K. (2020). 22 High Fiber Foods You Should Eat. https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/22-high-fiber-foods

Johns Hopkins Medicine (2022). Malrotation. Retrieved from https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-
    and-diseases/malrotation

Klein, H. (2022). Study Identifies Gut Microbiota Linked to HE Pathophysiology. https://www.ajmc.com/view/study-
    identifies-gut-microbiota-linked-to-he-pathophysiology

Lee, J., Tsolis, R., & Baumler, A. (2022). The Microbiome and Gut Homeostasis. Science, 377(6601), eabp9960.
    https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abp9960

Ludwig, K., Bartolo, D., Salerno, A., Ingravello, G., Cazzato, G., Giacometti, C., & Dall'lgna, P. (2022) Congenital
   Anomalies of the Tubular Gastrointestinal Tract. Pathologica, 114(1), 40-54. DOI: 10.32074/1591-951X-553

Mayo Clinic. (2022). Epiglottitis. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/epiglottitis/symptoms-causes/
    syc-20372227

Mealie, C., Ali, R., & Manthey, D. (2022). Abdominal Exam. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK459220/

Moffitt Cancer Center (2023). What Foods Reduce the Risk of Colon Cancer? Retrieved from https://moffitt.org/
    cancers/colon-cancer/faqs/what-foods-reduce-the-risk-of-colon-cancer/

Munger, R., Kuppuswamy, R., Murthy, J., Balakirshnan, K., Thangaval, G., Sambandam, S., Kurpad, A., Molly, A.,
    Ueland, P., & Mossey, P. (2021). Maternal Vitamin B12 Status and Risk of Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Birth Defects in
   Tamil Nadu State, India. Cleft Palate Craniofacial Journal, 58(5), 567-576. DOI: 10.1177/1055665621998394.
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33686867/

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2022). Your Digestive System and How it Works.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/digestive-system-how-it-works

NHS (2023). Fat: The Facts. https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/eat-well/food-types/different-fats-nutrition/

Nigam, Y., & Knight, J. (2017). Anatomy and Physiology of Ageing 3: The Digestive System. Nursing Times, 113(4),
    54-57. https://cdn.ps.emap.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/03/170329-Anatomy-and-physiology-of-
    ageing-3-the-digestive-system.pdf

Ogobuiro, I., Gonzales, J., & Tuma, F. (2022). Pathophysiology, Gastrointestinal. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537103/

Patricia, J. & Dahmoon, A. (2022). Physiology, Digestion. StatPearls. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK544242/
436 References

Readman, M. (2022). How Long the Digestion Process Takes from Beginning to End.
    https://www.mindbodygreen.com/articles/how-long-does-it-take-to-digest-food

Roscoe, L. (2022). Abdominal Assessment: Palpation. https://correctionalnurse.net/abdominal-assessment-
    palpation/

Shaw, P., Loree, J., Gibbons, R., & McCoy, T. (2023). Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm (Nursing). StatPearls. Retrieved
    from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK568681/

Sidharthan, C. (2022). Gut Microbiome Plays a Role in Alzheimer's. https://www.news-medical.net/news/
    20221117/Gut-microbiome-plays-a-role-in-Alzheimers.aspx

Stanford Medicine Children's Health. (2023a). 5 Ways to Boost Your Child's Gut Health. Retrieved from
    https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=5-ways-to-boost-your-childs-gut-health-197-29161

Stanford Medicine Children's Health. (2023b). Congenital Anomalies of the Biliary Tract. Retrieved from
    https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/service/advanced-endoscopy/conditions/congenital-anomalies-biliary-
    tract

Sivakumar, S., & Prabhu, A. (2023). Physiology, Gag Reflex. StatPearls. Retrieved from
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554502/

Tilg, H., Adolph, T., & Trauner, M. (2022). Gut-Liver Axis: Pathophysiological Concepts and Clinical Implications. Cell
   Metabolism, 34(11), 1700-1718. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2022.09.017. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    36208625/

University of Rochester Medical Center. (2022). The Digestive System: An Overview.
    https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/encyclopedia/content.aspx?contenttypeid=85&contentid=P00380

Villa, A. (2022). Oral Examination. Medscape. Retrieved from https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
    1080850-overview?reg=1#a2

Wallen, Z., Demirkan, A., Twa, G., Cohen, G., Dean, M., Standaert, D., Sampson, T., & Payami, H. (2022).
   Metagenomics of Parkinson's Disease Implicates the Gut Microbiome in Multiple Disease Mechanisms. Nature
   Communications, 13(6958). Retrieved from https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-022-34667-x

Wasser, C., Merceieca, E., Kong, G., Hannon, A., McKeown, S., Glikmann-Johnston, Y., & Stout, J. (2020). Gut
    dysbiosis in Huntington's disease: associations among gut microbiota, cognitive performance and clinical
   outcomes. Brain Communications, 2(2), fcaa110. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcaa110. Retrieved
    from https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article/2/2/fcaa110/5876019

Weersma, R., Zhernakova, A., & Fu, J. (2020). Interaction Between Drugs and the Gut Microbiome. Gut, 69,
    1510-1519. DOI: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7928-7371

Ye, Q., Wang, B., Zhang, T., Xu, J., & Shang, S. (2020). The Mechanism and Treatment of Gastrointestinal Symptoms
   in Patients with COVID 19. American Journal of Physiology Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 319(2). DOI:
    https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00148.2020. Retrieved from https://journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/
    ajpgi.00148.2020

Chapter 5 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Neurological
Wellness

Berkins, S., Schiöth, H. B., & Rukh, G. (2021). Depression and vegetarians: Association between dietary vitamin B6,
   B12 and folate intake and global and subcortical brain volumes. Nutrients, 13(6), 1790. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu13061790

Bhat, Z., Morton, J., Mason, S., Bekhit, A., & Bhat, H. (2019). Obesity and neurological disorders: Dietary perspective
   of a global menace. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 59(8), 1294-1310. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    10408398.2017.1404442

Borshchev, Y., Uspensky, P., & Galagudza, M. (2019). Pathogenetic pathways of cognitive dysfunction and dementia
   in metabolic syndrome, Life Sciences, 237. https://doi.org:10.1016/j.lfs.2019.116932

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 437

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, June 3). Assessing your weight. https://www.cdc.gov/
    healthyweight/assessing/index.html

Choi, S., Hong, D., Young Choi, B., & Won Suh, S. (2020). Zinc in the brain, friend or foe? International Journal of
   Molecular Science, 21(23), 8941. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21238941

Chugani, H. (2021). Hypermetabolism on pediatric PET scans of brain glucose metabolism: What does it signify?
   Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 62(9), 1301-1306. https://doi.org/10.2967/jnumed.120.256081

D'Angelo, S. (2020). Current evidence on the effect of dietary polyphenols intake on brain health. Current Nutrition
   and Food Science, 16(8), 1170-1182. https://doi.org/10.2174/1573401316999200714160126

Dighriri I. M., Alsubaie, A. M., Hakami, F. M., Hamithi, D. M., Alshekh, M. M., Khobrani, F. A., Dalak, F. E., Hakami, A.
    A., Alsueaadi, E. H., Alsaawi, L. S., Alshammari, S. F., Alqahtani, A. S., Alawi, I. A., Aljuaid, A. A., & Tawhari, M. Q.
   (2022). Effects of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on brain functions: A systematic review. Cureus 14(10),
    e30091. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.30091

Dowis, K., & Banga, S. (2021). The potential health benefits of the ketogenic diet: A narrative
   review. Nutrients, 13(5), 1654. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nu13051654

Farag, M. A., Hamouda, S., Gomaa, S., Agboluaje, A., Hariri, M., & Yousof, S. (2021). Dietary micronutrients from
    zygote to senility: Updated review of minerals' role and orchestration in human nutrition throughout life cycle
   with sex differences. Nutrients, 13(11), 3740. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13113740

Farruggia, M. C., & Small, D. M. (2019). Effects of adiposity and metabolic dysfunction on cognition: A
   review. Physiology & Behavior, 208, 112578. https://doi-org.ezproxy.gvsu.edu/10.1016/
    j.physbeh.2019.112578\

Fekete, M., Szarvas, Z., Fazekas-Pongor, V., Feher, A., Csipo, T., Forrai, J., . . . Varga, J. T. (2023). Nutrition strategies
    promoting healthy aging: From improvement of cardiovascular and brain health to prevention of age-associated
   diseases. Nutrients, 15(1), 47. https://doi-org.ezproxy.gvsu.edu/10.3390/nu15010047

Glenn, J., Madero, E., & Bott, N. (2019). Dietary protein and amino acid intake: Links to the maintenance of cognitive
   health. Nutrients, 11(6), 1315. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11061315

Grant, B. F., Chou, S. P., Saha, T. D., Pickering, R. P., Kerridge, B. T., Ruan, W. J., Huang, B., Jung, J., Zhang, H., Fan, A.,
   & Hasin, D. S. (2017). Prevalence of 12-month alcohol use, high-risk drinking, and DSM-IV alcohol use disorder in
    the United States, 2001-2002 to 2012-2013: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
   Related Conditions. JAMA Psychiatry,74(9):911-923. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.2161

Guasch-Ferré, M., Liu, G., Li, Y., Sampson, L., Manson, J. E., Salas-Salvadó, J., Martínez-González, M. A., Stampfer, M.
   J., Willett, W. C., Sun, Q., & Hu, F. B . (2020). Olive oil consumption and cardiovascular risk in U.S. adults. Journal
   of the American College of Cardiology, 75(15), 1729-1739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.02.036

Gudden, J., Vasquez, A., & Bloemendaal, M. (2021). Effects of intermittent fasting on brain and cognitive function,
   Nutrients, 13(9), 3166. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13093166

Harlyjoy, B. C., Sukmawan, R., Muliawan, H. S., Soerarso, R., Radi, B., & Widyantoro, B. (2019). Plasma brain derived
   neurotrophic factor level as a modifying factor for trans fat intake and hypertension. Clinical Nutrition ESPEN, 55,
    38-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnesp.2023.02.005

Held, C., Hadziosmanovic, N., Aylward, P., Hagstrom, E., Hochman, J., Stewart, R., White, H., & Wallentin, L. (2022).
    Body mass index and association with cardiovascular outcomes in patients with stable coronary heart disease--A
   STABILITY substudy. Journal of the American Heart Association, 11(3), e023667. https://doi.org/10.1161/
    JAHA.121.023667

Joundi, R. A., Saposnik, G., Martino, R., Fang, J., & Kapral, M. K. (2019). Timing of direct enteral tube placement and
   outcomes after acute stroke. Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases, 28(12), 104401. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.104401

Mateos-Aparicio, P. & Rodríguez-Moreno, A. (2019, Februrary 27). "The Impact of Studying Brain Plasticity."
438 References

   Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 13: 66. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2019.00066

National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. (2023, May 29). Calculate your body mass index.
    https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmicalc.htm

National Institutes of Health. (2023a). Copper. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Copper-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023b). Iodine. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Iodine-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023c). Magnesium. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023d). Niacin. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and Human
    Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Niacin-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023e). Selenium. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Selenium-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023f). Thiamin. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Thiamin-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023g). Vitamin B6. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB6-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023h). Vitamin B12. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services, https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023i). Vitamin E. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminE-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023j). Zinc. Office of Dietary Supplements, U. S. Department of Health and Human
    Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Zinc-HealthProfessional/

Ji, X., Compher, C., Irving, S., Kim, J., Dinges, D., & Liu, J. (2021). Serum micronutrient status, sleep quality and
   neurobehavioural function among early adolescents. Public Health Nutrition, 24(17), 5815-5825. https://doi.org/
    10.1017/s1368980021002329

Jin, U., Park, S. J., & Park, S. M. (2019). Cholesterol metabolism in the brain and its association with Parkinson's
   disease. Experimental Neurobiology, 28(5), 554-567. https://doi.org/10.5607/en.2019.28.5.554

Khattak, R., Khattak, M., Ittermann, T., & Völzke, H. (2017). Factors affecting sustainable iodine deficiency
   elimination in Pakistan: A global perspective. Journal of Epidemiology, 27(6), 249-257. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.je.2016.04.003

Kirkland, E., Sarlo, G., & Holton, K. (2018). The role of magnesium in neurological disorders. Nutrients, 10(6), 730.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10060730

Kossoff, E. (2023, May 5). Ketogenic diet. Epilepsy Foundation. https://www.epilepsy.com/treatment/dietary-
    therapies/ketogenic-diet

Lee, H. (2022). The importance of nutrition in neurological disorders and nutrition assessment methods. Brain &
   Neuro Rehabilitation, 15(1). https://doi.org/10.12786/bn.2022.15.e1

Lee, Y., & Siddiqui, W. J. (2023). Cholesterol levels. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK542294/

Leigh, S., & Morris, M. (2020). Diet, inflammation and the gut microbiome: Mechanisms for obesity-associated
   cognitive impairment. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)--Molecular Basis of Disease, 1866(6), 165767.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2020.165767

Li, D., Zhang, J., & Liu, Q. (2022). Brain cell type-specific cholesterol metabolism and implications for learning and
   memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 45(5), 401-414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2022.01.002

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 439

Liu, C., Xie, J., Xiao, X., Li, T., Li, H., Bai, X., Li, Z., & Wang, W. (2021). Clinical predictors of prognosis in patients with
   traumatic brain injury combined with extracranial trauma. International Journal of Medical Sciences, 18(7),
    1639-1647. https://doi.org/10.7150/ijms.54913

Luo, J., Si, H., Jia, Z., & Liu, D. (2021). Dietary anti-aging polyphenols and potential mechanisms. Antioxidants,
   10(2), 283. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10020283

Manson, J., Cook, N., Lee, I., Christen, W., Bassuk, S., Mora, S. Gibson, H., Albert, C., Gordon, D., Copeland, T.
    D'Agostino, D., Friedenberg, G., Ridge, C., Bubes, V., Giovannucci, E. L., Willett, W. C., Buring, J. E., & VITAL
   Research Group. (2019). Marine n-3 fatty acids and prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer. New
   England Journal of Medicine, 380, 23-32. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa1811403

Morris, M., Wang, Y., Barnes, L., Bennett, D., Dawson-Hughes, B., & Booth, S. (2018). Nutrients and bioactives in
   green leafy vegetables and cognitive decline: Prospective study. Neurology, 90(3), e214-e222. https://doi.org/
    10.1212/WNL.0000000000004815

Norris, T. L. (2019). Porth's Essentials of Pathophysiology (5th ed.). LWW.

Pase, M., Himali, J., Beiser, A., Aparicio, H., Satizabal, C. Vasan, R., Sesadri, S., & Jacaues, P. (2018). Sugar- and
    artificially-sweetened beverages and the risks of incident stroke and dementia: A prospective cohort study.
   Stroke, 48(5), 1139-1146. https://doi.org/10.1161/strokeaha.116.016027

Power, L., Mullally, D., Gibney, E., Clarke, M., Visser, M., Volkert, D., Bardon L., de van der Schueren M., Corish, C., &
    MaNuEL Consortium. (2018). A review of the validity of malnutrition screening tools used in older adults in
   community and healthcare settings--A MaNuEL study. Clinical Nutrition ESPEN, 24, 1-13. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.clnesp.2018.02.005

Reddy, V., Palika, R., Ismail, A., Pullakhandam, R., & Reddy, G. (2018). Nutrigenomics: Opportunities & challenges
   for public health nutrition. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 148(632). https://doi.org/10.4103/
    ijmr.ijmr_1738_18

Roberts, S., Franceschini, M., Silver, R., Taylor, S., Braima, A., Co, R., Sonco, A., ... Muentener, P. (2020). Effects of
    food supplementation on cognitive function, cerebral blood flow, and nutritional status in young children at risk of
   undernutrition: randomized controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 370, m2397. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmj.m2397

Roser, P., Bajaj, S. S., & Stanford, F. C. (2022). International lack of equity in modern obesity therapy: The critical
   need for change in health policy. International Journal of Obesity, 46, 1571-1572. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    s41366-022-01176-2

Russ, T., Killin, L., Hannah, J., Batty, G., Deary, I., & Starr, J. (2020). Aluminium and fluoride in drinking water in
   relation to later dementia risk. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 216(1), 29-34. https://doi.org/10.1192/
    bjp.2018.287

Smith, S. H. (2017). Using albumin and prealbumin to assess nutritional status. Nursing, 47(4), 65-66.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/01.nurse.0000511805.83334.df

Smith, A. D., & Refsum, H. (2021). Homocysteine--From disease biomarker to disease prevention. Journal of
   Internal Medicine, 290(4), 826-854. https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.13279

Sun, S., Wen, Y., & Li, Y. (2022). Serum albumin, cognitive function, motor impairment, and survival prognosis in
   Parkinson disease. Medicine, 101(37), e30324. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000030324

Swanson, D., Block, R., & Mousa, S. A. (2012). Omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA: Health benefits throughout
   life. Advances in Nutrition, 3(1), 1-7. https://doi.org/10.3945/an.111.000893

Tobias, A., Ballard, B. D., & Mohiuddin, S. S. (2022). Physiology, water balance. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK541059/

Ulíbarri, J., González-Madroño, A., de Villar N., González, P., González B., Mancha, A., Rodríguez, F., & Fernández, G.
   (2005). CONUT: A tool for controlling nutritional status. First validation in a hospital population. Nutricioón
440 References

   Hospitalaria, 20(1), 38-45.

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020, December). Dietary
   guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 (9th ed.). https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans-2020-2025.pdf

Von Schacky, C. (2020). Omega-3 fatty acids in pregnancy--The case for a target omega-3 index. Nutrients, 12(4),
    898. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nu12040898

Wambogo, E., Ansai, N., Want, C., Tery, A., Fryar, C., Ahluwalia, N., & Ogden, C. (2022). Awareness of the MyPlate
    Plan: United States, 2017-March 2020, National Health Statistics Reports, 178. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
    nhsr/nhsr178.pdf

Wang, R., He, M., Kang, Y., & Jianguo, X. (2020). Controlling nutritional status (CONUT) score is a predictive marker
   for patients with traumatic brain injury. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery,195, 105909. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.clineuro.2020.105909

Ward, R., Zucca, F., Duyn, J., Crichton, R., & Zecca, L. (2014). The role of iron in brain ageing and neurodegenerative
   disorders. The Lancet Neurology, 13(10), 1045-1060. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70117-6

Wickowska-Gacek, A., Mietelska-Porowska, A., Wydrych, M., & Wojda, U. (2021). Western diet as a trigger of
    Alzheimer's disease: From metabolic syndrome and systemic inflammation to neuroinflammation and
   neurodegeneration. Ageing Research Reviews, 70, 101397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101397

Wierenga, C., Brischoff-Grethe, A., Rasmusson, G., Bailer, U., Berner, L., Liu, T., & Kaye, W. (2017). Aberrant cerebral
   blood flow in response to hunger and satiety in women remitted from anorexia nervosa. Frontiers in Nutrition, 4,
    32. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2017.00032

Yasir, M., & Mechanic, O. (2023). Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK507777

Yuan, K., Zhu, S., Wang, H., Chen, J., Zhang, X., Xu, P., Xie, Y., Zhu, X., Zhu, W., Sun, W., Xu, G., & Liu, X. (2021).
   Association between malnutrition and long-term mortality in older adults with ischemic stroke. Clinical Nutrition,
   40, 2535-2542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2021.04.018

Chapter 6 Special Nutritional Considerations for Neurological Health

Al Rubaye, H., Adamson, C. C., & Jadavji, N. M. (2021). The role of maternal diet on offspring gut microbiota
   development: A review. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 99(1), 284-293. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.24605

Alrumayh, A., Alfuhaid, F., Sayed, A. J., Tareen, S. U. K., Alrumayh, I., & Habibullah, M. A. (2021). Maternal
    Periodontal Disease: A Possible Risk Factor for Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in the Qassim Region of Saudi
   Arabia. Journal of Pharmacy & Bioallied Sciences, 13(Suppl 2), S1723-S1727. https://doi.org/10.4103/
    jpbs.JPBS_838_20

Alzheimer's Disease International (2023, June 19). New study predicts the number of people living with Alzheimer's
   disease to triple by 2050. https://www.alzint.org/news-events/news/new-data-predicts-the-number-of-people-
    living-with-alzheimers-disease-to-triple-by-2050/

Arora, S. (2022). Effects of Breakfast on Cognitive Function of Children. ACTA Scientific Nutritional Health, 6(4),
    75-79.

Bethlehem, R.A.I., Seidlitz, J., White, S.R. (2022). Brain charts for the human lifespan. Nature, 604, 525-533.
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04554-y

Carazo, A., Macáková, K., Matousová, K., Krcmová, L. K., Protti, M., & Mladenka, P. (2021). Vitamin A Update: Forms,
   Sources, Kinetics, Detection, Function, Deficiency, Therapeutic Use and Toxicity. Nutrients, 13(5), 1703.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13051703

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020, November 3). Water Fluoridation Guidelines &
   Recommendations. https://www.cdc.gov/fluoridation/guidelines/index.htm

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 441

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022, February 1). Micronutrient Facts. https://www.cdc.gov/
    nutrition/micronutrient-malnutrition/micronutrients/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023a, September 22). Do mothers need more calories while
   breastfeeding? https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/diet-and-
    micronutrients/maternal-diet.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023b, September 22). Prevalence of Childhood Obesity in the
   United States. https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/childhood.html

Chauhan K, Shahrokhi M, Huecker MR. Vitamin D. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441912/

Chea, N., Tegene, Y., Astatkie, A., & Spigt, M. (2023). Prevalence of undernutrition among pregnant women and its
   differences across relevant subgroups in rural Ethiopia: a community-based cross-sectional study. Journal of
   Health, Population, and Nutrition, 42(1), 17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41043-023-00358-6

Choi, S., Hong, D. K., Choi, B. Y., & Suh, S. W. (2020). Zinc in the Brain: Friend or Foe? International Journal of
   Molecular Sciences, 21(23), 8941. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21238941

Cortés-Albornoz, M. C., García-Guáqueta, D. P., Velez-van-Meerbeke, A., & Talero-Gutiérrez, C. (2021). Maternal
   Nutrition and Neurodevelopment: A Scoping Review. Nutrients, 13(10), 3530. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
    nu13103530

Czarnecka, K., Pilarz, A., Rogut, A., Maj, P., Szymanska, J., Olejnik, L., & Szymanski, P. (2021). Aspartame--True or
   False? Narrative Review of Safety Analysis of General Use in Products. Nutrients, 13(6), 1957. http://dx.doi.org/
    10.3390/nu13061957

de Havenon A, Delic A, Stulberg E, et al. Association of Preeclampsia with Incident Stroke in Later Life Among
   Women in the Framingham Heart Study (2021). JAMA Network Open, 4(4), e215077. doi:10.1001/
    jamanetworkopen.2021.5077

Dhaliwal, J.S., Rosani, A.R., & Saadabadi, A. (2023). Diazepam. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK537022

Dunbar M., & Kirton, A. (2018). Perinatal stroke: mechanisms, management, and outcomes of early cerebrovascular
   brain injury. Lancet Child Adolesc Health, 9, 666-676. doi: 10.1016/S2352-4642(18)30173-1.

Duttaroy, A., Basak, S. (2020). Maternal dietary fatty acids and their roles in human placental development.
   Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 155: 102080, https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.plefa.2020.102080

Dynka, D., Kowalcze, K., & Paziewska, A. (2022). The Role of Ketogenic Diet in the Treatment of Neurological
   Diseases. Nutrients, 14(23), 5003. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14235003

Elgendy, I., Bukhari, S., Barakat,A., Pepine, C., Lindley, K., Miller E. (2021). Maternal Stroke A Call for Action.
   Circulation, 143(7). 727-738. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.051460

Epilepsy Foundation. (2023). Seizure Medication List. https://www.epilepsy.com/tools-resources/seizure-
    medication-list

Fei, H. X., Qian, C. F., Wu, X. M., Wei, Y. H., Huang, J. Y., & Wei, L. H. (2022). Role of micronutrients in Alzheimer's
   disease: Review of available evidence. World Journal of Clinical Cases, 10(22), 7631-7641. https://doi.org/
    10.12998/wjcc.v10.i22.7631

Filipi, M., & Jack, S. (2020). Interferons in the Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis: A Clinical Efficacy, Safety, and
   Tolerability Update. International Journal of MS Care, 22(4), 165-172. https://doi.org/10.7224/
    1537-2073.2018-063

Francis, H., & Stevenson, R. (2018). Potential for diet to prevent and remediate cognitive deficits in neurological
   disorders. Journal of Nutrition Reviews, 3(76), 204-217. https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nux073

Fryar C., Carroll M., Afful J. (2020). Prevalence of overweight, obesity, and severe obesity among adults aged 20 and
442 References

   over: United States, 1960-1962 through 2017-2018. NCHS Health E-Stats, Centers for Disease Control and
   Prevention. Updated February 8, 2021. www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity-adult-17-18/obesity-adult.htm

Georgieff, M. (2020). Iron deficiency in pregnancy. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 223(4),
    516-524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2020.03.006.

Gezmen-Karadag, M., Çelik, E., Kadayifçi, F., Yesildemir, Ö., Öztürk, Y. E., & Agagündüz, D. (2018). Role of food-drug
   interactions in neurological and psychological diseases. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 78(3), 187-197.

Gleason, J., Sundaram, R., Mitro, S. Hinkle, S., Gilman, S., Zhang, C., Newman, R. ... Grantz, K. (2022). Association of
   Maternal Caffeine Consumption During Pregnancy With Child Growth, JAMA Network Open, 5(10): e2239609.
    doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.39609

Griebsch, L. V., Theiss, E. L., Janitschke, D., Erhardt, V. K. J., Erhardt, T., Haas, E. C., Kuppler, K. N., Radermacher, J.,
    Walzer, O., Lauer, A. A., Matschke, V., Hartmann, T., Grimm, M. O. W., & Grimm, H. S. (2023). Aspartame and Its
   Metabolites Cause Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial and Lipid Alterations in SH-SY5Y Cells. Nutrients, 15(6),
    1467. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15061467

Filipi, M., & Jack, S. (2020). Interferons in the Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis: A Clinical Efficacy, Safety, and
   Tolerability Update. International Journal of MS Care, 22(4), 165-172. https://doi.org/10.7224/
    1537-2073.2018-063

Hoyert, DL (2023). Maternal mortality rates in the United States, 2021. NCHS Health E-Stats.DOI: 10.1056/
    EVIDoa2300058Jiang, Z., Yin, X., Wang, M., Chen, T., Wang, Y., Gao, Z., & Wang, Z. (2022). Effects of Ketogenic
   Diet on Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Aging and Disease, 13(4), 1146-1165.
    https://doi.org/10.14336/AD.2021.1217

Kija, E., Gidal, B., Shapson-Coe, A., Cader, S., van der Watt, G., Delport, S., Wilmshurst, J. (2019). Vitamin D
   abnormalities and bone turn over analysis in children with epilepsy in the Western Cape of South Africa. Seizure,
    69, 186-192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2019.04.020.

Larqué E., Morales E., Leis R., Blanco-Carnero J. (2018). Maternal and Foetal Health Implications of Vitamin D Status
   during Pregnancy. Ann. Nutr. Metab., 72:179-192. doi: 10.1159/000487370.

Leonhard S, Mandarakas M, Gondim F. (2019). Diagnosis and management of Guillain-Barré syndrome in ten steps.
   National Review Neurology, 15, 671-683. https:// doi: 10.1038/s41582-019-0250-9

Li, M., Francis E., Hinkle S., Ajjarapu A., Zhang C. (2019). Preconception and Prenatal Nutrition and
   Neurodevelopmental Disorders: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nutrients, 11, 1628. doi: 10.3390/
    nu11071628.

Li, Q., Liang, J., Fu, N., Han, Y., Qin, J. (2021). A Ketogenic Diet and the Treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder,
   Frontiers in Pediatrics, 9. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fped.2021.650624

Miller, J., LaFountain, R., Barnhart, E., Sapper, T. et al. (2020). A Ketogenic Diet combined with exercise alters
   mitochondrial function in human skeletal muscle while improving metabolic health, American Journal of
   Physiology: Endocrinology and Metabolism, 319(6), E995-E1007. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00305.2020

Richardt A, Aarnio K, Korhonen A, et al. Etiology and risk factors of ischemic stroke during pregnancy and
   puerperium: A population-based study. European Stroke Journal. 2023;8(2):475-482. doi:10.1177/
    23969873231170096

Moscatelli, F., De Maria, A., Marinaccio, L. A., Monda, V., Messina, A., Monacis, D., Toto, G., et al. (2023). Assessment
    of Lifestyle, Eating Habits and the Effect of Nutritional Education among Undergraduate Students in Southern
   Italy. Nutrients, 15(13), 2894. MDPI AG. Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nu15132894

Murphy, M. M., Higgins, K. A., Bi, X., & Barraj, L. M. (2021). Adequacy and Sources of Protein Intake among Pregnant
   Women in the United States, NHANES 2003-2012. Nutrients, 13(3), 795.

National Institutes of Health. (2021). Magnesium. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium-Consumer/

National Institutes of Health. (2022a). Biotin. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Biotin-HealthProfessional/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 443

National Institutes of Health. (2022b). Chromium. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Chromium-HealthProfessional/

Nawaz, A., Khattak, N.N., Khan, M., Nangyal, H., Sabri, S., Shakir, M. (2020). Deficiency of vitamin B12 and its relation
   with neurological disorders: a critical review. Journal of Basic and Applied Zoology, 81, 10. https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s41936-020-00148-0

Newman, C., Rabbitt, L., Ero, A., & Dunne, F. P. (2023). Focus on Metformin: Its Role and Safety in Pregnancy and
   Beyond. Drugs, 83(11), 985-999. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-023-01899-0

Nieto-Ruiz, A., García-Santos, J. A., Bermúdez, M. G., Herrmann, F., Diéguez, E., Sepúlveda-Valbuena, N., García, S.,
    Miranda, M. T., De-Castellar, R., Rodríguez-Palmero, M., Catena, A., & Campoy, C. (2019). Cortical Visual Evoked
    Potentials and Growth in Infants Fed with Bioactive Compounds-Enriched Infant Formula: Results from COGNIS
   Randomized Clinical Trial. Nutrients, 11(10), 2456. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11102456

Oei, J. (2020). Alcohol use in pregnancy and its impact on the mother and child. Addiction, 115, 2148-2163.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/add.15036

Okuda T. (2019). Dietary Control of Ganglioside Expression in Mammalian Tissues. International journal of Molecular
   Sciences, 21(1), 177. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21010177

Oppedisano, F., Maiuolo, J., Gliozzi, M., Musolino, V., Carresi, C., Nucera, S., Scicchitano, M., et al. (2020). The
    Potential for Natural Antioxidant Supplementation in the Early Stages of Neurodegenerative Disorders.
   International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(7), 2618. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijms21072618

Richardt A, Aarnio K, Korhonen A, et al.(2023). Etiology and risk factors of ischemic stroke during pregnancy and
   puerperium: A population-based study. European Stroke Journal 8(2):475-482. doi:10.1177/
    23969873231170096

Rivell, A., Mattson, M. (2019). Intergenerational Metabolic Syndrome and Neuronal Network Hyperexcitability in
   Autism. Trends Neuroscience, 42, 709-726.

Román, G. C., Jackson, R. E., Gadhia, R., Román, A. N., & Reis, J. (2019). Mediterranean diet: The role of long-chain
    -3 fatty acids in fish; polyphenols in fruits, vegetables, cereals, coffee, tea, cacao, and wine; probiotics and
   vitamins in prevention of stroke, age-related cognitive decline, and Alzheimer disease. Revue Neurologique,
    175(10), 724-741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2019.08.005

Rudloff, S., Bührer, C., Jochum, F., Kauth, T., Kersting, M., Körner, A., Koletzo, B., Mihatsch, W., Prell, C., Reinehr, T.,
   Zimmer, K. (2019). Vegetarian diets in childhood and adolescence. Molecular and Cellular Pediatrics, 6, (4).
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s40348-019-0091-z

Safahani, M., Aligholi, H. & Asadi-Pooya, A.A. (2020). Management of antiepileptic drug-induced nutrition-related
   adverse effects. Neurol Sci, 41, 3491-3502. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-020-04573-5

Sanchez, C. Barry, C., Sabhlok, A., Russell, K., Majors, A., Kollins, S., Fuemmeler, B. (2018). Maternal pre-pregnancy
   obesity and child neurodevelopmental outcomes: A meta-analysis. Obesity Review, 19, 464-484. doi: 10.1111/
    obr.12643.

Sheehy, S., Aparicio, H., Xu, N., Bertrand, K., Robles, Y., Lioutas, B., Shulman, J., Rosenberg, L., Palmer, J. (2023).
   Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy and Risk of Stroke in U.S. Black Women. NEJM Evidence,
    https://doi.org:10.1056/EVIDoa2300058

Sipione, S., Monyror, J., Galleguillos, D., Steinberg, N., Kadam, V. (2020). Gangliosides in the Brain: Physiology,
   Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Applications. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6(14). https://doi.org: 10.3389/
    fnins.2020.572965

Steane, S.E., Cuffe, J.S.M. and Moritz, K.M. (2023), The role of maternal choline, folate and one-carbon metabolism
   in mediating the impact of prenatal alcohol exposure on placental and fetal development. J Physiol, 601:
    1061-1075. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP283556

Sun, S., Corbeels, K., Desmet, L., Segers, A., Wang, Q., Van Der Schueren, B., Deporortere, I. (2020). Involvement in
    the CHSR in the developmental programming and metabolic disturbances induced by maternal undernutrition.
444 References

   The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry, 85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2020.108468

Tabaie, E., Reddy, A., Brahmbhatt, H. (2021). A narrative review on the effects of a ketogenic diet on patients with
   Alzheimer's disease. AIMS Public Health, 9(1), 185-193. https://doi.org/10.3934/publichealth.2022014

Tous, M., Villalobos, M., Iglesias, L., Fernández-Barrés, S., Arija V. (2020). Vitamin D status during pregnancy and
   offspring outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. European Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 74, 36-53. doi: 10.1038/s41430-018-0373-x.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2019). Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee, Table
   E3.1.A4. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2019-05/15-Appendix-E-3.pdf

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022a, August 9). Find Information about a Drug. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
    information-consumers-and-patients-drugs/find-information-about-drug

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020b, November 24). Resources | Drugs. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
    resources-drugs

Verhaegen, AA, Van Gaal, LF. Drugs That Affect Body Weight, Body Fat Distribution, and Metabolism. [Updated 2019
    Feb 11]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA):
    MDText.com, Inc., 2000-. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537590/

Xu, Y., Zhang, N., Xu, S., Xu, H., Chen, S., & Xia, Z. (2019). Effects of phenytoin on serum levels of homocysteine,
    vitamin B12, folate in patients with epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis (PRISMA-compliant article).
   Medicine, 98(12), e14844. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000014844

Zambrano, M., Miller, E. (2019). Maternal Stroke: An Update. Current Atherosclerosis Reports, 21(9), 33.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11883-019-0798-2

Chapter 7 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Endocrine
Wellness

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (n.d.) Endocrine diseases. https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/health-
    topics/endocrine-diseases

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2023). Patient education and engagement. https://www.ahrq.gov/
    health-literacy/patient-education/index.html

American Diabetes Association. (2019). Lifestyle Management: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes--2019.
   Diabetes Care, 42 (Supplement_1): S46-S60. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc19-S005

Ardoin, T. W., Hamer, D., Mason, N., Reine, A., Barleycorn, L., Francis, D., & Johnson, A. (2022). Effectiveness of a
   Patient-Centered Dietary Educational Intervention. The Ochsner journal, 22(2), 113-128. https://doi.org/
    10.31486/toj.21.0075

Bets, J., Young, K., Wise, J., Johnson, E., Poe, B., Kruse, D., Korol, O., Johnson, J., Womble, M., & DeSaix. (2022). The
   Endocrine System. In Anatomy and Physiology 2e. OpenStax. https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-
    physiology-2e/pages/17-introduction

Bickley, L. S., Szilagyi, P. G., & Hoffman, R. M. (2021). Bates' Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking (13th
    ed.). Wolters Kluwer.

Braunstein, G. (2022). Hypothyroidism. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved July 23, 2023, from
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/thyroid-disorders/
    hypothyroidism

Brown, A., Shi, S., Adas, S., Boyington, J., Cotton, P., Jirles, B., Rajapaske, N., Reedy, J., Regan, K., Xi, D., Zappala, G.,
   Agurs-Collins, T. (2022). A decade of nutrition and health disparities research at NIH, 2010-2019. American
   Journal of Preventative Medicine, 63, E49-E57, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2022.02.012

Brutsaert, E., (2022). Diabetes Mellitus. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved August 27, 2023, from
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/diabetes-mellitus-and-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 445

    disorders-of-carbohydrate-metabolism/diabetes-mellitus-dm

Caballero A. E. (2018). The "A to Z" of Managing Type 2 Diabetes in Culturally Diverse Populations. Frontiers in
   endocrinology, 9, 479. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00479

Can, A. & Rehman, A. (Updated 2023, August 14). Goiter. In StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK562161/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). Carb counting. Living with Diabetes. https://www.cdc.gov/
    diabetes/managing/eat-well/diabetes-and-carbohydrates.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022a). Diabetes and cultural foods. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/
    library/features/diabetes-cultural-eating.html#

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b). Diabetes meal planning. Living with Diabetes.
    https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/managing/eat-well/meal-plan-method.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). How to treat low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Type 1 Diabetes.
    https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/basics/low-blood-sugar-treatment.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c). Traditional foods. Native Diabetes Wellness Program.
    https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/ndwp/traditional-foods/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c). What is health literacy? Health Literacy. https://www.cdc.gov/
    healthliteracy/learn/index.html

Cushing syndrome: Everything you need to know. (2023, April 7). Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/health/
    cushings-syndrome#overview

Departments of Agriculture and Health and Human Services (2020). Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025.
    https://dietaryguidelines.gov.

Gherasim, A., Arhire, L., Ni, O., Popa, A., Graur, M., & Mihalache, L. (2020). The relationship between lifestyle
    components and dietary patterns. The Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 79(3), 311-323. https://doi.org/
    10.1017/S0029665120006898

Gray, A. & Threlkeld, R. (Updated 2019). Nutritional Recommendations for Individuals with Diabetes. In Feingold, K.,
   Anawalt, B., Blackman, M., et al., editors. Endotext. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com,
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279012/

Grossman, A. (2022). Overview of adrenal function. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved July 23, 2023,
    from https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/adrenal-disorders/
    overview-of-adrenal-function

Hoffman, J. & Sullivan, N. (2020). Medical-surgical nursing: Making connections to practice (2nd ed.). Philadelphia:
    F.A. Davis Company.

Kesari A. & Noel J.Y. (2022, April 16). Nutritional Assessment. In StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK580496/

Kiani, A., Dhuli, K., Donato, K., Aquilanti, B., Velluti, V., Matera, G., Iaconelli, A., Connelly, S., Bellinato, F., Gisondi, P.,
   & Bertelli, M. (2022). Main nutritional deficiencies. Journal of preventive medicine and hygiene, 63(2 Suppl 3),
    E93-E101. https://doi.org/10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2022.63.2S3.2752

Lewis, J. (2022). Overview of electrolytes. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved August 28, 2023, from
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/hormonal-and-metabolic-disorders/electrolyte-balance/overview-of-
    electrolytes

Mahboub, N., Rizk, R., Karavetian, M., & de Vries, N. (2021). Nutritional status and eating habits of people who use
   drugs and/or are undergoing treatment for recovery: a narrative review. Nutrition reviews, 79(6), 627-635.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nuaa095

Martos-Cabrera, M., Gómez-Urquiza, J., Cañadas-González, G., Romero-Bejar, J., Suleiman-Martos, N., Cañadas-De
446 References

    la Fuente, G., & Albendín-García, L. (2021). Nursing-Intense Health Education Intervention for Persons with Type
   2 Diabetes: A Quasi-Experimental Study. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 9(7), 832. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    healthcare9070832

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2018a). Cushing's syndrome.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrine-diseases/cushings-syndrome

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2021a). Diabetes insipidus.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/kidney-disease/diabetes-insipidus

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2023). Diabetes statistics.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-statistics/diabetes-statistics

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2018b). Adrenal insufficiency & Addison's
   disease. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrine-diseases/adrenal-insufficiency-addisons-
    disease/all-content

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2021b). Graves' disease.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrine-diseases/graves-disease

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2021c). Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid).
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrine-diseases/hypothyroidism

National Institutes of Health. (2023). Iodine fact sheet for health professionals. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/
    Iodine-HealthProfessional/

National Library of Medicine. (2021). Choosing effective patient education materials. Medical Encyclopedia.
    https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000455.htm

Ni, Y., Liu, S., Li, J., Dong, T., Tao, L., Yuan, L., & Yang, M. (2019). The Effects of Nurse-Led Multidisciplinary Team
    Management on Glycosylated Hemoglobin, Quality of Life, Hospitalization, and Help-Seeking Behavior of People
   with Diabetes Mellitus. Journal of diabetes research, 2019, 9325146. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/9325146

Orr, C., Keyserling, T., Ammerman, A., & Berkowitz, S. (2019). Diet quality trends among adults with diabetes by
   socioeconomic status in the U.S.: 1999-2014. BMC Endocr Disord 19, https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12902-019-0382-3

Padilla, O. & Abadie, J. (2022). Normal laboratory values. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved July 23,
    2023, from https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/resources/normal-laboratory-values/normal-
    laboratory-values

Ravelli, M., & Schoeller, D. (2020). Traditional Self-Reported Dietary Instruments Are Prone to Inaccuracies and New
   Approaches Are Needed. Frontiers in nutrition, 7, 90. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2020.00090

Salas-Huetos A. (2020). More evidence of the association of diet with human testicular function--Fish oil
   supplements. JAMA Netw Open. 3(1). doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.19569

Samodien, E., Johnson, R., Pheiffer, C., Mabasa, L., Erasmus, M., Louw, J., & Chellan, N. (2019). Diet-induced
   hypothalamic dysfunction and metabolic disease, and the therapeutic potential of polyphenols. Molecular
   metabolism, 27, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2019.06.022

Sapra A, Bhandari P. Diabetes. [Updated 2023 May 29]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
    Publishing; 2023 Jan-. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551501/

Shi, L., Rath, M., & Niedzwiecki, A. (2021). Dietary Vitamin C and Age-Induced Lipid and Hormonal Metabolic
    Changes in a Humanized Mouse Model Not Synthesizing Vitamin C and Producing Lipoprotein(a) [Gulo (-/-);
   Lp(a)+]. Journal of nutrition and metabolism, 2021, 5591697. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5591697

Shrimanker, I. & Bhattarai, S. (2023, July 24). Electrolytes. In StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK541123/

Tan, D. X., Xu, B., Zhou, X., & Reiter, R. J. (2018). Pineal Calcification, Melatonin Production, Aging, Associated

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 447

   Health Consequences and Rejuvenation of the Pineal Gland. Molecules (Basel, Switzerland), 23(2), 301.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules23020301

Xenou, M., & Gourounti, K. (2021). Dietary Patterns and Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: a Systematic Review. Maedica,
   16(3), 516-521. https://doi.org/10.26574/maedica.2020.16.3.516

Young, W. (2022). Overview of endocrine disorders. In Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved July 23, 2023,
    from https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/principles-of-
    endocrinology/overview-of-endocrine-disorders

Chapter 8 Special Nutritional Considerations for Endocrine Health

Adigun, O. O., Nguyen, M., Fox, T. J., & Anastasopoulou, C. (2023). Acromegaly. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK431086/

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (n.d.). Effective health care program: Diabetes. U.S. Department of
    Health and Human Services. https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/health-topics/diabetes

Akanmode, A. M., & Mahdy, H. (2023). Macrosomia. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557577/

Allen, M. J., & Sharma, S. (2023). Physiology, adrenocorticotropic hormone. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK500031/

American Diabetes Association. (n.d.). Vitamins and supplements. https://diabetes.org/healthy-living/recipes-
    nutrition/vitamins-diabetes

Bellastella, G., Scappacticcio, L., Caiazzo, F., Tomasuolo, M., Carotenuto, R., Caputo, M., Arena, S., Caruso, P.,
   Maiorino, M. I., & Esposito, K. (2022). Mediterranean diet and thyroid: An interesting alliance. Nutrients, 14(19),
    4130. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14194130

Breehl, L., & Caban, O. (2023). Physiology, puberty. StatPearls. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30521248/

California Department of Public Health. (2018). California MyPlate for Gestational Diabetes. Maternal, Child, and
    Adolescent Health Division, Center for Family Health. https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CFH/DMCAH/
    CDPH%20Document%20Library/NUPA/MyPlate-Handout-GestationalDiabetes.pdf

Campbell, M., & Jialal, I. (2022). Physiology, endocrine hormones. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK538498/

Can, A. S., & Rehman, A. (2023). Goiter. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK562161/

Caputo, M., Pigni, S., Agosti, E., Daffara, T., Ferrero, A., Filigheddu, N., & Prodam, F. (2021). Regulation of GH and GH
   signaling by nutrients. Cells, 10(6), 1376. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10061376

Chaudhry, H. S., & Singh, G. (2023). Cushing syndrome. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK470218/

Chen, C. C., Chen, C. L., & Ko, Y. (2020). The misconceptions and determinants of diabetes knowledge in patients
   with diabetes in Taiwan. Journal of Diabetes Research, 2020, 2953521. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2953521

Chen, C., Zhang, Y., Sun, W., Chen, Y., Jiang, Y., Song, Y., Lin, Q., Zhu, L., Zhu, Q., Wang, X., & Jiang, F. (2017).
    Investigating the relationship between precocious puberty and obesity: A cross sectional study in Shanghai,
   China. BMJ Journals. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014004

Chung, A., Vieira, D., Donley, T., Tan, N., Jean-Louis. G., Kiely Gouley, K., & Seixas, A. (2021, June 3). Adolescent
   Peer Influence on Eating Behaviors via Social Media: Scoping Review. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
   23(6):e19697. https://doi.org/10.2196/19697. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34081018/

DailyMed, (2023, February 19). Levothyroxine sodium capsule. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/
    drugInfo.cfm?setid=686ba2cf-7651-44de-9b4d-eeaaf2a0e364

Dugandzic, M. K., Pierre-Michel, E. C., & Kalayjian, T. (2022). Ketogenic diet initially masks symptoms of
   hypercortisolism in Cushing's disease. Metabolites, 12(11), 1033. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo12111033
448 References

Ellison, D. (2019). Clinical pharmacology in diuretic use. CJASN, 14(8): 1248-1257. DOI: 10.2215/CJN.09630818

Franceschi, R., Rizzardi, C., Maines, E., Liguori, A., Soffiati, M., & Tornese, G. (2021). Failure to thrive in infant and
   toddlers: A practical flowchart-based approach in a hospital setting. Italian Journal of Pediatrics, 47(1), 62.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-021-01017-4

Gray, A., & Threlkeld, R. J. (2019). Nutritional recommendations for individuals with diabetes. Endotext.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279012/

Herrick, E. & Bordoni, B. (2023). Embryology, placenta. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK551634/

Hysaj, O., Marques-Gallego, P., Richard, A., Elgizouli, M., Nieters, A., Quack Lotscher, K. C., & Rohrmann, S. (2021).
   Parathyroid hormone in pregnancy: Vitamin D and other determinants. Nutrients, 13(2), 360. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu13020360

Jain, M., & Saber, A. Y. (2023). Dwarfism. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK563282/

Jennings, L. K., & Mahdy, H. (2022). Hyperemesis gravidarum. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK532917/

Jouanne, M., Oddoux, S., Noel, A., Voisin-Chiret, A. S. (2021). Nutrient requirements during pregnancy and lactation.
   Nutrients, 13(2), 692. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020692

Kepley, J. M., Bates, K., & Mohiuddin, S. S. (2023). Physiology, maternal changes. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539766/

Khan, M., Jose, A., & Sharma, S. (2022). Physiology, parathyroid hormone. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK499940/

Kiebzak, W., urawski, A., Gluszek, S., Kosztolowicz, M., & Bialek, W. A. (2021). Cortisol levels in infants with central
   coordination disorders during Vojta Therapy. Children (Basel, Switzerland), 8(12), 1113. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    children8121113

Kobylinska, M., Antosik, K., Decyk, A., & Kurowska, K. (2022). Malnutrition in obesity: Is it possible? Obesity Facts,
   15(1), 19-25. https://doi.org/10.1159/000519503

Kota, A. S., & Ejaz, S. (2023). Precocious puberty. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK544313/

Kurtoglu, S., Direk, G., Tatli, Z. U., & Hatipoglu, N. (2019). Transient endocrinologic problems in the newborn period.
   Turkish Archives of Pediatrics, 54(1), 3-12. https://doi.org/10.14744/TurkPediatriArs.2019.04810

Lui, G., Guo, J., Zhang, X., Lu, Y., Miao, J., & Xue, H. (2021). Obesity is a risk factor for central precocious puberty: A
   case control study. BMC Pediatrics, 21(509). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-021-02936-1

Mathew, P., Kaur, J., & Rawla, P. (2023). Hyperthyroidism. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK537053/

Mohn, E. S., Kern, H. J., Saltzman, E., Mitmesser, S. H., & McKay, D. L. (2018). Evidence of drug-nutrient interactions
   with chronic use of commonly prescribed medications: An update. Pharmaceutics, 10(1), 36. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/pharmaceutics10010036

Molfino, A., Imbimbo, G., & Muscaritoli, M. (2021). Endocrinological and nutritional implications of anorexia of aging.
   Endocrines, 2(4), 439-448. https://doi.org/10.3390/endocrines2040039

Munir, S., Quintanilla, B. S., & Waseem, M. (2023). Addison disease. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK441994/

Murray, P. & Clayton, P. (2022). Disorders of growth hormone in childhood. In: Feingold K., Anawalt, B, Blackman, M.,
    et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-. Available from:
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK278971/

Nana, M. & Williamson, C. (2022). Pituitary and adrenal disorders of pregnancy. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 449

    Blackman MR, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279043/

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2020). Acromegaly. National Institutes of Health,
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrine-
    diseases/acromegaly

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2017). Thyroid disease and pregnancy. National
    Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-
    information/endocrine-diseases/pregnancy-thyroid-disease

National Institutes of Health. (2022a). Iodine. Office of Dietary Supplements, U.S. Department of Health and Human
    Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Iodine-Consumer/

National Institutes of Health. (2022b). Selenium. Office of Dietary Supplements, U.S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Selenium-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2022c). Vitamin D. Office of Dietary Supplements, U.S. Department of Health and
    Human Services. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/

Nazeri, P., Shariat, M., & Azizi, F. (2021). Effects of iodine supplementation during pregnancy on pregnant women
   and their offspring: A systematic review and meta-analysis of trials over the past 3 decades. European Society of
   Endocrinology, 184(1), 91-106. https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-20-0927

Osowiecka, K., & Myskowska-Ryciak, J. (2023). The influence of nutritional intervention in the treatment of
   Hashimoto's thyroiditis--A systematic review. Nutrients, 15(4), 1041. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15041041

Pancheva, R., Zhelyazkova, D., Ahmed, F., Gillon-Keren, M., Usheva, N., Bocheva, Y., Boyadzhieva, M., Valchev, G.,
    Yotov, Y., & Iotova, V. (2021). Dietary intake and adherence to the recommendations for healthy eating in patients
   with type 1 diabetes: A narrative review. Frontiers in Nutrition, 8, 782670. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fnut.2021.782670

Patil, N., Rehman, A., & Jialal, I. (2023). Hypothyroidism. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK519536/

Quintanilla Rodrigquez, B. S., & Mahdy, H. (2022). Gestational diabetes. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK545196/

Rad, S. & Deluxe, L. (2023). Postpartum thyroiditis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557646/

Rasmussen, L., Poulsen, C. W., Kampmann, U., Bech Smedegaard, S., Ovesen, P. G., & Fuglsang, J. (2020). Diet and
   healthy lifestyle in the management of gestational diabetes mellitus. Nutrients, 12(10), 3050. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu12103050

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. (2023). Explore data by demographic. State of Childhood Obesity.
    https://stateofchildhoodobesity.org/demographic-data/ages-10-17/#

Rodolico, C., Bonanno, C., Pugliese, A., Nicocia, G., Benvenga, S., & Toscano, A. (2020). Endocrine myopathies:
   Clinical and histopathological features of the major forms. Acta Myologica, 39(3), 130-135. https://doi.org/
    10.36185/2532-1900-017

Rozance, P. J. (2023). Management and outcome of neonatal hypoglycemia. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/
    contents/management-and-outcome-of-neonatal-hypoglycemia/print

Sapra, A., & Bhandari, P. (2023). Diabetes. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551501/

Sedaghat, G., Montazerifar, F., Keykhaie, M. A., Karajibani, M., Shourestani, S., & Dasipour, A. (2021). Effect of pre-
    meal water intake on serum levels of copeptin, Glycemic control, lipid profile, and anthropometric indices in
   patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Diabetes & Metabolic Disorders,
   20(1), 171-177. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40200-020-00724-9

Shah, N., Wang., M. Freaney, P., Perak, A., Carnethon, M., Kandula, N., Gunderson, E., Bullard, K., Grobman, W.,
450 References

    O'Brien,M., & Khan, S. (2021). Trends in gestational diabetes at first live birth by race and ethnicity in the US,
   2011-2019. JAMA, 326(7): 660-669. doi:10.1001/jama.2021.7217

Singh, S., & Sandhu, S. (2023). Thyroid disease and pregnancy. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK538485

Soliman, A., Alaaraj, N., Hamed, N., Alyafei, F., Ahmed, S., Shaat, M., Itani, M., Elalaily, R., & Soliman, N. (2022).
   Nutritional interventions during adolescence and their possible effects. Acta Biomedica, 93(1), e2022087.
    https://doi.org/10.23750/abm.v93i1.12789

Stotz, S., Charron-Prochownik, D., Terry, M., Marshall, G., Fischl, A., & Moore, K. (2021). Stopping gestational
    diabetes in American Indian and Alaska Native girls: Nutrition as a key component to gestational diabetes risk
   reduction. Current Developments in Nutrition, 5(4): 13-21. https://doi.org/10.1093/cdn/nzaa081

Tan, G. N., Tan, P. C., Hong, J. G. S., Kartik, B., & Omar, S. Z. (2021). Rating of four different foods in women with
   hyperemesis gravidarum: A randomized controlled trial. BMJ Open, 11(5), e046528. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmjopen-2020-046528

Teska, M. (2023, March 27). Can children develop Type 2 diabetes? Mayo Clinic Health System.
    https://www.mayoclinichealthsystem.org/hometown-health/speaking-of-health/can-children-develop-
    type-2-diabetes

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2020). Dietary guidelines for Americans 2020-2025. U.S. Department of Health
    and Human Services. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2023). Mercury in food and dietary supplements. U.S. Department of Health
    and Human Services. https://www.fda.gov/food/environmental-contaminants-food/mercury-food-and-dietary-
    supplements

Van den Beld, A., Kaufman, J. M., Zillikens, M. C., Lamberts, S. W. J., Egan, J. M., & van der Lely, A. J. (2018). The
   physiology of endocrine systems with ageing. Lancets Diabetes Endocrinology, 6(8), 647-658. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/S2213-8587(18)30026-3

Wiesner, A., Gajewska, D., & Pasko, P. (2021). Levothyroxine interactions with food and dietary supplements: A
   systematic review. Pharmaceuticals, 14(3), 206. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph14030206

Chapter 9 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Hematologic
Wellness

American Society of Hematology. (n.d.). Blood basics. https://www.hematology.org/education/patients/blood-basics

Barnes, M., Hanson, C. L., Novilla, L. B., Magnusson, B. M., Crandall, A., & Bradford, G. (2020). Family-centered
   health promotion: Perspectives for engaging families and achieving better health outcomes. Inquiry, 57,
    004695802092353. https://doi.org/10.1177/0046958020923537

Burton, J. K., Yates, L. C., Whyte, L., Fitzsimons, E., & Stott, D. J. (2020). New horizons in iron deficiency anaemia in
   older adults. Age and Ageing, 49(3), 309-318. https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afz199

Doenges, M. E., Moorhouse, M. F., & Murr, A. C. (2022). Nursing diagnosis manual: Planning, individualizing, and
   documenting client care. F. A. Davis.

Golan, Y., & Assaraf, Y.G. (2020, May 21). Genetic and Physiological Factors Affecting Human Milk Production and
   Composition. Nutrients, 12(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12051500

Grzymislawska, M., Puch, E. A., Zawada, A., & Grzymislawski, M. (2020). Do nutritional behaviors depend on
   biological sex and cultural gender? Advances in Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 29(1), 165-172.
    https://doi.org/10.17219/acem/111817

Hooker, S. A., Punjabi, A., Justesen, K., Boyle, L., & Sherman, M. D. (2018). Encouraging health behavior change:
   Eight evidence-based strategies. Family Practice Management, 25(2), 31-36.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 451

Kaur, D., Rasane, P., Singh, J., Kaur, S., Kumar, V., Mahato, D. K., Dey, A., Dhawan, K., & Kumar, S. (2019). Nutritional
   interventions for elderly and considerations for the development of geriatric foods. Current Aging Science, 12(1),
    15-27. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874609812666190521110548

Le, C. H. H. (2016). The prevalence of anemia and moderate-severe anemia in the U.S. population (NHANES
   2003-2012). PLOS ONE, 11(11), e0166635. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0166635

Lee, M. K., & Chung, W. J. (2021). Relationship between symptoms and both stage of change in adopting a healthy
   life style and quality of life in patients with liver cirrhosis: a cross-sectional study. Health and Quality of Life
   Outcomes, 19, 148. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-021-01787-9

Lulloff, A., Vessey, J. A., Bashore, L., & Gregas, M. (2019). Nutrition-related clinical decision making of pediatric
   oncology nurses. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 36(5), 352-360. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    1043454219844233

Márquez, E. J., Chung, C., Marches, R., Rossi, R. J., Nehar-Belaid, D., Eroglu, A., Mellert, D. J., Kuchel, G. A.,
   Banchereau, J., & Ucar, D. (2020). Sexual-dimorphism in human immune system aging. Nature Communications,
   11(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14396-9

Maxfield, L., & Crane, J. S. (2022). Vitamin C deficiency. In StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK493187/

Nakabayashi, J., Melo, G. R., & Toral, N. (2020). Transtheoretical model-based nutritional interventions in
   adolescents: a systematic review. BMC Public Health, 20(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-09643-z

National Institutes of Health. (2023, June 15). Iron: Fact sheet for health professionals. Office of Dietary
    Supplements. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Iron-HealthProfessional/

NCSBN. (2022). Clinical Judgment Measurement Model: A framework to measure clinical judgment & decision
   making. https://www.nclex.com/clinical-judgment-measurement-model.page

Nemati, R., McEntyre, C., Li, B., Phillips, I., & Sies, C. (2022). Fat-soluble vitamins: Mechanisms and metabolism: A
   narrative review. New Zealand Journal of Medical Laboratory Science, 76(1), 03-08.

Read, A. F., Waljee, A. K., Sussman, J. B., Singh, H., Chen, G. Y., Vijan, S., & Saini, S. D. (2021). Testing practices,
   interpretation, and diagnostic evaluation of iron deficiency anemia by U.S. primary care physicians. JAMA
   Network Open, 4(10), e2127827. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.27827

Serón-Arbeloa, C., Labarta-Monzón, L., Puzo-Foncillas, J., Mallor-Bonet, T., Lafita-López, A., Bueno-Vidales, N., &
   Montoro-Huguet, M. A. (2022). Malnutrition screening and assessment. Nutrients, 14(12), 2392. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu14122392

Sizar, O., Khare, S., Goyal, A., & Givlar, A. (2022). Vitamin D deficiency. In StatPearls [Internet].
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30335299/

Socha, D., DeSouza, S. I., Flagg, A., Sekeres, M. A., & Rogers, H. J. (2020). Severe megaloblastic anemia: Vitamin
   deficiency and other causes. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 87(3), 153-164. https://doi.org/10.3949/
    ccjm.87a.19072

National Lipid Association. (2021, May). The readiness to change conversation. The Clinician's Lifestyle Modification
    Toolbox. https://www.lipid.org/clmt

Walker-Clarke, A., Walase, L., & Meye, C. (2022). Psychosocial factors influencing the eating behaviours of older
   adults: A systematic review. Ageing Research Reviews, 77, 101597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2022.101597

Wiafe, M. A., Apprey, C., & Annan, R. A. (2023). Impact of nutrition education and counseling on nutritional status
   and anaemia among early adolescents: A randomized controlled trial. Human Nutrition & Metabolism, 31,
    200182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hnm.2022.200182

Yu, J. C., Shliakhtsitsava, K., Wang, Y., Paul, M. R., Farnaes, L., Wong, V. W., Kim, J., & Thornburg, C. D. (2019).
    Hematologic manifestations of nutritional deficiencies: Early recognition is essential to prevent serious
   complications. Journal of Pediatric Hematology Oncology. https://doi.org/10.1097/mph.0000000000001338
452 References

Zhong, Y., Patel, N., Ferris, M. E., & Rak, E. (2020). Health literacy, nutrition knowledge, and health care transition
   readiness in youth with chronic kidney disease or hypertension: A cross-sectional study. Journal of Child Health
   Care, 24(2), 246-259. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367493519831493

Chapter 10 Special Nutritional Considerations for Hematologic Health

Achebe, M., & Gafter-Gvili, A. (2017). How I treat anemia in pregnancy: iron, cobalamin, and folate. Blood, 129(8),
    940-949. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-08-672246

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022). Newborns need vitamin K shortly after birth to prevent bleeding disease.
    HealthyChildren.org. https://www.healthychildren.org/English/news/Pages/Newborns-Need-Vitamin-K-Shortly-
    After-Birth-to-Prevent-Bleeding-Disease.aspx

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). Anemia in pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/clinical/
    clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2021/08/anemia-in-pregnancy

American Society of Hematology. (2009, January 29). The problem with sickled cells. https://www.youtube.com/
    watch?v=BkC5Hf-AKwo

Ambrosy, A. P., Gurwitz, J. H., Tabada, G. H., Artz, A. S., Schrier, S. L., Rao, S. V., Barnhart, H. X., Reynolds, K., Smith,
    D. H., Peterson, P. N., Sung, S. H., Cohen, H. J., Go, A. S., & Investigators, R. H. (2019). Incident anaemia in older
   adults with heart failure: rate, aetiology, and association with outcomes. European Heart Journal - Quality of Care
   and Clinical Outcomes, 5(4), 361-369. https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjqcco/qcz010

Ankar, A. & Kumar, A. (2022, October 22). Vitamin B12 Deficiency. StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441923/?report=printable

Araki, S., & Shirahata, A. (2020). Vitamin K deficiency bleeding in infancy. Nutrients, 12(3), 780. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu12030780

Ballestín, S. S., Campos, M. I. G., Ballestín, J. B., & Bartolomé, M. J. L. (2021). Is supplementation with
   micronutrients still necessary during pregnancy? A review. Nutrients, 13(9), 3134. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu13093134

Benson, A. E., Shatzel, J. J., Ryan, K. S., Hedges, M. A., Martens, K. L., Aslan, J. E., & Lo, J. O. (2022). The incidence,
   complications, and treatment of iron deficiency in pregnancy. European Journal of Haematology, 109(6),
    633-642. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejh.13870

Berg, E. K. (2019). Performance nutrition for the adolescent athlete: A realistic approach. Clinical Journal of Sport
   Medicine, 29(5), 345-352. https://doi.org/10.1097/jsm.0000000000000744

Burton, J., Yates, L., Whyte, L., Fitzsimons, E. J., & Stott, D. J. (2020). New horizons in iron deficiency anaemia in
   older adults. Age and Ageing, 49(3), 309-318. https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afz199

Busti, F., Marchi, G., Ugolini, S., Castagna, A., & Girelli, D. (2018). Anemia and iron deficiency in cancer patients: Role
   of iron replacement therapy. Pharmaceuticals, 11(4), 94. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph11040094

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). What is hemophilia? National Center for Birth Defects and
    Developmental Disabilities. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/hemophilia/facts.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b). What is vitamin K deficiency bleeding? https://www.cdc.gov/
    ncbddd/vitamink/facts.html

Chardalias, L., Papaconstantinou, I., Gklavas, A., Politou, M., & Theodosopoulos, T. (2023). Iron deficiency anemia in
    colorectal cancer patients: Is preoperative intravenous iron infusion indicated? A narrative review of the
   literature. Cancer Diagnosis & Prognosis, 3(2), 163-168. https://doi.org/10.21873/cdp.10196

Cochrane, K. M., Hutcheon, J. A., & Karakochuk, C. D. (2022). Iron-deficiency prevalence and supplementation
   practices among pregnant women: A secondary data analysis from a clinical trial in Vancouver, Canada. Journal
   of Nutrition, 152(10), 2238-2244. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxac135

Desbrow, B. (2021). Youth athlete development and nutrition. Sports Medicine, 51(S1), 3-12. https://doi.org/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 453

    10.1007/s40279-021-01534-6

Drakesmith, H., Pasricha, S., Cabantchik, I., Hershko, C., Weiss, G., Girelli, D., Stoffel, N. U., Muckenthaler, M. U.,
    Nemeth, E., Camaschella, C., Klenerman, P., & Zimmermann, M. B. (2021). Vaccine efficacy and iron deficiency:
   An intertwined pair? The Lancet Haematology, 8(9), e666-e669. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    s2352-3026(21)00201-5

Eiduson, R., Heeney, M. M., Kao, P., London, W. B., Fleming, M. D., & Shrier, L. A. (2021). Prevalence and predictors of
   iron deficiency in adolescent and young adult outpatients: Implications for screening. Clinical Pediatrics,
    000992282110596. https://doi.org/10.1177/00099228211059647

Fulton, A. (2022, August 31). What's normal when it comes to menstrual bleeding? Healthy Women.
    https://www.healthywomen.org/condition/how-much-bleeding-is-normal-during-period

Giannini, S., Giusti, A., Minisola, S., Napoli, N., Passeri, G., Rossini, M., & Sinigaglia, L. (2022). The immunologic
   profile of vitamin d and its role in different immune-mediated diseases: An expert opinion. Nutrients, 14(3), 473.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14030473

Gilreath, J. A., & Rodgers, G. M. (2020). How I treat cancer-associated anemia. Blood, 136(7), 801-813.
    https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019004017

Goldberg, E. K., Neogi, S., Lal, A., Higa, A., & Fung, E. B. (2018). Nutritional deficiencies are common in patients with
   transfusion-dependent thalassemia and associated with iron overload. Journal of Food and Nutrition Research,
   6(10), 674-681. https://doi.org/10.12691/jfnr-6-10-9

Hand, I., Noble, L., & Abrams, S. A. (2022). Vitamin K and the newborn infant. Pediatrics, 149(3). https://doi.org/
    10.1542/peds.2021-056036

Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health. (2023, March 7). Iron. The Nutrition Source.
    https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/iron/

Hod, E. A., Brittenham, G. M., Bitan, Z. C., Feit, Y. M. Z., Gaelen, J. I., La Carpia, F., Sandoval, L. A., Zhou, A., Soffing,
    M., Mintz, A., Schwartz, J. E., Eng, C., Scotto, M., Caccappolo, E., Habeck, C. G., Stern, Y., McMahon, D. J., Kessler,
    D., Shaz, B. H., . . . Spitalnik, S. L. (2022). A randomized trial of blood donor iron repletion on red cell quality for
   transfusion and donor cognition and well-being. Blood, 140(25), 2730-2739. https://doi.org/10.1182/
    blood.2022017288

Ismail, S., Eljazzar, S., & Ganji, V. (2023). Intended and unintended benefits of folic acid fortification--A narrative
   review. Foods, 12(8), 1612. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods12081612

Jefferds, M. E., Mei, Z., Addo, Y., Hamner, H. C., Perrine, C. G., Flores-Ayala, R., Pfeiffer, C. M., & Sharma, A. J. (2022).
   Iron deficiency in the United States: Limitations in guidelines, data, and monitoring of disparities. American
   Journal of Public Health, 112(S8), S826-S835. https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2022.306998

Kaur, D., Rasane, P., Singh, J. P., Kaur, S., Kumar, V., Mahato, D. K., Dey, A., Dhawan, K., & Kumar, S. (2019).
   Nutritional interventions for elderly and considerations for the development of geriatric foods. Current Aging
   Science, 12(1), 15-27. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874609812666190521110548

Khan, K. M. (2023, June 26). Folic acid deficiency. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK535377

Kontele, I., & Vassilakou, T. (2021). Nutritional risks among adolescent athletes with disordered eating. Children
   (Basel), 8(8), 715. https://doi.org/10.3390/children8080715

Lim, M. Y., Guo, W., Presson, A. P., Bray, P. F., & Rodgers, G. M. (2020). High prevalence of overweight/obesity in
   adult persons with hemophilia in Utah and a review of the literature. Blood Coagulation & Fibrinolysis, 31(8),
    522-529. https://doi.org/10.1097/mbc.0000000000000957

Mairbäurl, H., Kilian, S., Seide, S., Muckenthaler, M. U., Gassmann, M., & Benedict, R. K. (2023). The increase in
    hemoglobin concentration with altitude differs between world regions and is less in children than in adults.
   HemaSphere, 7(4), e854. https://doi.org/10.1097/hs9.0000000000000854

Malek, A. M., Newman, J. C., Hunt, K. J., & Marriott, B. P. (2019). Race/ethnicity, enrichment/fortification, and dietary
454 References

   supplementation in the U.S. population, NHANES 2009-2012. Nutrients, 11(5), 1005. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu11051005

Mansour, D., Hofmann, A., & Gemzell-Danielsson, K. (2021). A review of clinical guidelines on the management of
   iron deficiency and iron-deficiency anemia in women with heavy menstrual bleeding. Advances in Therapy, 38(1),
    201-225. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-020-01564-y

Mattiello, V., Schmugge, M., Hengartner, H., Von Der Weid, N., & Renella, R. (2020). Diagnosis and management of
    iron deficiency in children with or without anemia: Consensus recommendations of the SPOG Pediatric
   Hematology Working Group. European Journal of Pediatrics, 179(4), 527-545. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00431-020-03597-5

McCaskill, M. L., Ogunsakin, O. A., Hottor, T., Harville, E. W., & Kruse-Jarres, R. (2018). Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
   and diet mediates vaso-occlusive related hospitalizations in sickle-cell disease patients. Nutrients, 10(10), 1384.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10101384

Means, R. T. (2020). Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia: Implications and impact in pregnancy, fetal
   development, and early childhood parameters. Nutrients, 12(2), 447. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12020447

Meek, J. Y., Noble, L., & Section on Breastfeeding. (2022). Policy statement: Breastfeeding and the use of human
   milk. Pediatrics, 150(1), e2022057988. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-057988

Milman, N. (2021). Managing genetic hemochromatosis: An overview of dietary measures, which may reduce
   intestinal iron absorption in persons with iron overload. Gastroenterology Research, 14(2), 66-80.
    https://doi.org/10.14740/gr1366

Miniero, R., Talarico, V., Galati, M. C., Giancotti, L., Saracco, P., & Raiola, G. (2019). Iron deficiency and iron
   deficiency anemia in children. IntechOpen eBooks. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.79790

Moustarah, F. (2022, October 22). Dietary iron. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK540969/

Natalucci, V., Virgili, E., Calcagnoli, F., Valli, G., Agostini, D., Zeppa, S., Barbieri, E., & Emili, R. (2021). Cancer related
   anemia: An integrated multitarget approach and lifestyle interventions. Nutrients, 13(2), 482. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu13020482

National Center for Health Statistics. (2023). Health, United States, 2020-2021: Annual Perspective. U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://dx.doi.org/
    10.15620/cdc:122044

National Institutes of Health. (2022, December 22). Vitamin B12. Office of Dietary Supplements.
    https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health. (2023, June 15). Iron. Office of Dietary Supplements. https://ods.od.nih.gov/
    factsheets/Iron-HealthProfessional/

Nour, N. M. (2022). Optimize detection and treatment of iron deficiency in pregnancy. OBG Management, 34(5).
    https://doi.org/10.12788/obgm.0194

Pai, U., Chandrasekhar, P., Carvalho, R., & Kumar, S. A. (2018). The role of nutrition in immunity in infants and
   toddlers: An expert panel opinion. Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health, 6(4), 155-159. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.cegh.2017.11.004

Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine. (2020a). Nutritional requirements throughout the life cycle.
    Nutrition Guide for Clinicians. https://nutritionguide.pcrm.org/nutritionguide/view/
    Nutrition_Guide_for_Clinicians/1342043/all/Nutritional_Requirements_throughout_the_Life_Cycle

Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine. (2020b). Sickle cell disease. Nutrition Guide for Clinicians.
    https://nutritionguide.pcrm.org/nutritionguide/view/Nutrition_Guide_for_Clinicians/1342072/all/
    Sickle_Cell_Disease

Pivina, L., Semenova, Y., Dosa, M. D., Dauletyarova, M., & Bjørklund, G. (2019). Iron deficiency, cognitive functions,
   and neurobehavioral disorders in children. Journal of Molecular Neuroscience, 68(1), 1-10. https://doi.org/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 455

    10.1007/s12031-019-01276-1

Porter, J. L., & Prashanth, R. (2023, March 31). Hemochromatosis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK430862

Porto, A., & Abu-Alreesh, S. (2022, August 24). Vitamin D for babies, children & adolescents. HealthyChildren.org.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/healthy-living/nutrition/Pages/Vitamin-D-On-the-Double.aspx

Rodríguez-Mañas, L., Murray, R., Glencorse, C., & Sulo, S. (2023). Good nutrition across the lifespan is foundational
   for healthy aging and sustainable development. Frontiers in Nutrition, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fnut.2022.1113060

Rotstein, A., Kodesh, A., Goldberg, Y., Reichenberg, A., & Levine, S. Z. (2022). Serum folate deficiency and the risks
   of dementia and all-cause mortality: A national study of old age. Evidence-based Mental Health, 25(2), 63-68.
    https://doi.org/10.1136/ebmental-2021-300309

Safiri, S., Kolahi, A., Noori, M., Nejadghaderi, S. A., Karamzad, N., Bragazzi, N. L., Sullman, M. J., Abdollahi, M.,
    Collins, G. S., Kaufman, J. S., & Grieger, J. A. (2021). Burden of anemia and its underlying causes in 204 countries
   and territories, 1990-2019: Results from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Journal of Hematology &
   Oncology, 14(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13045-021-01202-2

Sharma, A. J., Addo, O. Y., Mei, Z., & Suchdev, P. S. (2019). Reexamination of hemoglobin adjustments to define
   anemia: altitude and smoking. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1450(1), 190-203. https://doi.org/
    10.1111/nyas.14167

Sharma, A. J., Ford, N. D., Bulkley, J. E., Jenkins, L., Vesco, K. K., & Williams, A. (2021). Use of the electronic health
   record to assess prevalence of anemia and iron deficiency in pregnancy. Journal of Nutrition, 151(11),
    3588-3595. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxab254

Sickle-Cell.com. (2023, April). Can my diet help manage my pain crises? https://sickle-cell.com/living/diet-nutrition

Smith, C. H., Teng, F., Branch, E., Chu, S. W., & Joseph, K. (2019). Maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality
   associated with anemia in pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 134(6), 1234-1244. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    aog.0000000000003557

Socha, D., DeSouza, S. I., Flagg, A., Sekeres, M. A., & Rogers, H. J. (2020). Severe megaloblastic anemia: Vitamin
   deficiency and other causes. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 87(3), 153-164. https://doi.org/10.3949/
    ccjm.87a.19072

Srichairatanakool, S., Koonyosying, P., & Fucharoen, S. (2020). Diet-related thalassemia associated with iron
   overload. IntechOpen eBooks. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.91998

Stauder, R., Valent, P., & Theurl, I. (2018). Anemia at older age: etiologies, clinical implications, and management.
   Blood, 131(5), 505-514. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-07-746446

Stauder, R., Augschoell, J., Hamaker, M. E., & Koinig, K. A. (2020). Malnutrition in older patients with hematological
    malignancies at initial diagnosis--Association with impairments in health status, systemic inflammation and
   adverse outcome. HemaSphere, 4(1), e332. https://doi.org/10.1097/hs9.0000000000000332

Umeakunne, K., & Hibbert, J. M. (2019, April 2). Nutrition in sickle cell disease: Recent insights. Nutrition and
   Dietary Supplements, 11, 9-17. https://doi.org/10.2147/nds.s168257

Vreugdenhil, M., Akkermans, M. D., Van Der Merwe, L. F., Van Elburg, R. M., Van Goudoever, J. B., & Brus, F. (2021).
   Prevalence of zinc deficiency in healthy 1-3-year-old children from three western European countries. Nutrients,
   13(11), 3713. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13113713

World Health Organization. (n.d.-a). Anaemia in women and children. https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/
    topics/anaemia_in_women_and_children

World Health Organization. (n.d.-b). Antenatal iron supplementation. https://www.who.int/data/nutrition/nlis/info/
    antenatal-iron-supplementation
456 References

Yan, H., Chen, Y., Zhu, H., Huang, W., Cai, X., Li, D., Ya-Juan, L., Si-Zhao, N., Zhou, H., Luo, F., Zhang, W., & Li, X.
    (2022). The relationship among intestinal bacteria, vitamin K and response of vitamin K antagonist: A review of
   evidence and potential mechanism. Frontiers in Medicine, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.829304

Chapter 11 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Cardiovascular Wellness

Albakri, A. (2019). Nutritional deficiency cardiomyopathy: A review and pooled analysis of pathophysiology,
   diagnosis and clinical management. Research and Review Insights 3. https://doi.org/10.15761/RRI.1000149

Akbar, H., Foth, C., Kahloon, R., & Mountfort, S. (2022). Acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. StatPearls
   [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532281/

American College of Cardiology. (2023). Too little sodium can be harmful to heart failure patients.
    https://www.acc.org/About-ACC/Press-Releases/2023/02/22/20/42/Too-Little-Sodium-Can-be-Harmful-to-
    Heart-Failure-Patients

American Diabetes Association. (2023). Fats. https://diabetes.org/healthy-living/recipes-nutrition/eating-well/fats

American Heart Association. (2023). How much sodium should I eat per day? https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-
    living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/sodium/how-much-sodium-should-i-eat-per-day

American Society of Hematology. (2023). Blood basics. https://www.hematology.org/education/patients/blood-
    basics

Balchem. (2021). Feel the rhythm: Minerals for heart health. https://balchem.com/human-nutrition-health/blog/
    heart-health-minerals/

Bord, S. (2022). Electrolyte abnormalities. Clerkship Directors in Emergency Medicine. https://www.saem.org/
    about-saem/academies-interest-groups-affiliates2/cdem/for-students/online-education/m3-curriculum/group-
    electrocardiogram-(ecg)-rhythm-recognition/electrolyte-abnormalities

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Heart attack symptoms, risks, and recovery.
    https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/heart_attack.htm

Cleveland Clinic. (2022a). Albumin blood test. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diagnostics/22390-albumin-
    blood-test.

Cleveland Clinic. (2022b). Arteries. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/22896-arteries

Cleveland Clinic. (2022c). Hypokalemia. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17740-low-potassium-
    levels-in-your-blood-hypokalemia

Cohagan, B., & Brandis, D. (2022). Torsade de Pointes. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK459388/

Dmitrieva, N. I., Liu, D., Wu, C. O., & Boehm, M. (2022). Middle age serum sodium levels in the upper part of normal
   range and risk of heart failure. European Heart Journal, 43(35), 3335-3348. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
    ehac138

Gupta, J., & Shea, M. (2022). Biology of the blood vessels. Merck Manuals. https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/
    heart-and-blood-vessel-disorders/biology-of-the-heart-and-blood-vessels/biology-of-the-blood-vessels

Harvard Medical School. (2021). BMI calculator. https://www.health.harvard.edu/diet-and-weight-loss/bmi-
    calculator

Harvard Health Publishing. (2020). Eat more fiber-rich foods to foster heart health. https://www.health.harvard.edu/
    heart-health/eat-more-fiber-rich-foods-to-foster-heart-health

Harvard University. (2023). Preventing heart disease. https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/disease-
    prevention/cardiovascular-disease/preventing-cvd/

Hinzey, E., & Chien, S. (2023). What's the Mediterranean diet? https://health.usnews.com/best-diet/mediterranean-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 457

    diet

Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. (2023). Hardening of the arteries. https://www.mountsinai.org/health-
    library/diseases-conditions/hardening-of-the-arteries

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2023a). Lipid panel. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/treatment-tests-and-
    therapies/lipid-panel

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2023b). Anatomy and function of the heart's electrical system.
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/anatomy-and-function-of-the-hearts-
    electrical-system

Kenny, B., & Brown, K. (2022). ECG T wave. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538264/

Lee, Y., Lin, C., Fang, W., Lee, C., Ho, C., Wang, C., Tsai, D., & Lin, C. (2022). Artificial intelligence-enabled
    electrocardiography detects hypoalbuminemia and identifies the mechanism of hepatorenal and cardiovascular
   events. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.895201

Malik, M., & Goyal, A. (2022). Cardiac exam. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK553078/

Martyniak, A., & Tomasik, P. J. (2022). A new perspective on the renin-angiotensin system. Diagnostics (Basel),
   13(1), 16. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13010016

Mayo Clinic. (2023a). Long QT syndrome. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/long-qt-syndrome/
    symptoms-causes/syc-20352518

Mayo Clinic. (2023b). Supraventricular tachycardia. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/
    supraventricular-tachycardia/symptoms-causes/syc-20355243

Mayo Clinic. (2023c). High blood pressure (hypertension). https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-
    blood-pressure/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20373417

Medline Plus. (2022). Heart failure: Fluids and diuretics. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/
    000112.htm

Moll, J. (2022). Saturated vs. unsaturated fats. Verywell Health. https://www.verywellhealth.com/difference-
    between-saturated-fats-and-unsaturated-fats-697517

Morales-Brown, L. (2020). What is the best afib diet? Medical News Today. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/
    articles/afib-diet

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2021). DASH eating plan. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/education/dash-
    eating-plan

National Institute on Aging. (2022). High blood pressure in older adults. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/high-blood-
    pressure-and-older-adults.

National Institutes of Health. (2022). Good hydration may reduce long-term risks for heart failure.
    https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/good-hydration-may-reduce-long-term-risks-heart-failure

Pediatric Heart Specialists. (2023). Normal heart anatomy and blood flow. https://pediatricheartspecialists.com/
    heart-education/14-normal/152-normal-heart-anatomy-and-blood-flow

Penn Medicine Lancaster General Health. (2023). High-potassium foods. https://www.lancastergeneralhealth.org/
    healthwise-library/healthwise-article?lang=en-us&DocumentId=abo9047

Sherrell, Z. (2021). What to know about the cardiovascular system. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/cardiovascular-system

Srakocic, S. (2023). Understanding smoking's effect on your blood vessels. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/
    health/smoking/does-smoking-constrict-your-blood-vessels

Teymouri, N., Mesbah, S., Navabian, S., Shekouh, D., Najafabadi, M., Norouzkhani, N., Poudineh, M., Qadirifard, M.,
458 References

   Mehrtabar, S., & Deravi, N. (2022). ECG frequency changes in potassium disorders: A narrative review. American
   Journal of Cardiovascular Disease, 12(3), 112-124. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9301030/

University of California San Francisco. (2023). Guidelines for a low sodium diet. https://www.ucsfhealth.org/
    education/guidelines-for-a-low-sodium-diet

University of North Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy. (2023). Physiology review. https://apps.media.unc.edu/
    crashcart/Resources/PhysiologyReview.html

University of Washington. (2023). Go green with high fiber foods. https://thewholeu.uw.edu/2023/03/13/fiber/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2020). What is MyPlate? https://www.myplate.gov/eat-healthy/what-is-myplate

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2023). Calcium: Shopping list. https://health.gov/myhealthfinder/
    healthy-living/nutrition/calcium-shopping-list

University of Rochester Medical Center. (2023). Magnesium rich foods. https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/childrens-
    hospital/nutrition/magnesium-foods.aspx

Visible Body. (2023). Functions of the blood: 8 facts about blood. https://www.visiblebody.com/learn/circulatory/
    circulatory-functions-of-the-blood

Chapter 12 Special Nutritional Considerations for Cardiovascular Health

Advent Health. (2021, February). A healthy start for your baby's heart. https://www.adventhealth.com/hospital/
    adventhealth-children/blog/a-healthy-start-your-babys-heart

American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. (2019, March). Eating disorder in teens.
    https://www.aacap.org/AACAP/Families_and_Youth/Facts_for_Families/FFF-Guide/Teenagers-With-Eating-
    Disorders-002.aspx

American Heart Association. (2017). What is cardiovascular disease? https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/
    consumer-healthcare/what-is-cardiovascular-disease

American Heart Association. (2018). Dietary recommendations for healthy children. https://www.heart.org/en/
    healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/dietary-recommendations-for-healthy-children

American Heart Association. (2020). Prevention and treatment of high cholesterol. https://www.heart.org/en/
    health-topics/cholesterol/prevention-and-treatment-of-high-cholesterol-hyperlipidemia

American Heart Association. (2021). The American Heart Association diet and lifestyle recommendations.
    https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/American Heart Association-
    diet-and-lifestyle-recommendations

American Heart Association. (2023) Feeding tips for your baby with CHD. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/
    congenital-heart-defects/care-and-treatment-for-congenital-heart-defects/feeding-tips-for-your-baby-with-chd

American Pregnancy Association. (2023). Gestational hypertension: Pregnancy induced hypertension (PIH).
    https://americanpregnancy.org/healthy-pregnancy/pregnancy-complications/gestational-hypertension/

Amirani, E., Milajerdi, A., Reiner, Z., Mirzaei, H., Mansournia, M. A., & Asemi, Z. (2020). Effects of whey protein on
    glycemic control and serum lipoproteins in patients with metabolic syndrome and related conditions: a
   systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Lipids in Health and Disease, 19(1),
    209. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12944-020-01384-7

Anderson, M., Vogels, E., Perrin, A, & Rainie, L. (2022). Connection, creativity and drama: Teen life on social media in
   2022. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2022/11/16/connection-creativity-and-
    drama-teen-life-on-social-media-in-2022/

Anderson-Villaluz, D., & Quam, J. (2022). Nutrition during pregnancy to support a healthy mom and baby.
    Health.gov. https://health.gov/news/202202/nutrition-during-pregnancy-support-healthy-mom-and-baby

Back, I., de Barros, N., & Caramelli, B. (2022). Lifestyle, inadequate environments in childhood and their effects on

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 459

   adult cardiovascular health. Joirnal de Pediatria, 98(S1), S19-S26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ped.2021.09.005

Bensley, J., Moore, L., De Matteo, R., Harding, R., & Black, M. (2018). Impact of preterm birth on the developing
   myocardium of the neonate. Pediatric Research, 83(4), 880-888. https://doi.org/10.1038/pr.2017.324

Biddinger, K., Emdin, C., Haas, M., Wang, M., Hindy, G., Ellinor, P., Kathiresan, S., Khera, A., & Aragam, K. (2022).
   Association of habitual alcohol intake with risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA Network Open, 5(3), e223849.
    https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.3849

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). High blood pressure symptoms and causes.
    https://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/about.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022) Weight Gain During Pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pregnancy-weight-gain.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). Facts about hypertension. https://www.cdc.gov/
    bloodpressure/facts.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b). Food and drinks to avoid or limit.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c). Heart disease facts. https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/
    facts.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023d). Know your risk for heart disease. https://www.cdc.gov/
    heartdisease/risk_factors.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023e). Recommendations and benefits: Breastfeeding.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023f). About heart disease. https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/
    about.htm

Cleveland Clinic. (2020a). How to pick heart-healthy Mexican food. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/say-ole-heart-
    healthy-mexican-food

Cleveland Clinic. (2020b). Craving Chinese food? How to pick Asian food that's heart healthy.
    https://health.clevelandclinic.org/heart-smart-asian-dining-strategies/

Cleveland Clinic. (2022a). How to follow a heart-healthy diet. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/heart-healthy-diet/

Cleveland Clinic (2022b). Lipids. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/24425-lipids

Cleveland Clinic. (2022c). How to teach kids healthy eating habits. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/healthy-eating-
    for-kids/

Cleveland Clinic. (2023). How race and ethnicity impact heart disease. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/
    articles/23051-ethnicity-and-heart-disease

Cunningham, M., & LaMarca, B. (2018). Risk of cardiovascular disease, end-stage renal disease, and stroke in
   postpartum women and their fetuses after a hypertensive pregnancy. Am. J. Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol,
   315(3). R521-R528. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00218.2017

Dahm, C., Chomistek, A., Jakobsen, M., Mukamal, K., Eliassen, A., Sesso, H., Overvad, K., Willett, W., Rimm, E., &
    Chiuve, S. (2016). Adolescent diet quality and cardiovascular disease risk factors and incident cardiovascular
   disease in middle-aged women. J Am Heart Assoc., 20;5(12):e003583. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.116.003583

FDA. (2022a). Using the nutrition facts label: For older adults. https://www.fda.gov/food/new-nutrition-facts-label/
    using-nutrition-facts-label-older-adults

FDA. (2022b). Sodium in your diet. https://www.fda.gov/food/nutrition-education-resources-materials/sodium-
    your-diet

FDA. (2023). Infant formula. https://www.fda.gov/food/resources-you-food/infant-formula

Garg, V. (2020, February 25). Maternal diabetes and fetal heart development: What mothers need to know.
460 References

    Nationwide Children's. https://www.nationwidechildrens.org/family-resources-education/700childrens/2020/
    02/maternal-diabetes-and-fetal-heart-development

Gersh, B. (2022). Maternal adaptations to pregnancy: Cardiovascular and hemodynamic changes. UpToDate.
    Retrieved October 1, 2023, from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maternal-adaptations-to-pregnancy-
    cardiovascular-and-hemodynamic-changes

Greenblatt, J. (2023). The essential role of amino acids in combating anorexia. Psychiatry Redefined.
    https://www.psychiatryredefined.org/the-essential-role-of-amino-acids-in-combating-anorexia/

Howland, J. (2018). Mayo Clinic minute: Heart-healthier choices at fast food restaurants.
    https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/discussion/mayo-clinic-minute-heart-healthier-choices-at-fast-food-
    restaurants/

Ifitkhar, S. & Biswas, M. (2023). Cardiac disease in pregnancy. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK537261/

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2023) Alcohol and heart health: Separating fact from fiction. Retrieved from
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/wellness-and-prevention/alcohol-and-heart-health-separating-fact-
    from-fiction

Kepley, J., Bates, K., & Mohiuddin, S. (2023). Physiology, Maternal Changes. Retrieved from
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539766/

Knott, L. (2020). Potassium-sparing diuretics. Retrieved from https://patient.info/digestive-health/dietary-
    potassium/potassium-sparing-diuretics

Lee, S., Oh, J., Park, J., Choi, S., & Wee, J. (2018). Differences in youngest-old, middle-old, and oldest-old patients
   who visit the emergency department. Clin Exp Emerg Med, 5(4):249-255. doi: 10.15441/ceem.17.261.

Lennie, T., Andreae, C., Rayens, M., Song, E., Dunbar, S., Pressler, S., Heo, S., Kim, J., & Moser, D. (2018).
   Micronutrient deficiency independently predicts time to events in patients with heart failure. Journal of the
   American Heart Association, 7, https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/JAHA.117.007251

Lu, Y., Chen, R., Cai, J., Huang, Z, & Yuan, H. (2018). The management of hypertension in women planning for
   pregnancy. Oxford Journals British Medical Bulletin. 128(1): 75-84. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldy035

Martin, R. (2023). Health benefits of French food. Blog post Cuisine of the Month: French. Retrieved from:
    https://ubiquinol.org/blog/cuisine-month-french

Mayo Clinic. (2021). DASH diet: Healthy eating to lower your blood pressure. Retrieved from:
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/dash-diet/art-20048456

Mayo Clinic. (2022a). Teens and social media use: What's the impact? Retrieved from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/
    healthy-lifestyle/tween-and-teen-health/in-depth/teens-and-social-media-use/art-20474437

Mayo Clinic. (2022b). Warfarin diet: What foods should I avoid? Retrieved from https://www.mayoclinic.org/
    diseases-conditions/thrombophlebitis/expert-answers/warfarin/faq-20058443

Mayo Clinic. (2022c). Transient ischemic attack (TIA). https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/transient-
    ischemic-attack/symptoms-causes/syc-20355679

Mayo Clinic. (2023a). Diuretics: A cause of low potassium? Retrieved from https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
    conditions/high-blood-pressure/expert-answers/blood-pressure/faq-20058432

Mayo Clinic. (2023b). Top 5 lifestyle changes to improve your cholesterol. Retrieved from
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-cholesterol/in-depth/reduce-cholesterol/
    art-20045935

Mayo Clinic. (2023c). Premature birth. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/premature-birth/
    symptoms-causes/syc-20376730

Mayo Clinic. (2023d). High cholesterol. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-cholesterol/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 461

    symptoms-causes/syc-20350800

Mayo Clinic. (2023e). Cholesterol: Top foods to improve your numbers. Retrieved from https://www.mayoclinic.org/
    diseases-conditions/high-blood-cholesterol/in-depth/cholesterol/art-20045192

Medical News Today. (2021). Can fish oils and omega-3 oils benefit our health? Retrieved from:
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/40253

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2022). What is atherosclerosis? Retrieved from:
    https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/atherosclerosis

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2023). High blood triglycerides. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/high-
    blood-triglycerides

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2022). The basics: Defining how much alcohol is too much.
    https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/health-professionals-communities/core-resource-on-alcohol/basics-defining-how-
    much-alcohol-too-much

National Library of Medicine. (2022). Cholesterol levels. https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/cholesterol-levels/

National Lipid Association. (2020). Heart-healthy eating southern style. https://www.lipid.org/sites/default/files/
    heart_healthy_eating_-_southern_style.pdf

Nemours Children's Hospital. (2023, April). Household safety: Preventing choking. Retrieved from
    https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/safety-choking.html

Patiala Heart Institute. (2023). Importance of diet for a healthy heart. Retrieved from https://patialaheart.com/blog/
    diet-chart-for-heart-patients/

Raeside, R., Partridge, S., Singleton, A., & Redfern, J. (2019). Cardiovascular disease prevention in adolescents:
   eHealth, Co-Creation, and Advocacy. Med Sci (Basel), 7(2):34. doi: 10.3390/medsci7020034.

Rodgers, J., Jones, J., Bolleddu, S., Vanthenapalli, S., Rodgers, L., Shah, K., Karia, K., & Panguluri, S. (2019).
   Cardiovascular risks associated with gender and aging. Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease, 6(2),
    19. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcdd6020019

Royal Bromptom and Harefield Hospital. (2021). Nutrition for babies born with CHD. https://www.rbht.nhs.uk/our-
    services/paediatrics/information-for-parents/childrens-diet/nutrition-for-babies-born-chd

Russell, M. (2022). JAHA Spotlight on pregnancy and its impact on maternal and offspring cardiovascular health.
   Journal of American Heart Association, 11(2). https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.121.025167

Sarder, M., Greway, A., DeAngelis, M., Tysko, E., Lehmann, S., Wohlstetter, M., & Patel, R. (2015). Cardiovascular
   impact of eating disorders in adults: A single center experience and literature review. Heart Views, 16(3).
    Doi:10.4103/1995-705X.164463

Sterns, R. (2022). Diuretic-induced hyponatremia. UpToDate. Retrieved from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/
    diuretic-induced-hyponatremia#H9602708

UNICEF. (2023). Maternal nutrition. https://www.unicef.org/nutrition/maternal

United States Department of Agriculture. (2020), Dietary guidelines for Americans.
    https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf

United States Department of Agriculture. (n.d.). MyPlate. https://www.myplate.gov/myplate-plan

Watson, S. (2022). Infant nutrition: The first 6 months. Grow by WebMD. Retrieved from https://www.webmd.com/
    parenting/baby/nutrition

WebMD. (2022). Best and worst Italian dishes for your health. Retrieved from https://www.webmd.com/food-
    recipes/ss/slideshow-best-worst-italian-dishes

Yang, J., Kang, Y., Cheng, Y., Zeng, L., Yan, H., & Dong, S. (2019). Maternal dietary patterns during pregnancy and
462 References

   congenital heart defects: A case-control study. International Journal of Environmental and Public Health, 16(16).
    Doi:10.3390/ijerph16162957

Chapter 13 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Pulmonary
Wellness

Ahmadi, A., Eftekhari, M. H., Mazloom, Z., Masoompour, M., Fararooei, M., Eskandari, M. H., Mehrabi, S.,
    Bedeltavana, A., Famouri, M., Zare, M., Nasimi, N., & Sohrabi, Z. (2020). Fortified whey beverage for improving
   muscle mass in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A single-blind, randomized clinical trial. Respiratory
   Research, 21, 1-11.

American Lung Association. (2023). Nutrition and COPD. https://www.lung.org/lung-health-diseases/lung-disease-
    lookup/copd/living-with-copd/nutrition

Andrianasolo, R. M., Kesse-Guyot, E., Adjibade, M., Hercberg, S., Galan, P., & Varraso, R. (2018). Associations
   between dietary scores with asthma symptoms and asthma control in adults. European Respiratory Journal,
   52(1). https: DOI: 10.1183/13993003.02572-2017

Arsenault, J. E., Moursi, M., Olney, D. K., Becquey, E., & Ganaba, R. (2020). Validation of 24-h dietary recall for
   estimating nutrient intakes and adequacy in adolescents in Burkina Faso. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 16(4),
    e13014.

Arvers, P. (2018). Alcohol consumption and lung damage: Dangerous relationships. Revue des Maladies
   Respiratoires, 35(10), 1039-1049.

Arigliani, M., Spinelli, A. M., Liguoro, I., & Cogo, P. (2018). Nutrition and lung growth. Nutrients, 10(7), 919. doi:
    10.3390/nu10070919

Burris, M., Kihlstrom, L., Arce, K. S., Prendergast, K., Dobbins, J., McGrath, E., Renda, A., Shannon, E., Cordier, T.,
   Song, Y., & Himmelgreen, D. (2021). Food insecurity, loneliness, and social support among older adults. Journal
   of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition, 16(1), 29-44.

Calcaterra, V., Verduci, E., Ghezzi, M., Cena, H., Pascuzzi, M. C., Regalbuto, C., Lamberti, R., Rossi, V., Manuelli, M.,
    Bosetti, A., & Zuccotti, G. V. (2021). Pediatric obesity-related asthma: The role of nutrition and nutrients in
   prevention and treatment. Nutrients, 13(11), 3708.

Canadian Lung Association. (n.d.). Breathing. https://www.lung.ca/lung-health/lung-info/breathing

Castro, D., Patil, S., & Keenaghan, M. (2022). Arterial blood gas. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK536919/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, February 22). Tips from former smokers: Overviews of
   diseases/conditions. 2022, Feb. 22. https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/diseases/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b, April 19). Alcohol basics: Frequently asked questions.
    https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/faqs.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c, May 20). Cow's milk and milk alternatives.
    https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/foods-and-drinks/cows-milk-and-milk-alternatives.html

COPD Foundation. (2021). Nutrition for someone with COPD. https://www.copdfoundation.org/Learn-More/I-am-a-
    Person-with-COPD/Nutrition-for-Someone-with-COPD.aspx

Deer, R. & Volpi, E. (2018). Protein requirements in critically ill older adults. Nutrients, 10(3), 378. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu10030378

Dezube, R. (2023, January). Evaluation of the pulmonary patient. Merck Manual Professional Version.
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pulmonary-disorders/approach-to-the-pulmonary-patient/
    evaluation-of-the-pulmonary-patient Dixon, A. E., & Peters, U. (2018). The effect of obesity on lung function.
   Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine, 12(9), 755-767. https://www.nclex.com/clinical-judgment-
    measurement-model.page

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 463

Esquivel, M. (2018). Nutritional assessment and intervention to prevent and treat malnutrition for fall risk reduction
   in elderly populations. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 12(2), 107-112. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    1559827617742847

Gea, J., Sancho-Muñoz, A., & Chalela, R. (2018). Nutritional status and muscle dysfunction in chronic respiratory
   diseases: stable phase versus acute exacerbations. Journal of thoracic disease, 10(Suppl 12), S1332-S1354.
    https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2018.02.66

Gomes, F., Schuetz, P., Bounoure, L., Austin, P., Ballesteros-Pomar, M., Cederholm, T., Fletcher, J., Laviano, A.,
    Norman, K., Poilia, K. A., Ravasco, P., Schneider, S. M., Stanga, Z., Weekes, C. E., & Bischoff, S. C. (2018). ESPEN
   guidelines on nutritional support for polymorbid internal medicine clients. Clinical nutrition, 37(1), 336-353.

Grajek, M., Krupa-Kotara, K., Bialek-Dratwa, A., Sobczyk, K., Grot, M., Kowalski, O., & Stakiewicz, W. (2022).
   Nutrition and mental health: A review of current knowledge about the impact of diet on mental health. Frontiers
   in Nutrition, 9, 943998.

Keller, U. (2019). Nutritional laboratory markers in malnutrition. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 8(6), 775.

Kokoszynska, M., Ubags, N. D., Bivona III, J. J., Ventrone, S., Reed, L. F., Dixon, A. E., Wargo, M. J., Poynter, M. E., &
   Suratt, B. T. (2021). Storage conditions of high-fat diets affect pulmonary inflammation. Physiological Reports,
   9(22), e15116.

Larson, H. (2021). Easy ways to boost fiber in your daily diet. https://www.eatright.org/health/essential-nutrients/
    carbohydrates/easy-ways-to-boost-fiber-in-your-daily-diet

Lee, Y. G., Lee, P. H., Choi, S. M., An, M. H., & Jang, A. S. (2021). Effects of air pollutants on airway diseases.
   International journal of environmental research and public health, 18(18), 9905.

McDonald, M., Wouters, E., Rutten, E. Casaburi, R., Rennard, S., Lomas, D., Bamman, M., Celli, B., Agusti, A., Tal-
    Singer, R., Hersh, C., Dransfield, M., & Silverman, E. (2019). It's more than low BMI: Prevalence of cachexia and
   associated mortality in COPD. Respiratory Research: 20(100). https://respiratory-research.biomedcentral.com/
    articles/10.1186/s12931-019-1073-3#citeas

Norris, T. (2019). Porth's essentials of pathophysiology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Nutrition for lung health and COPD. (2023). Health. Wellness, Prevention. https://health.umms.org/2023/09/06/
    nutrition-for-lung-health-and-copd/

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2020, August). Healthy people 2030: Social Determinants of
   Health. https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-determinants-health

Paddilla, O., & Abadie, J. (2022). Blood tests: Normal values. Merck Manual Professional Version.
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/resources/normal-laboratory-values/blood-tests-normal-values

Pagana, K., & Pagana, T. (2018). Mosby's manual of diagnostic and laboratory tests (6th ed.). St. Louis: Elsevier.

Plein, L. M., & Rittner, H. L. (2018). Opioids and the immune system-friend or foe. British Journal of Pharmacology,
   175(14), 2717-2725.

Rôlo Silvestre, C., Dias Domingues, T., Mateus, L., Cavaco, M., Nunes, A., Cordeiro, R., Silva Santos, T., Falcão, T., &
   Domingos, A. (2022). The nutritional status of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbators. Canadian
   respiratory journal, 2022, 3101486. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/3101486

Schneider, J., Rowe, J., Garcia-de-Alba, C., Kim, C., Sharpe, A., & Haigis, M. (2021). The aging lung: Physiology,
   disease, and immunity. Cell, 184(8): 1990-2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.005

Sherenian, M. G., Singh, A. M., Arguelles, L. M., Balmert, L. C., Caruso, D., Wang, X., Pongracic, J. A., & Kumar, R.
   (2018). Food allergy is an independent risk factor for decreased lung function in children with asthma. Annals of
   Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, 121(5), 588-593,e1.

Shirasawa, T., Ochiai, H., Yoshimoto, T., Nagahama, S., Kobayashi, M., Ohtsu, I., & Kokaze, A. (2019). Associations
    between normal weight central obesity and cardiovascular disease risk factors in Japanese middle-aged adults: a
464 References

   cross-sectional study. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition, 38, 1-7.

Sun, X., Shen, Y., & Shen, J. (2021). Respiration-related guidance and nursing can improve the respiratory function
   and living ability of elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. American Journal of
   Translational Research, 13(5), 4686-4695.

Timmers, T., Janssen, L., Kool, R. B., & Kremer, J. A. (2020). Educating clients by providing timely information using
   smartphone and tablet apps: systematic review. Journal of medical Internet research, 22(4), e17342.

Tinsley, G., & Lewsley, J. (2023) Diet recommendations for people with asthma. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/asthma-diet

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (n.d.). Learn how to eat healthy with MyPlate. MyPlate. https://www.myplate.gov

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2022. July 24). Dietary
   guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. 9th edition. DGA: Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
    https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2022, July 1) Leading health indicators. Healthy people 2030.
    https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/leading-health-indicators

van den Berg, G. H., Huisman-de Waal, G. G., Vermeulen, H., & de van der Schueren, M. A. (2021). Effects of nursing
    nutrition interventions on outcomes in malnourished hospital in clients and nursing home residents: A systematic
   review. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 117, 103888. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2021.103888

Vézina, F., & Cantin, A. (2018). Antioxidants and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chronic Obstructive
   Pulmonary Diseases, 5(4), 277-288. https://doi.org/10.15326/jcopdf.5.4.2018.0133

Vlieg-Boerstra, B., de Jong, N., Meyer, R., Agostoni, C., De Cosmi, V., Grimshaw, K., Milani, G. P., Muraro, A., Elberink,
    H. O., Pali-Scholl, I., Roduit, C., Sasaki, M., Skypala, I., Sokolowska, M., van Splunter, M., Untersmayr, E., Venter,
    C., O'Mahony, L., & Nwaru, B. I. (2022). Nutrient supplementation for prevention of viral respiratory tract
   infections in healthy subjects: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Allergy, 77(5), 1373-1388.

Wood, K. (2022). Overview of tests of pulmonary function. StatPearls. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/pulmonary-disorders/tests-of-pulmonary-function-pft/overview-of-tests-of-pulmonary-function

World Health Organization. (2023, October 11). Obesity and overweight. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
    sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight

Chapter 14 Special Nutritional Considerations for Pulmonary Health

Agarwal, A. K., & Huda, N. (2022). Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK557765/

Allen, M. J., & Sharma, S. (2023). Magnesium. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK 19036/

Alwarith, J., Kahleova, H., Crosby, L., Brooks, A., Brandon, L., Levin, S. M., & Barnard, N. D. (2020). The role of
   nutrition in asthma prevention and treatment. Nutrition Review, 78(11), 928-938. https://doi.org/ 0.1093/n trit/
    nuaa005

Arigliani, M., Spinelli, A. M., Liguoro, I., & Cogo, P. (2018). Nutrition and lung growth. Nutrients, 10(7) 919.
    https://doi.org/ 0.3390/nu10070919

Ashorobi, D., Ameer, M. A., & Fernandez, R. (2022). Thrombosis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK 38430/

Baiz, N., Just, J., Chastang, J., Forhan, A., de Lauzon-Guillain, B., Magnier, A. M., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2019).
   Maternal diet before and during pregnancy and risk of asthma and allergic rhinitis in children. Allergy, Asthma
   Clinical Immunology, 15, 40. https://doi.or / 0.1186/s13223-019-0353-2

Bendix, I., Miller, S. L., & Winterhager, E. (2020). Editorial: Causes and consequences of intrauterine growth
   restriction. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 11, 205. https://doi.org/ 0.3389/ endo.2020.00205

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 465

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022). Most recent national asthma data. U. S. Department of Health
    and Human Services, Retrieved April 30, 2023, https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/
    most_recent_national_asthma_data.htm

Collins, P. F., Yang, I. A., Chang, Y. C., & Vaughan, A. (2019). Nutritional support in chronic obstructive pulmonary
   disease (COPD): An evidence update. Journal of Thoracic Disease, 11(17), S2230-S2237. https://doi org/
    0.21037/jtd.2019.10.41

Comerford, K. B., Miller, G. D., Boileau, A. C., Masiello Schuette, S. N., Giddens, J. C., & Brown, K. A. (2021). Global
   review of dairy recommendations in food-based dietary guidelines. Frontiers in Nutrition, 8. https://doi.org/
    0.3389/fnut.2021.671999

DailyMed. (2022, December 9). Levofloxacin tablet. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/
    drugInfo.cfm?setid=3c5219e9-b75b-4898-aaf5-8357ddb36373

Dokuhaki, S., Dokuhaki, F., & Akbarzadeh, M. (2021). The relationship of maternal anxiety, positive and negative
   affect schedule, and fatigue with neonatal psychological health upon childbirth. Contraception and Reproductive
   Medicine, 6, 12. https://doi.o g/ 0.1186/s40834-021-00155-8

Fandino, J., Toba, L., Gonzalez-Matias, L. C., Diz-Chaves, Y., & Mallo, F. (2019). Perinatal undernutrition, metabolic
   hormones, and lung development. Nutrients, 11(12), 2870. https://doi.org/ 0.3390/nu11122870

Faverio, P., Bocchino, M., Cominati, A., Fumagalli, A., Gasbarra, M., Iovino, P., Petruzzi, A., Scalfi, L., Sebastiani, A.,
    Stanziola, A. A., & Sanduzzi, A. (2020). Nutrition in clients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Critical issues
   analysis and future research directions. Nutrients, 12(4) 1131. https://doi.org/ 0.3390/nu12041131

Food and Drug Administration (2021). Grapefruit juice and some drugs don't mix. FDA.gov. https://www.fda.gov/
    consumers/consumer-updates/grapefruit-juice-and-some-drugs-dont-mix

Gozzi-Silva, S. C., Mouradian, F., Teixeira, E., da Silva Duarte, A. J., Sato, M. N., & de Menonca Oliveira, L. (2021).
   Immunomodulatory role of nutrients: How can pulmonary dysfunctions improve? Frontiers in Nutrition, 8,
    674258. https://doi.org/ 0.3389/fn t.2021.674258

Green, R. J., van Niekerk, A., McDonald, M., Friendman, R., Feldman, C., Richards, G., & Mustafa, F. (2020). Acute
   allergic rhinitis. South African Family Practice, 62(1), 5154. https://doi.org/10.4102/safp.v62i1.5154

Han, Y. Y., Forno, E., & Celedon, J. C. (2020). Health risk behaviors, violence exposure, and current asthma among
   adolescents in the United States. Pediatric Pulmonology, 54(3), 237-244. https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.24236

Hancu, A. (2019). Nutritional status as a risk factor in COPD. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 14(2), 140-143.
    https://doi.org 0.26574/maedica.2019.14.2.140

Hashmi, M. F., Tariq, M., & Cataletto, M. E. (2023). Asthma. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/b oks/
    NBK430901/

Herring, C. M., Bazer, F. W., Johnson, G. A., & Wu, G. (2018). Maternal dietary protein intake impacts fetal survival,
   growth, and development. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 243(6), 525-533. https://doi.org/ 0.1177/
    1535370218758275

Hosseini, B., Berthon, B. S., Wark, P., & Wood, L. G. (2017). Effects of fruit and vegetable consumption on risk of
   asthma, wheezing, and immune responses: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients, 9(4), 341.
    https://doi.org/ 0.3390/nu9040341

Hudson, J., Baum, J., Diaz, E., & Børsheim, E. (2021). Dietary protein requirements in children: Methods for
   consideration. Nutrients, 13(5), 1554. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13051554

Kalaiselvan, M. S., Arunkumar, A. S., Renuka, M. K., & Sivakumar, R. L. (2021). Nutritional adequacy in mechanically
   ventilated client: Are we doing enough? Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine, 25(2), 166-171. https://doi.org/
    10.5005/jp-jounrals-10071-23717

Krishna, R., Chapman, K., & Ullah, S. (2022). Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. StatPearls. https:/ www.ncbi
    nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK 48162/
466 References

LaRocque, R. C , & Ryan, E. T. (2019). Post-travel evaluation: Respiratory infections. Centers for Disease Control and
    Prevention, U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/
    posttravel-evaluation/respiratory-infections

Lucas, S., Leach, M. J., Kumar, S., & Phillips, A. C. (2019). Complementary and alternative medicine practitioner's
   management of acute respiratory tract infection in children - A qualitative descriptive study. Journal of
   Multidisciplinary Healthcare, 12, 947-962. https://doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S230845

Mekal, D., Czerw, A., Deptala, A. (2021). Dietary behavior and nutrition in clients with COPD treated with long-term
   oxygen therapy. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(23), 12793.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182312793

Mercader-Barcelo, J., Truyols-Vives, J., Rio, C., Lopez-Safont, N., Sala-Llinas, E., & Chaplin, A. (2020). Insights into
   the role of bioactive food ingredients and the microbiome in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. International Journal
   of Molecular Sciences, 21, 6051. https: /doi.org/ 0.3390/ijms21176051

Murphy, M. M., Higgins, K. A., Bi, X., Barraj, L. M. (2021). Adequacy and sources of protein intake among pregnant
   women in the United States, NHANES 2003-2012. Nutrients, 13(3), 795. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13030795

National Institute of Health. (2021). Vitamin E. Office of Dietary Supplements, U.S. Department of Health and
    Human Services, Retrieved May 13, 2023, https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminE-HealthProfessional/

National Institute of Health (2022a). Asthma: What is Asthma? National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Retrieved April 30, 2023, https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/asthma

National Institute of Health. (2022b). Lung diseases. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, U. S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Retrieved April 23, 2023, https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/topics/
    conditions/lung-disease/index.cfm

National Institute of Health. (2022c). Pneumonia: Cause and risk factors. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
    U. S. Department of Health, and Human Services, Retrieved May 5, 2023, https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/
    pneumonia/causes

National Institute of Health. (2022d). What is respiratory failure? National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, U. S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Retrieved May 3, 2023, https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/
    respiratory-failure

Pahal, P., Avula, A., & Sharma, S. (2023). Emphysema. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK 82217/

Ramirez, J., Guarner, F., Fernandez, L. B., Maruy, A., Sdepanian, V. L., & Cohen, H. (2020). Antibiotics as major
   disruptors of gut microbiota. Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, 10, 572912. https://doi.org/
    10.3389/fcimb.2020.572912

Rehman, S., & Bacha, D. (2022). Embryology, Pulmonary. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK
    44372/

Rocha, G., Guimarães, H., & Pereira-da-Silva, L. (2021). The role of nutrition in the prevention and management of
   bronchopulmonary dysplasia: A literature review and clinical approach. International Journal of Environmental
   Research and Public Health, 18(21), 6245. https://doi.org/ 0.3390/ijerph18126245

Rogers, L. K., & Cismowski, M. J. (2018). Oxidative stress in the lung - The essential paradox. Current Opinion
   Toxicology, 7, 37-43. https://doi.org/ 0.1016 j.cotox.2017.09.001

Saleri, N., & Ryan, E. T. (2019). Respiratory infections. Travel Medicine, 2019, 527-537. https://doi.org/ 0.1016/
    B978-0-323-54696-6.00059-8

Sanghavi, M., & Rutherford, J. D. (2014). Cardiovascular Physiology of Pregnancy. In Circulation, 130(12),
    1003-1008). https://doi.org/10.1161/circulationaha.114.009029

Sanivarapu, R. R., & Gibson, J. (2022). Aspiration pneumonia. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK
    70459/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 467

Santo, C. E., Caseiro, C., Martins, M. J., Monteiro, R., & Brandao, I. (2021). Gut microbiota, is the halfway between
   nutrition and lung function. Nutrients, 13(5), 1716. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13051716

Sattar, S. B., & Sharma, S. (2022). Bacterial pneumonia. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK
    13321/

Schultz, E. S., Hallberg, J., Andersson, N., Thacher, J. D., Pershagen, G., Bellander, T., Bergström, A., Kull, I., Guerra,
    S., Thunqvist, P., Gustafsson, P. M., Bottai, M., & Melén, E. (2018). Early life determinants of lung function change
   from childhood to adolescence. Respiratory Medicine, 139, 48-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2018.04.009

Scoditti, E., Massaro, M., Garbarino, S., & Toraldo, D. M. (2019). Role of diet in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
   prevention and treatment. Nutrients, 11(6), 1357. https://doi.org/ 0.3390/nu11061357

Sharifi-Rad, M., Kumar, N. V. A., Zucca, P., Varoni, E. M., Dini, L., Panarinin, E., Rajkovic, J., Tsouh Fokou, P., V., Azzini,
    E., Peluso, I., Mishra, A. P., Nigam, M., Rayess, Y. Beyrouthy, M. E., Polito, L., Iriti, M., Martins, N., Martorell, M.,
    Docea, A. O., Setzer, W. N., Calina, D., Cho, W. C., & Sharifi-Rad, J. (2020). Lifestyle, oxidative stress, and
   antioxidants: Back and forth in the pathophysiology of chronic diseases. Frontiers of Physiology, 11.
    https://doi.org/ 0.3389/fphys.20 0.00694

Soma-Pillay, P., Nelson-Piercy, C., Tolppanen, H., & Mebazaa, A. (2016). Physiological changes in pregnancy.
   Cardiovascular Journal of Africa, 27(2), 89-94. https://doi.org/10.5830/CVJA-2016-021

Thomas, M., & Bomar, P. A. (2022). Upper respiratory tract infection. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK 32961/

Vahid, F., & Rahmani, D. (2021). Can an anti-inflammatory diet be effective in preventing or treating viral respiratory
   diseases? A systematic narrative review. Clinical Nutrition ESPEN, 43, 9-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.clnesp.2021.04.009

Voraphani, N., Stern, D. A., Zhai, J., Wright, A. L., Halonen, M., Sherrill, D. L., Hallberg, J., Kull, I., Bergstrom, A.,
    Murray C. S., Lowe, L., Custovic, A., Morgan, W. J., Martinez, F. D., Melen, E., Simpson, A., & Guerro, S. (2022). The
    role of growth and nutrition in the early origins of spirometric restriction in adult life: A longitudinal, multicohort,
   population-based study. Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 10(1), 59-71. https://doi.org/ 0.1016/
    S2213-2600(21)00355-6

Vyas, V., & Goyal, A. (2022). Acute pulmonary embolism. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK
    60551/

Wee, J. H., Yoo, D. M., Byun, S. H., Song, C. M., Lee, H. J., Park, B., Park, M. W., & Choi, H. G. (2020). Analysis of the
   relationship between asthma and coffee/green tea/soda intake. International Journal of Environmental Research
   and Public Health, 17(20), 7471. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17207471

Widysanto, A., & Mathew, G. (2022). Chronic Bronchitis. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK482437/

Yasir, M., Goyal, A., Sonthalia, S. (2022). Corticosteroid adverse effects. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK531462/

Yuan, S., Bruzelius, M., Damrauer, S. M., Hakansson, N., Wolk, A., Akesson, A., & Larsson, S. C. (2021). Anti-
   inflammatory diet and venous thromboembolism: Two prospective cohort studies. Nutrition, Metabolism and
   Cardiovascular Diseases, 31(10), 2831-2838. https://doi.org/ 0.1016/j.numecd.2021.06.021

Zheng, L., Kelly, C. J., & Colgan, S. P. (2015). Physiologic hypoxia and oxygen homeostasis in the healthy intestine. A
   review in the theme: Cellular responses to hypoxia. American Journal of Physiology: Cell Physiology, 309(6),
    C350-360. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00191.2015

Chapter 15 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for Renal
Wellness

Ballstaedt, L., & Woodbury, B. (2022). Bladder post void residual volume. In StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls
    Publishing. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539839/
468 References

de Bellefonds, C. (2023, March 21). 8 diet tips to help prevent or manage chronic kidney disease. Everyday Health.
    https://www.everydayhealth.com/kidney-diseases/diet-tips-to-help-prevent-or-manage-chronic-kidney-
    disease/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Kidney testing: Everything you need to know.
    https://www.cdc.gov/kidneydisease/publications-resources/kidney-tests.html

Cleveland Clinic. (2023a). Hyperkalemia (high potassium). https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/
    15184-hyperkalemia-high-blood-potassium

Cleveland Clinic. (2023b). Kidney. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/21824-kidney

Cleveland Clinic. (2023c). Renal cortex. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/23127-renal-cortex

Dalal, R., Bruss, Z., & Sehdev, J. (2022). Physiology, renal blood flow and filtration. In StatPearls [Internet].
    StatPearls Publishing. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482248/

DaVita. (2023). Healthy food swaps for a kidney diet. https://www.davita.com/diet-nutrition/articles/basics/healthy-
    food-swaps-for-a-kidney-diet

Gang-Jee, K., Rhee, C.M., Kalantar-Zadeh, K., & Joshi, S. (2020, August). The Effects of High-Protein Diets on Kidney
   Health and Longevity. JASN, 31(8), p. 1667-1679. DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2020010028. https://journals.lww.com/
    jasn/Abstract/2020/08000/The_Effects_of_High_Protein_Diets_on_Kidney_Health.7.aspx

Kariuki, F. (2022). The complete guide to patient engagement. Health Recovery Solutions.
    https://www.healthrecoverysolutions.com/resources/eguide/patient-engagement-guide#patient-engagement

Maddukuri, G. (2022a). Evaluation of the renal patient. Merck Manuals. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/genitourinary-disorders/approach-to-the-genitourinary-patient/evaluation-of-the-renal-patient

Maddukuri, G. (2022b). Evaluation of the urologic patient. Merck Manuals. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/genitourinary-disorders/approach-to-the-genitourinary-patient/evaluation-of-the-urologic-patient

Mitchell, A., Strafford, M., & Tavares, S. (2022). The renal system and associated disorders. British Journal of
   Nursing, 31(19). https://www.britishjournalofnursing.com/content/pathophysiology/the-renal-system-and-
    associated-disorders

Merck Manuals. (2023). Regulating blood pressure: The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
    https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/multimedia/figure/regulating-blood-pressure-the-renin-angiotensin-
    aldosterone-system

National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. (n.d.). Components of the urinary system. National
    Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, SEER Training Modules. https://training.seer.cancer.gov/anatomy/
    urinary/components/

National Kidney Foundation. (n.d.). Tests to measure kidney function, damage and detect abnormalities.
    https://www.kidney.org/atoz/content/kidneytests

National Kidney Foundation. (2022). Nutrition and chronic kidney disease: Getting the most out of the foods you eat.
    https://www.kidney.org/sites/default/files/11-50-0114_nutrition_chronic_kidney_disease_stage1-4.pdf

National Kidney Foundation. (2023a). Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). https://www.kidney.org/atoz/
    content/gfr

National Kidney Foundation. (2023b). Kidney biopsy. https://www.kidney.org/atoz/content/kidney-biopsy

Newman, T. (2023). Where are the kidneys located, what do they do, and what do they look like? Healthline Media.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/305488

Reinoso, D., Haut, D., Claffey, S., Hahn Keiner, K., Chavez, A., Nace, N., & Carter, A. (2022). Addressing food
   insecurity: Lessons learned from co-locating a food pantry with a federally qualified health center. International
   Journal of Integrated Care, 22(3), 24. https://doi.org/10.5334/ijic.6430

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 469

Roscoe, L. (2022). Correctional Nurse Clinical Update: Abdominal Assessment: Palpation. CorrectionalNurse.net.
    https://correctionalnurse.net/abdominal-assessment-palpation/

Sperati, C.J. (2022, March 1). Coronavirus: Kidney Damage Caused by COVID-19. Johns Hopkins Medicine.
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/coronavirus-kidney-damage-
    caused-by-covid19

Urology Care Foundation. (2023). Urinary tract infections in adults. https://www.urologyhealth.org/urology-a-z/u/
    urinary-tract-infections-in-adults

World Health Organization. (2020). Social determinants of health. https://www.who.int/health-topics/social-
    determinants-of-health

Chapter 16 Special Nutritional Considerations for Renal Health

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015, November 21). Prevent urinary tract infections in children.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/genitourinary-tract/Pages/Prevent-Urinary-
    Tract-Infections-in-Children.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021, January 20). Kidney stones in children and teens.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/genitourinary-tract/Pages/Kidney-Stones-in-
    Children-and-Teens.aspx

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020). How much water should I drink during pregnancy?
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/experts-and-stories/ask-acog/how-much-water-should-i-drink-during-
    pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023a). Nutrition during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/nutrition-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023b). Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnant Individuals.
   ACOG Clinical Consensus, 142(2). https://www.acog.org/-/media/project/acog/acogorg/clinical/files/clinical-
    consensus/articles/2023/08/urinary-tract-infections-in-pregnant-individuals.pdf

American Heart Association. (n.d.). How much sugar is too much? https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-
    eating/eat-smart/sugar/how-much-sugar-is-too-much

American Kidney Fund. (2022). Types of kidney diseases. https://www.kidneyfund.org/all-about-kidneys/types-
    kidney-diseases

Attini, R., Leone, F., Chatrenet, A., Longhitano, E., Casula, V., Tomasi Cont, A., Zaccaria, G., Dalmasso, E., Manzione,
    A., Masturzo, B., Torreggiani, M., Revelli, A., Cabiddu, G., & Piccoli, G. (2022). Plant-based diets improve
   maternal-fetal outcomes in CKD pregnancies. Nutrients, 14(19), 4203. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14194203

Bennett, W. M., Rahbari-Oskoui, F. F., & Chapman, A. B. (2022, June 7). Patient education: Polycystic kidney disease
   (beyond the basics). UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/polycystic-kidney-disease-beyond-the-
    basics

Cafasso, J. (2023, February 14). Anticholinergics. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/health/anticholinergics

Columbia University Irving Medical Center. (n.d.). Intrauterine growth restriction (fetal growth abnormality).
    https://www.columbiadoctors.org/treatments-conditions/intrauterine-growth-restriction-fetal-growth-
    abnormality

Dai, J., & Pearle, M. (2022). Diet and stone disease in 2022. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 11(16), 4740.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11164740

Deshpande, P. (n.d.). Diet for good kidney health in children. PatientsEngage. https://www.patientsengage.com/
    healthy-living/diet-good-kidney-health-children

Duda, K. (2022, August 1). What is chromium? Verywell Health. https://www.verywellhealth.com/chromium-
    benefits-4588421
470 References

Economic Research Service. (2022, October 20). Documentation. Food Access Research Atlas.
    https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research-atlas/documentation/

Ferraro, P., Bargagli, M., Trinchieri, A., & Gambaro, G. (2020). Risk of kidney stones: Influence of dietary factors,
   dietary patterns, and vegetarian-vegan diets. Nutrients, 12(3), 779. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12030779

Fresenius Kidney Care. (n.d.). Managing fluid intake on dialysis. https://www.freseniuskidneycare.com/recipes-and-
    nutrition/fluid-management-on-dialysis

Furst, J. (2021, April 15). Mayo study finds that pregnancy increases risk for women to develop first-time
   symptomatic kidney stones. Mayo Clinic News Network. https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/discussion/mayo-
    clinic-study-finds-that-pregnancy-increases-risk-for-women-to-develop-first-time-symptomatic-kidney-stones/

Gavin, M. (2021, January). Iron. Nemours KidsHealth. https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/iron.html

Gleason, J.L., Sundaram, R., & Mitro, S.D., et al. (2022, October 31). "Association of Maternal Caffeine Consumption
    During Pregnancy With Child Growth." JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5(10):e2239609. doi:10.1001/
    jamanetworkopen.2022.39609. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2797983

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (n.d.). Urinary incontinence in children. Health. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/
    conditions-and-diseases/urinary-incontinence/urinary-incontinence-in-children

Karki, N., & Leslie, S. (2023, May 30). Struvite and triple phosphate renal calculi. In StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK568783/

Keilman, C., & Shanks, A. (2022, September 12). Oligohydramnios. In StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK562326/

Kubala, J. (2021, October 4). Does cranberry juice help treat UTIs? Myth versus science. Healthline.
    https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cranberry-juice-uti

Lee, Y., Lumbers, E., Schumacher, T., Collins, C., Rae, K., Pringle, K., & Gomeroi Gaaynggal Advisory Committee.
    (2021). Maternal diet influences fetal growth but not fetal kidney volume in an Australian Indigenous pregnancy
   cohort. Nutrients, 13(2), 569. https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fnu13020569

Leslie, S., Sajjad, H., & Nazzal, L. (2023, May 30). Cystinuria. In StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK470527/

Levtchencko, E., Servais, A., Hulton, S., Ariceta, G., Emma, F., Game, D., Lange, K., Lapatto, R., Liang, H., Sberro-
    Soussan, R., Topaloglu, R., Das, A., Webb, N., & Wanner, C. (2022). Expert guidance on the multidisciplinary
   management of cystinosis in adolescent and adult patients. Clinical Kidney Journal, 15(9), 1675-1684.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/ckj/sfac099

Liao, Z., Fang, Z., Gou, S., Luo, Y., Liu, Y., He, Z., Li, X., Peng, Y., Fu, Z., Li, D., Chen, H., & Luo, Z. (2022). The role of
   diet in renal cell carcinoma incidence: An umbrella review of meta-analyses of observational studies. BMC
   Medicine, 20(39). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-021-02229-5

Lubeck, B. (2023, April 25). Selenium: Everything you need to know. Verywell Health.
    https://www.verywellhealth.com/selenium-benefits-side-effects-and-more-7481242

Malek, A., Hunt, K., Turan, T., Mateus, J., Lackland, D., Lucas, A., & Wilson, D. (2022). Hypertensive disorders of
    pregnancy with and without pre-pregnancy hypertension are associated with incident maternal kidney disease
   subsequent to delivery. Hypertension, 79, 844-854. https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18451

Mas Que Ideas Foundation. (2022, April). Kidney cancer diet and nutrition: A guide for patients and their families.
    https://ikcc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/KIDNEY-CANCER-DIET-NUTRICION-EN-Web-version.pdf

McCarthy, C. (2021, January 26). New dietary guidelines: Any changes for infants, children, and teens? Harvard
    Health Publishing. https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/new-dietary-guidelines-any-changes-for-infants-
    children-and-teens-2021012621831

Medical Home Portal. (n.d.). Nutritional needs of the preterm infant. https://www.medicalhomeportal.org/clinical-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 471

    practice/feeding-and-nutrition/nutritional-needs-of-the-preterm-infant

Mobley, D., Patel, H., & Baum, N. (2020, May 20). Impact of nutrition on urologic and renal diseases. Renal & Urology
    News. https://www.renalandurologynews.com/home/departments/nutrition/diet-prostatitis-ic-stones-ed-oab-
    bph-ckd-bladder-cancer/

Modglin, L. (2022, February 22). Mediterranean diet voted best for 2022: What do diabetes experts say?
    DiaTribeLearn. https://diatribe.org/mediterranean-diet-voted-best-2022-what-do-diabetes-experts-say

National Institutes of Health (2021). Manganese. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Manganese-HealthProfessional/

National Institutes of Health (2022a). Copper. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Copper-HealthProfessional/.

National Institutes of Health. (2022b). Vitamin B12. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/
    VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/

National Kidney Foundation. (2022). FDA proposes new definition of "healthy": What this mean for people with
   kidney disease. https://www.kidney.org/newsletter/fda-proposes-new-definition-healthy-what-means-people-
    kidney-disease

National Kidney Foundation. (2023). Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). https://www.kidney.org/atoz/
    content/gfr

Nelms, C. (2018). Optimizing enteral nutrition for growth in pediatric chronic kidney disease (CKD). Frontiers in
   Pediatrics, 6(1), 214. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2018.00214

NHS Inform. (2023, February 13). Urinary tract infection in children. https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-
    conditions/kidneys-bladder-and-prostate/urinary-tract-infection-uti-in-children

Norton Children's. (2020, December 3). Five foods for urinary tract infections in a child.
    https://nortonchildrens.com/news/5-power-foods-better-urinary-health/

Nusken, E., Voggel, J., Fink, G., Dotsch, J., & Nusken, K. (2020). Impact of early-life diet on long-term renal health.
   Molecular and Cellular Pediatrics, 7(17). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40348-020-00109-1

Orlando Health. (2023, August 3). Kidney stones: Pregnancy's secret side effect. https://www.orlandohealth.com/
    content-hub/kidney-stones-pregnancy-s-secret-side-effect

Patel, J., & Rouster, A. (2022, August 8). Infant nutrition requirements and options. In StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560758/

Peerapan, P., & Thongboonkerd, V. (2023). Kidney stone prevention. Advances in Nutrition, 14(3), 555-569.
    https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.advnut.2023.03.002

Richards, L. (2022, July 17). What to know about natural treatments for kidney cancer. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/beating-kidney-cancer-naturally-is-it-possible-diet-and-other-tips

Sass, C. (2022, December 8). Best foods for vaginal health. Health. https://www.health.com/condition/sexual-
    health/best-foods-for-vagina

Satellite Healthcare. (2022). Total kidney health: A holistic approach to value-based kidney care. NephTalk.
    https://www.satellitehealthcare.com/podcasts/a-holistic-approach-to-value-based-kidney-care

Shi, H., Chen, L., Wang, Y., Sun, M., Guo, Y., Ma, S., Wang, X., Jiang, H., Wang, X., Lu, J., Ge, L., Dong, S., Zhuang, Y.,
    Zhao, Y., Wei, Y., Ma, X., & Qiao, J. (2022). Severity of anemia during pregnancy and adverse maternal and fetal
   outcomes. JAMA Network Open, 5(2): e2147046. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.47046

Siligato, R., Gembillo, G., Cernaro, V., Torre, F., Salvo, A., Granese, R., & Santoro, D. (2020). Maternal and fetal
   outcomes of pregnancy in nephrotic syndrome due to primary glomerulonephritis. Frontiers in Medicine, 10(7),
    1-7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.563094

Sissons, B. (2019, November 27). UTI in pregnancy: Everything you need to know. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/327148
472 References

Stanford Medicine Children's Health. (n.d.). Zinc. https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/
    default?id=zinc-19-Zinc

Stoppler, M. (2020, July 24). Urinary incontinence: Foods and drinks that cause overactive bladder. RxList.
    https://www.rxlist.com/urinary_incontinence_slideshow/article.htm

Thompson, D., Jr. (2023, May 18). Best diet and nutrition tips for kidney cancer. Everyday Health.
    https://www.everydayhealth.com/kidney-cancer/kidney-cancer-diet-and-nutrition.aspx

Tommasso, C., Mauro, G., Mattivi, F., Mondaini, N., Mingo, S., Boddi, V., Gacci, P., Detti, B., Gontero, P., Chiodini, S.,
    Mereu, L., Tateo, S., Mazzoli, S., Malossini, G., & Bartoletti, R. (2014). Apple consumption is related to better
   sexual quality in young women. Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 290(1), 93-98. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00404-014-3168-x

UNICEF. (n.d.). Maternal nutrition: Preventing malnutrition in pregnant and breastfeeding women.
    https://www.unicef.org/nutrition/maternal

Urology Care Foundation (2023). Pregnancy and Kidney Stones. https://www.urologyhealth.org/healthy-living/
    urologyhealth-extra/magazine-archives/summer-2019/did-you-know-pregnancy-and-kidney-stones.

Urology Specialists. (2015, March 17). Nutrition to avoid urinary tract infections.
    https://www.urologyspecialistsnc.com/nutrition-avoid-urinary-tract-infections/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2020). Dietary guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 (9th ed.).
    https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf

UT Southwestern Medical Center. (2023, June 12). Lots of water, small dietary changes can help prevent kidney
   stones, UTSW expert says. https://www.newswise.com/articles/lots-of-water-small-dietary-changes-can-help-
    prevent-kidney-stones-utsw-expert-says

Weinberg, J. L. (2023, May 25). A functional medicine kidney stone protocol: Testing, supplements, and treatment
   options. Rupa Health. https://www.rupahealth.com/post/a-functional-medicine-kidney-stone-protocol-testing-
    supplements-and-treatment-options

Wiles, K., Chappell, L., Clark, K., Elman, L., Hall, M., Lightstone, L., Mohamed, G., Mukherjee, D., Nelson-Piercy, C.,
   Webster, P., Whybrow, R., & Bramham, K. (2019). Clinical practice guideline on pregnancy and renal disease. BMC
   Nephrology, 20(401). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-019-1560-2

Wiles, K., Webster, P., Seed, P., Bennett-Richards, K., Bramham, K., Brunskill, N., Carr, S., Hall, M., Khan, R., Nelson-
    Piercy, C., Webster, L., Chappell, C., & Lightstone, L. (2020). The impact of chronic kidney disease stages 3-5 on
   pregnancy outcomes. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 36(11), 2008-2017. https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/
    gfaa247

Willacy, H. (2022). Physiological changes in pregnancy. https://patient.info/doctor/physiological-changes-in-
    pregnancy

Williamson, L. (2022, February 25). High blood pressure may raise future kidney disease risk for pregnant women.
    American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/news/2022/02/25/high-blood-pressure-may-raise-
    future-kidney-disease-risk-for-pregnant-women

Wing, D., & Johnston, R. (2017). Obstetrics and gynecology: Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy. Cancer Therapy
    Advisor. https://www.cancertherapyadvisor.com/home/decision-support-in-medicine/obstetrics-and-
    gynecology/acute-pyelonephritis-in-pregnancy/

Chapter 17 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Gastrointestinal Wellness

Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. (2020a, January 23). Foods to fight iron deficiency. https://www.eatright.org/
    health/essential-nutrients/minerals/iron-deficiency

Afzaal, M., Saeed, F., Shah, Y., Hussain., M., Rabail, R., Socol, C., Hassoun, A., Pateiro, M., Lorenzo, J., Rusu, A., &

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 473

   Aadil, R. (2022). Human gut microbiota in health and disease: Unveiling the relationship. Frontiers in
   Microbiology, 13, 999001. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.999001

American Dental Association. (2023, July 7). Nutrition and oral health. https://www.ada.org/resources/research/
    science-and-research-institute/oral-health-topics/nutrition-and-oral-health

Azzouz, L. A., & Sharma, S. (2023, July 31). Physiology, large intestine (PMID 29939634). National Library of
    Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK507857/

Castera, M., & Borhade, M. (2022, September 5). Fluid management (PMID 30335338). National Library of
    Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532305/

Cleveland Clinic. (n.d.-a). Hyperkalemia (high potassium). https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/
    15184-hyperkalemia-high-blood-potassium

Cleveland Clinic. (n.d.-b). Koilonychia (spoon nails). https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/symptoms/
    22140-koilonychia-spoon-nails

Diaz de Ortiz, L., & Mendez, M. (2023, March 24). Palatal and gingival cysts in newborns (PMID 29630229). National
    Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK493177/

Ems, T., Lucia, K., & Huecker, M. (2023, April 17). Biochemistry, iron absorption (PMID 28846259). National Library
    of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK448204/

Feroze, K., & Kaufman, E. (2023, April 17). Xerophthalmia (PMID 28613746). National Library of Medicine, National
    Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK431094/

Fish, E., & Burns, B. (2022, October 14). Physiology, small bowel (PMID 30335296). National Library of Medicine,
    National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532263/

Gantan, E., & Wiedrich, L. (2023, August 14). Neonatal evaluation (PMID 32644369). National Library of Medicine,
    National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK558943/

Gold, J., & Schoenhaus, J. (2023, August 13). Foot and ankle doctor Boynton Beach explains how salt and lack of
    exercise affects lower leg health. Foot, Ankle & Leg Vein Center. https://www.bocaratonfootcare.com/foot-ankle-
    doctor-boynton-explains-salt-and-lack-exercise-affects-lower-leg-health/

Gunnars, K. (2023, May 3). 22 high fiber foods you should eat. https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/22-high-fiber-
    foods

Hakes, H. (2021, April 5). Vitamin deficiencies: Noting the oral health clues present in the mouth.
    https://www.todaysrdh.com/vitamin-deficiencies-noting-the-oral-health-clues-present-in-the-mouth/

Howley, E. K. (2020, July 13). 9 foods high in vitamin B12. U.S. News & World Report. https://health.usnews.com/
    wellness/food/articles/foods-high-in-vitamin-b12

Hsu, M., Safadi, A., & Lui, F. (2023, July 17). Physiology, stomach (PMID 30571046). National Library of Medicine,
    National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK535425/

Johnson, J. (2021, February 18). What to know about low blood pressure with a high pulse. Medical News Today.
    https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/low-blood-pressure-high-pulse

Johnson, L. E. (2022, November). Riboflavin deficiency (vitamin B2 deficiency). MSD Manual.
    https://www.msdmanuals.com/professional/nutritional-disorders/vitamin-deficiency,-dependency,-and-toxicity/
    riboflavin-deficiency

Kesari, A., & Noel, J. (2023, April 10). Nutritional assessment (PMID 35593821). National Library of Medicine,
    National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK580496/

Lee, J., Tsolis, R., & Baumler, A. (2022). The microbiome and gut homeostasis. Science, 377(6601), eabp9960.
    https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abp9960
474 References

Mealie, C., Ali, R., & Manthey, D. (2022, October 10). Abdominal exam (PMID 29083767). National Library of
    Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459220/

Mount Sinai Icahn School of Medicine. (n.d.). Dry mouth. https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/symptoms/dry-
    mouth

Ogobuiro, I., Gonzales, J., Shumway, K. R., & Tuma, F. (2023, April 8). Physiology, gastrointestinal (PMID 30725788).
    National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK537103/

Plewa, M., & Chatterjee, K. (2022, August 7). Aphthous stomatitis (PMID 28613713). National Library of Medicine,
    National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK431059/

Rosenthal, B. (2020, October). Recognizing the impact of nutrition in healing wounds. Podiatry Today.
    https://www.hmpgloballearningnetwork.com/site/podiatry/recognizing-impact-nutrition-healing-wounds

Sanchez Lopez de Nava, A., & Raja, A. (2022, September 12). Physiology, metabolism (PMID 31536296). National
    Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK546690/

Sawar, M. F., Sawar, M. H., & Sawar, M. (2021). Deficiency of B-complex and its relation with body disorders. In J. G.
   LeBlanc (Ed.). B-complex vitamins. IntechOpen. https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/78374

Schneider, A., & Gibbs, H. (2022, December 7). Disparities in housing, health care, child care, and economic security
   affect babies for life. Center for American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/article/disparities-in-
    housing-health-care-child-care-and-economic-security-affect-babies-for-life/

Stewart, A. (n.d.). Deficiency symptoms and signs. Stewart Nutrition. https://www.stewartnutrition.co.uk/
    nutritional_assesment/deficiency_symptoms_and_signs.html

UPMC. (n.d.). Defining obesity. https://www.upmc.com/locations/hospitals/hamot/services/bariatric/defining-
    obesity

Weersma, R., Zhernakova, A., & Fu, J. (2020). Interaction between drugs and the gut microbiome. Gut, 69,
    1510-1519. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7928-7371

Chapter 18 Special Nutritional Considerations for Gastrointestinal Health

Abrams, S. A. (2022, May 17). How to safely prepare baby formula with water. https://www.healthychildren.org/
    English/ages-stages/baby/formula-feeding/Pages/how-to-safely-prepare-formula-with-water.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). Portions and serving sizes. https://www.healthychildren.org/English/
    healthy-living/nutrition/Pages/Portions-and-Serving-Sizes.aspx

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023). Nutrition during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/nutrition-during-pregnancy

Balestrieri, P., Ribolsi, M., Guarino, M., Emerenziani, S., Altomare, A., & Cicala, M. (2020). Nutritional aspects in
   inflammatory bowel diseases. Nutrients, 12(2), 372. https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fnu12020372

Bedosky, L. (2022). Resistant Starch 101: Potential Benefits, Foods that Contain it, and More.
    https://www.everydayhealth.com/diet-nutrition/resistant-starch-101/

Ben-Joseph, E. P. (2023). When should kids switch to nonfat milk? https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/start-skim-
    milk.html

Bhatia, A., Shatanof, R., and Bordoni, B. (2023). Embryology, Gastrointestinal. StatPearls.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537172/

Cancer Research UK (2022). Mercaptopurine (Xaluprine). https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/
    treatment/drugs/mercaptopurine

Crohn's and Colitis Foundation. (n.d.). What should I eat? https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/diet-and-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 475

    nutrition/what-should-i-eat

García-Montero, C., Fraile-Martinez, O., Rodriguez-Martín, S., Saz, J. V., Rodriguez, R. A., Moreno, J. M. P., Labarta, J.
    R., García-Honduvilla, N., Alvarez-Mon, M., Bravo, C., De Leon-Luis, J. A., & Ortega, M. A. (2023). The use of
   prebiotics from pregnancy and its complications: Health for mother and offspring--A narrative review. Foods,
   12(6), 1148. https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/foods12061148

Getz, M. (2022, June 10). How does your baby eat and poop in the womb? Babycenter.
    https://www.babycenter.com/pregnancy/your-baby/fetal-development-your-baby-s-digestive-
    system_40005566

Jin, J., Gao, L., Zou, X., Zhang, Y., Zheng, Z., Zhang, X,. Li, J., Tian, Z., Wang, X., Gu, J., Zhang, C., Wu, T., Wang, Z., &
   Zhang, Q. (2022). Gut dysbiosis promotes preeclampsia by regulating macrophages and trophoblasts. Circulation
   Research, 131(6), 492-506. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320771

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (n.d.). 5 foods to improve your digestion. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/
    wellness-and-prevention/5-foods-to-improve-your-digestion

Kaiser Permanente. (2015). Moxifloxacin. https://wa.kaiserpermanente.org/kbase/topic.jhtml?docId=hn-4012001

Lifespan Health System. (n.d.). Gastrointestinal issues during pregnancy. https://www.lifespan.org/centers-services/
    multidisciplinary-obstetric-medicine-service-moms/gi-issues-pregnancy

Mahadevan, U., Robinson, C., Bernasko, N., Boland, B., Chambers, C., Dubinsky, M., Friedman, S., Kane, S., Manthey,
    J., Sauberan, J., Stone, J., & Jain, R. (2019). Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy clinical care pathway: A
    report from the American Gastroenterological Association IBD Parenthood Project Working Group.
   Gastroenterology, 156(5), 1508-1524. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2018.12.022

Martinez, J., Kahana, D., Ghuman, S., Wilson, H., Wilson, J., Kim, S., Lagishetty, V., Jacobs, J., Sinha-Hikim, A., &
    Friedman, T. (2021). Unhealthy lifestyle and gut dysbiosis: A better understanding of the effects of poor diet and
   nicotine on the intestinal microbiome. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 12, 667066. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fendo.2021.667066

Mayo Clinic. (n.d.). Drugs and supplements. https://www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-supplements

Mayo Clinic (2023). Metronidazole (Oral Route). https://www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-supplements/metronidazole-
    oral-route/precautions/drg-20064745

Naeini, B., Rajabi, P., & Dehghani, S. (2021). Azathioprine-induced pellagra in a child with autoimmune hepatitis: A
   case report and literature review. Clinical Case Reports, 9(10), e04975. https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fccr3.4975

Nebraska Medicine. (2022, September 19). Diet and gastrointestinal disease: 8 best foods for gut health.
    https://www.nebraskamed.com/gastrointestinal-care/diet-and-gastrointestinaldisease-8-best-foods-for-gut-
    health

Nesta. (2019, August 27). Key components of a healthy diet for children and teens. https://www.nestacertified.com/
    key-components-of-a-healthy-diet-for-children-and-teens/

NHS (2021). Sulfasalazine. https://www.nhs.uk/medicines/sulfasalazine/

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2023). Eat healthy during pregnancy: Quick tips. U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services. https://health.gov/myhealthfinder/pregnancy/nutrition-and-physical-
    activity/eat-healthy-during-pregnancy-quick-tips

Oregon Health and Science University. (2023). Nutrition during pregnancy. https://www.ohsu.edu/womens-health/
    nutrition-during-pregnancy

Patel, J., & Rouster, A. (2023). Infant nutrition requirements and options. StatPearls. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK560758/

Peace Health. (2015). Metronidazole. https://www.peacehealth.org/medical-topics/id/hn-1153006

PeaceHealth (2023). Olsalazine Oral Capsule (OLSALAZINE-ORAL). https://www.peacehealth.org/medical-topics/id/
476 References

    fdbm30600-5003#fdbm30600-5003-3

Prescott, J., Drake, V., & Stevens, J. (2018). Medications and micronutrients: Identifying clinically relevant
   interactions and addressing nutritional needs. Journal of Pharmacy Technology, 34(5), 216-230. https://doi.org/
    10.1177%2F8755122518780742

Ratajczak, A., Szymczak-Tomczak, A., Rychter, A., Zawada, A., Dobrowolska, A., & Hrela-Kazmericzak, I. (2021).
   Does folic acid protect patients with inflammatory bowel disease from complications? Nutrients, 13(11), 4036.
    https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fnu13114036

Stanford Medicine Children's Health. (n.d.). 5 ways to boost your child's gut health.
    https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=5-ways-to-boost-your-childs-gut-health-197-29161

Tabani, A., & Olendzki, B. (2019, April 18). The correlation between pregnancy and the gut.
    https://www.umassmed.edu/nutrition/blog/blog-posts/2019/4/the-correlation-between-pregnancy-and-the-
    gut/

Thomas, L. (2023). Nutritional needs of young children (age 5-10). News-Medical.Net. https://www.news-
    medical.net/health/Nutritional-Needs-of-Young-Children-(Age-5-10).aspx

UMass Chan Medical School. (n.d.). IBD & pregnancy (the MELODY trial). https://www.umassmed.edu/maldonado-
    contreraslab/the-melody-trial/

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). Dietary guidelines for
   Americans 2020-2025 (9th ed.). https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans-2020-2025.pdf

Zhang, C., Li, L., Jin, B., Xu, X., Zuo, X., Li, Y., and Li, Z. (2021). The Effects of Delivery Mode on the Gut Microbiota
   and Health: State of Art. Frontiers in Microbiology, 12. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.724449.
    https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2021.724449/full

Chapter 19 Applying Clinical Judgment to Promote Nutrition for
Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Wellness

Academic Senate for California Community Colleges (ASCCC). (2021) Open Educational Resources Initiative.

Academic Master. (2018, September 13). Biology: Affiliation Integumentary and Musculoskeletal Systems.
    https://academic-master.com/affiliation-integumentary-and-skeletal-systems/

Benedetti, J. (2021, December). Diagnostic Tests for Skin Disorders. Merck Manual Professional Version. Retrieved
    May1, 2023, from https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/dermatologic-disorders/approach-to-the-
    dermatologic-patient/diagnostic-tests-for-skin-disorders

Benedetti, J. (2021, December 16). Foods that Fight Inflammation. Harvard Health Publishing. Retrieved May 3,
    2023, from https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/foods-that-fight-inflammation

Benedetti, J. (2021, August 17). The Best Foods for Vitamins and Minerals. Harvard Health Publishing. Retrieved
    May 3, 2023, from https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/the-best-foods-for-vitamins-and-minerals

Campbell, B. (2023). What to Eat When You are Trying to Heal. Cleveland Clinic. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/
    foods-to-help-healing

Campbell, B. (2021). Calcium Nutrition and Bone Health. Orthoinfo. https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/staying-healthy/
    calcium-nutrition-and-bone-health/

Cao, C., Xiao, Z., Wu, Y., & Ge, C. (2020, March 24). Diet and Skin Aging-From the Perspective of Food Nutrition.
   Nutrients, 12(3):870. https://doi: 10.3390/nu12030870

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, July 15). Consequences of Obesity. https://www.cdc.gov/
    obesity/basics/consequences.html

Cleveland Clinic, Health Essentials. (2023, January 31). What to Eat When You are Trying to Heal.
    https://health.clevelandclinic.org/foods-to-help-healing/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 477

Cleveland Clinic. (2022). Vitiligo. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/12419-vitiligo

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2023) Pressure Ulcers. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-
    diseases/pressure-ulcers

LibreTexts Medicine. (2022, March 29). Integumentary Assessment. Chippewa Valley Technical College.
    https://med.libretexts.org/@go/page/44631

LibreTexts Medicine (2019, June 23). Overview of the Musculoskeletal System. https://med.libretexts.org/@api/
    deki/files/43482/1rs7zxnq9vccticihr6q.jpefixme?revision=1

LibreTexts Musculoskeletal Assessment. (2022, April 5). Chippewa Valley Technical College.
    https://med.libretexts.org/@go/page/44622

Mayo Clinic. (2021, February 9). Vitamin D. https://www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-supplements-vitamin-d/
    art-20363792

Mazzasette, W. M., Julie Jenks, Chiara, & Nguyen, K.-L. (2021, May 17). Tissue Injury and Aging. ASCCC) Open
    Educational Resources Initiative. https://med.libretexts.org/@go/page/22268

Mazzasette, W. M., Julie Jenks, Chiara, & Nguyen, K.-L. (2021, May 17). Integumentary System. ASCCC Open
    Educational Resources Initiative. https://med.libretexts.org/@go/page/22269

Marriott, B., Birt, D., Stallings, V., & Yates, A., (2020) Present Knowledge in Nutrition (11th ed.). ILSI.

Meacham, J. (2022). Vitamins for Muscle Recovery. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/foods-
    supplements-for-sports-injury

Morris, G. (2022). 10 Ways Nurses and Nurse Leaders Can Improve Patient Education. Nurse Journal.
    https://nursejournal.org/articles/tips-to-improve-patient-education/

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2023). Basic Nutrition. https://www.nutrition.gov/topics/basic-nutrition

National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke (2023, March 17). Brain Basics: Know Your Brain. National
    Institutes of Health. https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/public-education/brain-basics/brain-basics-
    know-your-brain.

Nursing Skills - 2e Copyright © 2023 by Chippewa Valley Technical College is licensed under a Creative Commons
    Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted. https://wtcs.pressbooks.pub/nursingskills/

Orthopedic Oncology (2023, April 1). Genetic Basis of Musculoskeletal Disorders. Teach Me Orthopedics.
    https://teachmeorthopedics.info/genetic-basis-of-musculoskeletal-disorders/

Pagana, K., & Pagana, T. (2023). Mosby's Diagnostic and Laboratory Test Reference (16th ed.). Elsevier.

Saeg F, Orazi R, Bowers GM, Janis JE. Evidence-based nutritional interventions in wound care. Plast Reconstr Surg.
   2021 Jul 1;148(1):226-238. https://doi:10.1097/PRS.0000000000008061

Thau, L., Reddy, V., & Singh, P. (2022, October 10). Anatomy, Central Nervous System. National Library of Medicine.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK542179/

Travers, J. (2020). The Bone-Strength Plan. Welbeck Balance. London.

White, A. (2022). The Correct Method to Completing an Integumentary Assessment. Nursing CE Central.
    https://nursingcecentral.com/the-correct-method-to-completing-an-integumentary-assessment/

Chapter 20 Special Nutritional Considerations for Musculoskeletal and
Integumentary Health

American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. (2016, September). Position statement: Children and musculoskeletal
   health (Position Statement 1170). https://www.aaos.org/contentassets/
    1cd7f41417ec4dd4b5c4c48532183b96/1170-children-and-musculoskeletal-health.pdf

American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. (2023). Policy on use of fluoride. https://www.aapd.org/research/oral-
478 References

    health-policies--recommendations/use-of-fluoride/

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022, May 31). Osteopenia in newborns and infants. https://www.aap.org/en/
    patient-care/newborn-and-infant-nutrition/osteopenia-in-newborns-and-infants/

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). Osteoporosis prevention, screening, and diagnosis.
    https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/clinical-practice-guideline/articles/2021/09/osteoporosis-
    prevention-screening-and-diagnosis

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, October). Osteoporosis: Frequently asked questions.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/osteoporosis

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023, June). Nutrition during pregnancy: Frequently asked
   questions. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/nutrition-during-pregnancy

Azzolino, D., Spolidoro, G. C. I., Saporiti, E., Luchetti, C., Agostoni, C., & Cesari, M. (2021). Musculoskeletal changes
   across the lifespan: Nutrition and the life-course approach to prevention. Frontiers in Medicine, 8, 697954.
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.697954

Burmeister, M. A., Fincher, T. K., Todd, A. M., Virga, K. G., & Maddox, M. M. (2021). An overview of male osteoporosis.
   U.S. Pharmacist, 46(6):18-24.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, May 17). Maternal diet. https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/
    breastfeeding-special-circumstances/diet-and-micronutrients/maternal-diet.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, July 2). Vitamin D. https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/
    breastfeeding-special-circumstances/diet-and-micronutrients/vitamin-d.html

Chanchlani, R., Nemer, P., Sinha, R., Nemer, L., Krishnappa, V., Sochett, E., Safadi, F., & Raina, R. (2020). An overview
   of rickets in children. Kidney International Reports, 5(7), 980-990. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2020.03.025

DailyMed. (2018, November 30). Tetracycline hydrochloride capsule. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/
    drugInfo.cfm?setid=32a409a0-fea6-411a-8218-c1c7df46d664

Endocrine Society. (2022, January 24). Menopause and bone loss. https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/
    endocrine-library/menopause-and-bone-loss

Fulton, J., Evans, B., Miller, S., et al. (2016). Development of a nutrition screening tool for an outpatient wound
   center. Advances in Skin and Wound Care, 29(3), 136-142. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.asw.0000479803.09658.cb

Gelsomin, E. (2020, March 9). The scoop on protein powder. Harvard Health Publishing.
    https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/the-scoop-on-protein-powder-2020030918986

Ganesan, K., Goyal, A., & Roane, D. (2023, July 3). Bisphosphonate. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470248/

Hall, K., Ayuketah, A., Brychta, R., Cai, H., Cassimatis, T., Chen, K., Chung, S., Costa, E., Courville, A., Darcey, V.,
    Fletcher, L., Forde, C., Gharib, A., Guo, J., Howard, R., Joseph, P., McGehee, S., Ouwerkerk, R., Raisinger, K.,
    Rozga, I., Zhou, M. (2019). Ultra-processed diets cause excess calorie intake and weight gain: An inpatient
   randomized controlled trial of ad libitum food intake. Cell metabolism, 30(1), 67-77.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.cmet.2019.05.008

Harvard Health Publishing. (2022, August 15). The hidden dangers of protein powders.
    https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/the-hidden-dangers-of-protein-powders

Isaksen, I., & Dankel, S. (2023). Ultra-processed food consumption and cancer risk: A systematic review and meta-
   analysis. Clinical nutrition (Edinburgh, Scotland), 42(6), 919-928. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2023.03.018

Jang, J. Y., Kim, D., & Kim, N. D. (2023). Pathogenesis, intervention, and current status of drug development for
   sarcopenia: A review. Biomedicines, 11(6), 1635. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11061635

Klemm, S. (2020, July 21). How teen athletes can build muscles with protein. American Academy of Nutrition and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   References 479

    Dietetics. https://www.eatright.org/health/essential-nutrients/protein/how-teen-athletes-can-build-muscles-
    with-protein

Manley, S., & Mitchell, A. (2022). The impact of nutrition on pressure ulcer healing. British Journal of Nursing,
   31(12), S26-S30. https://doi.org/10.12968/bjon.2022.31.12.s26

March of Dimes. (2020, April). Eating healthy during pregnancy. https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/
    topics/pregnancy/eating-healthy-during-pregnancy

National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. (2023a, May). Osteoporosis in men.
    https://www.niams.nih.gov/health-topics/osteoporosis-men

National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. (2023b, May). Pregnancy, breastfeeding, and
   bone health. https://www.niams.nih.gov/health-topics/pregnancy-breastfeeding-and-bone-health

Office of Dietary Supplements. (2022, April 26). Fluoride: Fact sheet for health professionals. National Institutes of
    Health. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Fluoride-HealthProfessional/

Nowicki, P., Kemppainen, J., Maskill, L., & Cassidy, J. (2019). The role of obesity in pediatric orthopedics. Journal of
   the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Global research & reviews, 3(5), e036. https://doi.org/10.5435/
    JAAOSGlobal-D-19-00036

Panuganti, K. K., Nguyen, M., & Kshirsagar, R. K. (2023, August 8). Obesity (PMID 29083734). National Library of
    Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459357/

Prado, C., Landi, F., Chew, S., Atherton, P. J., Molinger, J., Ruck, T., & Gonzalez, M. C. (2022). Advances in muscle
   health and nutrition: A guide for healthcare professionals. Clinical Nutrition, 41(10), 2244-2263. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.clnu.2022.07.041

Reid, I., & Bolland, M. (2020). Calcium and/or vitamin D supplementation for the prevention of fragility fractures:
   Who needs it? Nutrients, 12(4), 1011. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12041011

Thornton-Evans, G., Junger, M. L., Lin, M., Wei, L. ,Espinoza, L., & Beltran-Aguilar, E. (2019, February 1). Use of
    Toothpaste and Toothbrushing Patterns Among Children and Adolescents -- United States, 2013-2016. Centers
   for Disease Control and Prevention. Weekly, 68(4); 87-90. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/
    mm6804a3.htm

Tihtonen, K., Korhonen, P., Isojärvi, J., Ojala, R., Ashorn, U., Ashorn, P., & Tammela, O. (2022). Calcium
    supplementation during pregnancy and maternal and offspring bone health: a systematic review and meta-
   analysis. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1509(1), 23-36. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14705

University of Sheffield. (n.d.). FRAX fracture risk assessment tool. https://frax.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.aspx?country=9
480 References
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Index 481

INDEX

Symbols                          albumin levels 81                anorexia 88, 157, 200, 236, 281
                                 albumin-to-creatinine-ratio 301  antepartum 112
24-hour creatinine clearance     alcohol 71, 99, 110, 122, 164,   anti-inflammatory diet 287
  test 300                                                        Antibiotics 72, 88, 289, 290, 403
                                   214                            antibodies 276
24-hour food recall 253          alcohol consumption 238          anticancer therapy 199
                                 Alcohol intake 254               anticoagulant medications 197
A                                alcohol use 71                   anticonvulsant medications 122
                                 aldosterone 152, 161, 298        Anticonvulsant/Antiepileptic
abdomen 66, 338                  allergies 253, 255
abdominal assessment 66          Alopecia 377                       Medications 120
abdominal distention 64, 68      Alprazolam 121                   Anticonvulsants 119
abdominal pain 64, 70            ALS 118, 119                     Antidepressants 72, 121, 123
Abdominal palpation 299          altitude 275                     antidiuretic hormone (ADH 97
abnormal heart rhythm 88         aluminum 95                      Antiepileptics 121
Absolute iron deficiency anemia  Alveolar ducts 252               antioxidant 42
                                 alveolar sacs 251                antioxidant properties 72
  200                            alveolarization 275, 276         antioxidant supplements 279
absorption 42, 46, 51, 62, 69,   Alzheimer's disease 73, 90, 95,  Antioxidants 262, 277, 279
                                                                  antipsychotic medications 123
  116, 148, 198, 198, 290, 335,    115, 117                       Antipsychotics 121
  352, 355                       American Diabetes Association    Antiseizure medications 404
accessory muscles 251                                             anus 68, 70, 338
acid reflux 149                    15, 28                         anxiety 95, 258, 266
acid-base balance 301            American Heart Association 15,   Aortic aneurysm 68
acidic foods 70                                                   aortic disease 236
Acromegaly 161                     15, 30                         aortic pulsations 68
Action for Healthy Kids 15       amino acid pool 32               Aphasia 117
action potential 79              amino acids 32, 79, 287          apoptosis 279
activities of daily living 200   amiodarone 160                   appetite 70, 122
acute bacterial infection 259    Amitriptyline 120, 121, 123      appetite suppression 157
Addison's disease 130, 132, 162  ammonia toxicity 275             apraxia 117
adiposity 93, 149, 152           Amoxicillin- Clavulanate 360,    arterial blood gases 258
adolescence 155, 357                                              arteries 208, 212, 237
Adrenal glands 129, 152, 161,      362                            arterioles 212
  298                            Amphetamines 121                 arteriosclerosis 208
Adrenal insufficiency 132, 135,  amputation 159                   Artificial sugars 96
  161                            amylase 63                       ascorbic acid 46, 108
adrenocorticotropic hormone      Amyloids 93                      aspartame 115
  (ACTH) 161                     anaerobic 193                    aspiration pneumonia 120
adult-onset obesity 116          androgenic steroids 161, 161     aspirin 197
adulthood 278                    anemia 113, 171, 188, 191, 196,  assessment 12
afferent 78                                                       assessment of the digestive
aging 116, 157, 197, 251, 369      258, 259, 261, 317
airway assessment scale 257      angina 236                         system 64
airway hyperreactivity 253       angiogenesis 46                  assessment of the renal system
airway resistance 276            angiotensin-converting enzyme
airways 250
Akkermansia muciniphila 351        (ACE) inhibitors 254
albumin 81, 93, 173, 219, 258    animal-based foods 30
                                 Anorectal anomalies 64
482 Index

  299                            bicarbonate 301                  brain fog 119
asthma 253, 260, 279, 282, 286   Bilateral edema 261              brain metabolism 194
astrocytes 91                    bile 63                          brain radiation therapy 160
ataxia 119                       Biliary anomalies 64             breast milk 113, 191, 262, 355
ataxic gait 84                   bilious vomiting 64              breast tissue development 147
atelectasis 251, 259             bilirubin 153                    breastfeeding 177, 191, 233,
atherosclerosis 235, 284         bioavailability 34
Athletes 28, 196, 398, 399       biotin 45, 47, 71, 108             395, 399
Atkins diet 98                   birth abnormalities 110          breathing 265
atorvastatin 243                 birth weight 189, 190            breathlessness 256
atresia 64                       bisphosphonates 88, 403          Bronchioles 252
atria 209                        Bitot's spots 338                bronchitis 259
atrial fibrillation 214          bladder 298                      bronchodilators 289
atrial flutter 214               Bladder cancer 325               bruising 171
atrioventricular node (AV node)  Bladder scanning 299             buccal mucosa 65, 337
                                 bleeding 171, 199                BUN 302
  209                            bleeding disorders 188           bundle of His 209
atrophic gastritis 70            blindness 159                    burning pain 83
attention deficit disorder 111   bloating 70, 263
attention span 115               blood 96                         C
attention-deficit hyperactivity  blood abnormalities 197
                                 Blood analysis 172               cadmium 95
  disorder (ADHD) 194            blood disorders 173, 182         caffeine 70, 99, 109, 111, 214,
aural atresia 64                 blood flow 274, 284
Auscultation 66, 257             blood glucose 26, 136, 139         289
autism 111, 117                  blood glucose levels 112, 140,   calciferol 108
autism spectrum disorder 111                                      calcitriol 165
Autoimmune disorders 191, 369      149, 152                       Calcium 51, 70, 108, 121, 135,
autonomic nervous system 78      blood loss 188
axons 79, 110                    blood pressure 51, 148, 208,       164, 214, 301, 307, 392, 393,
Azathioprine 360, 361                                               396
                                   219, 230, 240, 264             calcium concentrations 147
B                                blood sugar 28                   Calcium stones 325
                                 blood transfusion 189            California MyPlate for Gestational
B vitamins 44, 135               blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 300      Diabetes 150
B12 164, 258                     blood volume 188, 274            caloric intake 97, 357
bacterial vaginosis (BV) 322     blood-gas barrier 275            calories 8, 29, 71
bad cholesterol 72               Bloody stool 171                 cancer drugs 160
Balsalazide 360, 361             BMI 10, 219, 260                 cancer prevention 9
Banding of nails 261             Body mass index (BMI) 9          cancer-associated anemia 200
Barbiturates 120                 body measurements 10             cancers 70
bariatric surgery 190            body weight 121, 369             capillaries 208
basal ganglia 368                bone density 290, 393, 395, 399  capnography 260
Basophils 259                    bone loss 385                    caput medusae 68
behavioral disorders 111         Bone Marrow Aspiration/Biopsy    Carbamazepine 120, 120, 122
Bell's palsy 112                                                  carbohydrate loading 28
Benign prostatic hyperplasia       173                            carbohydrates 8, 25, 27, 118,
                                 bones 369                          139, 148
  (BPH) 325                      bowel sounds 66, 66              carboxypeptidase 63
Benzodiazepines 121              Braden Scale 372                 carcinogens 71
beta-2 adrenergic receptor       brain 78, 368                    Cardiac cachexia 197
                                 brain development 147            cardiac muscle 208
  agonists 289                                                    cardiac output 230
beta-amyloid aggregation 118                                      cardiomyopathy 216
Beta-carotene 42

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Index 483

cardiovascular disease 216, 217,    Disease (COPD) 285            congenital anomalies 64
  231, 232, 239                   chronic pain 95                 congenital heart defects 231
                                  chronic pelvic pain syndrome    congenital heart disease 231,
cardiovascular system 208
cardiovascular workload 257         324                             234
Carney complex 161                Chronic pulmonary diseases 280  congestive heart failure 197
cartilage 369                     chyme 63, 69, 335               Congregate Nutrition Program
Celiac disease 70, 191, 194       chymotrypsinogen 63
cellular depolarization 79        Ciprofloxacin 361                 265
cellular metabolism 275           circulatory systems 209         constipation 64, 70, 70, 72, 151,
cellulose 25                      Cirrhosis 68, 73
central diabetes insipidus 97     Citalopram 121                    358
central hypothyroidism 160        citric acid cycle 45            Consumer health information 16
central nervous system (CNS) 78   Cleft lip 70                    Controlling Nutritional Status
cerebral autoregulation 93        Cleft palate 70
Cerebral blood flow 92, 94        Client education 139, 177         (CONUT) 81, 92
cerebral cortex 79                client questions 17             cooking techniques 31, 50
cerebrum 79                       client teaching 17, 382         COPD 260
cesarean delivery 189             clinical judgment 173           coping mechanisms 258
cesarean section 351              Clonazepam 121, 122             Copper 51, 86, 109, 171
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorder      Clostridium difficile 72        CoQ10 119, 121
                                  Clozapine 121, 123              coronary artery disease 241
  94                              clubbing 371                    coronary heart disease 216, 236
Chelation therapy 86              Coagulopathy 171                corpus luteum 146
chemotherapy 327                  Cobalamin 48, 85, 109           corticosteroid therapy 259
chest tightness 255               coenzyme 43                     corticosteroids 289, 290
chest wall 274                    Coenzyme Q10 119                corticotropin-releasing hormone
chest x-ray 260                   cognitive decline 93
chewing 117                       cognitive function 197            149
Cheyne-Stokes respiration 252     cognitive performance 114       cortisol 129, 152, 161, 162, 298
Child and Adult Care Food         cognitive processing 194        cortisol levels 274
                                  colchicine 116                  Corynebacterium 351
  Program 13, 328                 cold 261                        costovertebral angle 300
childhood diet 234                cold intolerance 151            cough 255, 280
childhood obesity 114, 276        Collagen 397                    County Health Rankings &
Chloride 51, 136, 301             collagen synthesis 46, 395
Chlorpromazine 120, 123           colon cancer 71, 72, 200          Roadmaps (CHR&R) 19
choking 233                       colostrum 276                   COVID-19 73
cholecystokinin 29, 63, 157       coma 83                         COVID-19 infection 301
Cholelithiasis 352                Commodity Supplemental Food     cow's milk 262
cholestasis 193                                                   crackling 257
cholesterol 31, 34, 72, 91, 220     Program 328                   creatinine clearance 300
cholesterol levels 217            Common cold 284                 crepitus 257, 375
choline 45, 48, 110               communication 16                cretinism 111
chondrogenesis 161                comorbid conditions 100         Crohn's disease 351, 360
Chromium 51, 108, 164             comorbidities 303               Cullen's sign 68
Chronic bronchitis 280            Complete Blood Count 258        cultural assessment 17
chronic hypoxic state 258         Complex carbohydrates 26, 69,   cultural sensitivity 180
chronic kidney disease 259, 317                                   curcumin 287
chronic obstructive pulmonary       264                           Cushing's disease/syndrome
                                  computed tomography (CT) 260
  disease 279, 280                concentration 82, 195             130, 132, 135
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary                                     Cushing's syndrome 68, 162
                                                                  cyanosis 65, 66, 257
                                                                  cysteine 320
                                                                  Cysteine stones 326
484 Index

Cystic anomalies 64               Dietary Guidelines for Americans  EBP 19
cystic fibrosis 194, 259            2020-2025 13                    Ecchymosis 68
cystinuria 320                                                      edema 264, 372
cystitis 302                      Dietary history 170               educational strategies 306
cytokines 157, 288                dietary recall 12                 efferent 78
                                  dietary recommendations 136       eicosapentaenoic acid 97
D                                 Dietary Supplement Health and     elastase 63
                                                                    Elastic recoil 252
d-alpha-tocopherol 108              Education Act (DSHEA) 54        elasticity 252
Daily Value 45                    dietary supplements 54            Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG)
Daily Values 45                   Differential White Blood Cell
dairy 70, 286                                                         171, 210
dairy intake 70                     (Leukocyte) Count 259           electrolyte disturbances 72
DASH diet 28                      Diffusion 252                     electrolyte levels 243, 301
deep palpation 67, 299            digestion 32, 61, 63, 334         electrolytes 69
dehydrated 318                    digestive enzymes 70              elemental iron 190, 201
dehydration 37, 72, 80, 99, 116,  digestive organs 62               embolus 284
                                  digestive process 61, 63, 69      Emphysema 280
  258, 259, 261, 380              digestive system 62, 70           endocrine disorders 131, 134
delayed speech 109                Dim-light vision 261              endocrine glands 155
dementia 83, 116                  disaccharides 26                  endocrine system 128
Demyelinating polyneuropathies    disease management 159            endorphin 148
                                  disease prevention 217            endothelial cells 82
  112                             disequilibrium 80                 Energy 29, 62, 356
dental checkups 395               disproportionate short stature    energy expenditure 358
dental health 112                                                   energy metabolism 117
denture adhesive 90                 161                             energy supply 28
Depot medroxyprogesterone         diuretics 88, 243                 enkephalin 148
                                  Diversity Implications 20         enteral feeding 120
  acetate 404                     diverticulitis 359                enteral feedings 93
depression 82, 95, 115, 117,      dizziness 80, 171, 195, 230       Enteral nutrition 35
                                  DNA synthesis 82                  enteral tube feedings 122
  123, 197, 266                   docosahexaenoic acid 97           enterocytes 335
dermatitis 83                     docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 392    enterohepatic circulation 153
Desipramine 120                   dopamine 82, 114                  enuresis 319
DEXA 385                          Doxepin 121                       enzymes 26
dextrose 152                      drug use 254                      Eosinophilic esophagitis 70
diabetes 71, 72, 132, 157, 162,   Drug-food interactions 403        Eosinophils 259
                                  drug-resistant epilepsy 117       epiglottis 65
  164                             drug-food interactions 120, 360   epilepsy 95, 96, 98, 117, 120,
diabetes insipidus 136            drugs 72
diagnostic assessment 258         duodenum 69, 335                    121
diagnostic tests 372, 372         Dwarfism 161                      epinephrine 161
dialysis 35, 303, 318             dysbiosis 71, 71, 351             erythema 68
diarrhea 72, 83                   dyslipidemia 93                   erythropoiesis 188, 193, 200
Diascopy 372                      dyspareunia 316                   erythropoietin 258, 298
Diazepam 121, 122                 dysphagia 93, 117, 119            erythropoietin deficiencies 177
diet 8                            Dyspnea 171, 231, 256, 260,       erythropoietin production 95
Diet recalls 139                                                    esophageal atresia 64
Dietary Approaches to Stop          263, 281                        Esophageal reflux 70
                                                                    esophagus 63, 70
  Hypertension 219                E
Dietary Approaches to Stop
                                  eating behaviors 178, 234
  Hypertension diet (DASH) 27     eating disorder 114
Dietary evaluation 11             eating disorders 236
dietary fiber 163
Dietary Guidelines 55

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Index 485

essential amino acids 32          fluid balance 152, 298, 300, 301   frontal lobes 368
estrogen 146, 155                 fluid volume 264                   fructose 111
estrogen levels 149               Fluids 306                         functional fiber 163
Ethosuximide 122                  Fluoride 51, 95, 109, 395, 396     Functional iron deficiency 200
Evaluation of nutritional         fluoxetine 123                     Furosemide 164, 243
                                  Fluvoxamine 121
  strategies 268                  folate 45, 47, 71, 110, 171, 175,  G
Evidence-based practice 11
Exercise 222                        190, 258                         GABA 82
exhaustion 151                    folate deficiencies 198            Gabapentin 120, 121
extracellular matrix 275          folate deficiency 352              gait 119, 375
                                  Folate                             galactose 26
F                                                                    galactosemia 356
                                    (vitamin B9) 109                 gallbladder 62, 63, 67, 69, 335
failure to thrive 153             folic acid 46, 70                  gamma-aminobutyric acid
Fainting 171, 195                 folic acid deficiency 190
familial acromegaly 161           folic acid supplements 149           [GABA] 79
family history 255                food 8                             gangliosides 111
family medical history 255, 369   Food allergies 70                  gas exchange 250
Farmers Market Grant Program      Food and Drug Administration 8     gastric emptying 63, 197
                                  food and drug interactions 289     gastric or ileac resection 191
  13                              Food Assistance Programs 13        gastrin 69
Farmers Market Nutrition Program  food consistency 70                Gastroesophageal reflux disease
                                  food cravings 171
  (FNMP) 13                       food deserts 18                      70, 72, 352
fasting serum glucose level 158   food diary 139                     gastrointestinal change theory
Fat 8, 307                        food enrichment 44
fat intake 70                     Food fortification 52                149
fat-soluble vitamins 29, 42       food frequency 12                  gastrointestinal disease 359
fatigue 119, 171, 197, 200, 261,  food frequency questionnaires      gastrointestinal health 350
                                                                     gastrointestinal system 62, 70,
  266                               139
Fats 29                           Food Hero 21                         334, 353
fatty acids 63                    Food insecurity 18, 328            gene mutation 111
FDA 14, 48                        food journal 140                   Genetic hemochromatosis 199
fermented foods 26                Food literacy 18                   Genu varum 375
ferritin 258                      food packaging 9                   gestation 189
ferrous sulfate 95, 183           food preferences 178               gestational diabetes 112, 149,
fertility 109                     food preparation 221
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder   food processing 44                   233
                                  Food security 18                   gestational thyrotoxicosis 151
  111                             Food swamps 18                     ghrelin 157
fetal alcohol syndrome 111        Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 8     Gingivitis 70
fetal brain development 148       formula 233, 262, 355, 395         glia cells 91
fetal development 82, 352         fortified foods 46                 glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
fetal health 109                  fractures 165, 290, 399, 401
Fetal lung development 275        FRAX assessment 401                  35, 300, 316
fetal skeletal development 392    free radicals 42, 279              glomerulus 297
fiber 26, 72, 217, 351            fremitus 257                       Glossitis 261
fiber intake 70                   frenulum 66                        glucagon 157
fibrotic tissue 283               Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program  Glucagon-like protein-1 (GLP-1)
fibrous plaques 284
fight-or-flight 161                 (FFVP) 13                          receptor agonists 121
fissures 70                                                          glucocorticoid levels 148
fistula 64                                                           gluconeogenesis 298
flavonoids 116, 262, 286                                             Glucose 26, 63, 82, 112
                                                                     glucose control 162
                                                                     glucose intolerance 149
486 Index

glucose metabolism 114            Healthy People 2030 10              (HCG) 146
Glycemic control 129              healthy weight 369                hunger 92, 99
glycemic index 28, 150            heart 208                         Hunger Vital Sign screening 18
glycemic load 29                  heart attack 241                  Huntington's disease 73
glycogen 28                       heart disease 30, 32              hydralazine 84
glycolysis 117                    heart failure 189, 197, 237, 243  hydration 36, 99, 380, 392
glycoproteins 69                  heart rate 195                    hydrochlorothiazide 165
goiter 52, 87, 130, 163           heartburn 149                     hydrogenated oils 31
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone    Hematocrit 258                    hyperamylasemia 64
                                  hematologic disorders 173         hypercarbia 252
  agonists 404                    hematologic malignancies 202      hyperemesis gravidarum 148,
granulocytes 282                  hematologic wellness 170
Graves' disease 130, 132, 151,    Hematopoiesis 191                   352
                                  hematuria 302                     Hyperemia 274
  160, 191                        hemoglobin 90, 183, 258, 397      Hyperglycemia 153, 158, 164
gray matter 78, 114               hemoglobin A1C 158                hyperhomocysteinemia 122
Grey Turner's sign 68             hemoglobinopathy 198              hyperinsulinemia 152
growth hormone 82, 152, 153,      hemolysis 153, 258                hyperkalemia 88, 243
                                  Hemophilia 199                    hyperlipidemia 72, 236
  156, 161, 177                   Hemorrhoids 70                    hypermagnesemia 287
guaiac test 68                    hemostasis 191                    hyperoxaluria 320
Guillain-Barré syndrome 94, 113   hepatic encephalopathy 73         hyperplasia 152
gums 65, 70, 337                  hepatic inflammation 73           hyperreactive hematopoiesis
gut bacteria 115, 350             hepatic stores 190
gut health 71, 72, 359            hepatotoxicity 122                  198
gut homeostasis 71, 72            hexosaminidase A 111              hyperresonance 257
gut microbiome 94, 113, 120       high blood pressure 240           hypersensitivity reactions 259
gut-brain axis 73                 High-density lipid (HDL)          hypertension 68, 71, 189, 216,
Gut-liver axis 73
                                    cholesterol 217                   217, 219, 230, 240, 317
H                                 high-density lipoprotein 31, 237  hypertensive disorders of
                                  High-fat diets 71
H2 receptor antagonists 191       hippocampus 113                     pregnancy (HDOP) 112
hair 371                          Hirsutism 377                     Hyperthyroidism 132, 151, 160,
hair loss 261                     histamine 263
Haloperidol 121                   holistic assessment 381             163
Haptoglobin 173                   holistic care 170                 hyperventilation 259
hard palate 337                   holistic health 381               hypoalbuminemia 219
Hartnup disease 47                Holistic nutritional assessment   hypocalcemia 88, 122
Hashimoto's thyroiditis 160                                         hypoglycemia 113, 135, 136,
HCG 149                             domains 180
HCO3 260                          holistic practice 11                152, 164
headaches 86, 113, 195, 261       Home-Delivered Nutrition          Hypogonadism 201
health 9                                                            hypokalemia 88, 243
health disparities 137, 306         Program 265                     hypomagnesemia 153
health education interventions    homeostasis 71, 71, 128           hyponatremia 96, 243
                                  homeostasis of the gut 71         hypoperfusion 93
  182                             homocysteine 82, 121, 121         Hypotension 171
health equity 19                  hormones 128, 298                 hypothalamic-pituitary-somatotropic
health history 64, 130, 170, 369  Household Food Security Survey
Health literacy 16, 19, 180, 182                                      157
healthy diet 136                    (HFSS) 18                       hypothalamus 109, 128, 146
healthy eating patterns 356       human chorionic gonadotropin      Hypothyroidism 132, 151, 163,
Healthy Fluid Milk Incentives
                                                                      201
  (HFMI) 13                                                         hypovolemic shock 189, 189
                                                                    hypoxemia 265

Access for free at openstax.org
hypoxia 252, 259, 275, 290       Iodine 51, 82, 87, 109, 111,                                            Index 487
                                   151, 160, 163
I                                                                 lactotroph hyperplasia 147
                                 iodine deficiency 131, 133       large intestine 336
icterus 338                      iodine-induced pituitary         Laryngitis 284
Imipramine 120, 121                                               laryngoscope 65
immune function 152                adenoma 160                    laryngospasm 65
immune system 31, 289            iodized salt 131                 larynx 69, 251
immunity 73                      IQ 109                           Laxatives 72
immunoglobins 82                 Iron 51, 70, 82, 109, 110, 171,  lean muscle mass 34
immunoglobulin A 276                                              leptin 157
Immunoglobulin A 253               174, 192, 258, 342, 397        Levetiracetam 122
immunomodulators 123             iron deficiency 95, 113, 188,    levodopa 121
immunosuppressant therapy                                         Levofloxacin 289, 289
                                   194                            levothyroxine 164
  259                            iron deficiency anemia 173, 318  life expectancy 287
In vitro fertilization 189       iron overload 201                lightheadedness 230
induration 68                    Iron sequestration 200           lignin 163
infancy 152, 275                 iron stores 188, 190, 200        lingual lipase 29
Infant formula 233, 355          iron supplement 51, 190, 201     lipase 63
infection 189                    Iron-restricted erythropoiesis   lipid infusion 153
inflammation 73, 119, 278, 351,                                   lipid plaques 284
                                   200                            lipids 118, 239
  359, 381, 384                  Irritability 195                 lips 65, 70, 337
inflammatory bowel disease 191   ischemia 64                      lithium 160
inflammatory muscle disease      isoniazid 84                     liver 62, 64, 67, 67, 69, 123, 190
                                                                  liver disease 35, 259
  112                            J                                liver failure 68
inflammatory response 163                                         liver toxicity 110
influenza 259                    jaundice 64, 68                  long chain fatty acids 355
Ingestion 61, 334                Johns Hopkins Medicine 15        Long QT syndrome 211
injury-induced bleeding 199      joint pain 369                   long-chain polyunsaturated fatty
insomnia 123                     joints 199
Inspection 66                                                       acids 114, 118
insulin 63, 113, 157             K                                loop diuretics 164
insulin resistance 130, 149                                       Lordosis 375
insulin-dependent diabetes 158   ketogenic diet 96, 96, 98, 117,  loss of appetite 122
insulin-like growth factor 82,     161                            loss of sensation 83
                                                                  low-density lipid (LDL) cholesterol
  153                            ketosis 122
Integrative nutrition 11         kidney cancer 326                  levels 217
integumentary system 368, 370    kidney disease 162               low-density lipoprotein 31
interdisciplinary team 10        Kidney Disease 35                low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
Interferon beta-1a 123           kidney failure 86, 159
Intermittent fasting 100         kidney stones 122, 302, 316        cholesterol 237
Interstitial cystitis, 324       kidneys 96, 296                  low-protein diet 35
intestinal microbiota 71         koilonychia 339                  low-sodium diet 326
Intestine 70                     Korsakoff's syndrome 83          lower gastrointestinal system 62,
Intoeing 375                     kyphoscoliosis 253
intramuscular (IM) vitamin K     Kyphosis 375                       63
                                                                  lower respiratory tract 251, 284
  prophylaxis 193                L                                lung cancer 254, 279
intrauterine growth restriction                                   lung capacity 279
                                 laboratory assessment 258        lung development 275
  275                            lactase 28                       Lung disease 280
intrinsic factor 69, 70, 335     lactation 399
inversely related 286            Lactobacillus 72, 351
                                 lactose 26, 28
                                 lactose intolerance 28
                                 lactose-free diet 356
488 Index

lung function 279                 melena 68                         mononucleosis 259
lung growth 276                   memory 82, 110                    monosaccharide 26
lung parenchyma inflammation      Menopause 399                     monounsaturated fats 30
                                  menorrhagia 195                   mood disorders 115
  284                             menstruation 180, 195             morbidity 111
lung volume 276                   Mental health 73                  morning sickness 112
lycopene 265                      mental health disorders 114       motivation 182
Lymphocytes 259                   Mercaptopurine 360, 361           motivational interviewing 183
                                  mercury 95, 95                    Mouth 70, 257
M                                 Mesalamine 360, 361               mouth floor 66
                                  metabolic alkalosis 260           movement 368, 369
Macrocytic anemia 173, 190        metabolic rate 114                movement potential 370
macroglossia 161                  metabolic syndrome 71, 93         Moxifloxacin 361
macrominerals 50                  Metabolic-associated fatty liver  Moxifloxacin and Ciprofloxacin
Macronutrients 8, 29, 115
macrophages 287                     disease 35                        360
Macrosomia 152                    metabolism 26, 29, 32, 44, 52,    MS 119, 123
Magnesium 51, 82, 88, 109,                                          mucins 69
                                    62, 70, 73, 135, 152, 169, 337  mucosal function 350
  113, 119, 136, 214, 287, 301,   Metformin 72, 85, 113, 116, 164   mucus 263
  307, 380                        Methylphenidate 121               multidisciplinary approach 268
malabsorption 172, 198, 259,      Metronidazole 360, 362            multiple births 188
  343, 352                        microbial growth 72, 341          multiple endocrine neoplasia type
Mallampati score 257              microbiome 350
malnutrition 35, 92, 154, 258,    microbiota 71                       1 161
  260, 266, 274, 402              Microcytic anemia 173             multiple myeloma 202
Malnutrition Universal Screening  micronutrient deficiencies 191,   Multiple sclerosis 73, 117
  Tool (MUST) 172                                                   Multivitamins 264
malrotation 64                      198                             muscle cramps 151
maltose 26                        Micronutrient deficiency 114,     muscle development 398
Manganese 51                                                        muscle mass 116, 260, 290,
mastication 69, 334                 170, 261
maternal death 112                micronutrient intake 154            400, 401
maternal nutrition during         Micronutrients 8, 318             muscle strength 197, 261
  pregnancy 318                   micturition 299                   muscle synthesis 265
Mayo Clinic 15                    midarm circumference (MAC)        Muscle tone 370
McCune-Albright syndrome 161                                        muscle weakness 83, 290
meal plan 178, 268                  170                             muscles 34, 368, 384
meal planning 50                  Midazolam 122                     muscular arteries 212
meal preparation 234              midbrain 79                       musculoskeletal system 368
Meals on Wheels America 15        migraine 82, 113                  Musculoskeletal tissue 370
mechanical ventilation 290        mineral deficiencies 72           myasthenia gravis 112, 119
meconium 68                       minerals 50                       myelin 79, 94
meconium aspiration 153           Mini Nutritional Assessment 92,   myelin production 82
medical history 12                                                  myelodysplasia 202
medications 72, 255                 172, 402                        myocardial infarction 239
Mediterranean diet 27, 97, 114,   Mirtazapine 121                   MyPlate 13, 50, 222, 303
  219, 222, 381                   mitochondrial function 117
Mediterranean-DASH Intervention   mitochondrial respiration 82      N
  for Neurodegenerative Delay     mobility 400
  (MIND) diet 265                 Molybdenum 51                     nail clubbing 257
medulla 79                        monoamine oxidase inhibitors      nails 261, 371
megaloblastic anemia 45                                             nasal congestion 274
                                    (MAOIs) 123                     nasopharynx 69
                                  Monoamines 79
                                  Monocytes 259

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Index 489

National Action Plan to Improve      non-cystic anomalies 64             omega-6 30
  Health Literacy 16                 Nonelemental iron 190               omega-6 fatty acids 90, 97
                                     nonessential amino acids 32         Omphalitis 68
National Alliance for Nutrition and  nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory      Opioids 72
  Activity 15                                                            optic neuropathy 85
                                       drug 254, 374                     oral health 197
National Association of Farmers      norepinephrine 161                  oral hygiene 396
  Market Nutrition Programs          normal sinus rhythm (NSR) 210       Oral iron replacement 195
  (NAFMNP) 13                        Nortripgyline 120                   Oral palate 70
                                     Nose 251, 257                       oropharynx 66, 337
National Council Licensure           NSAIDS 382                          orthopedic surgery 397
  Examination (NCLEX) 11             nucleases 63                        orthopnea 256
                                     numbness 84                         osteoarthritis 369, 375
National Health and Nutrition        nursing process 12                  osteopenia 393, 395
  Examination Survey (NHANES)        nutrient deficiencies 394           osteoporosis 43, 201, 290, 400
  189                                nutrient deficiency 253             otitis media 284
                                     nutrients 8                         Ovaries 129
National School Lunch Program        Nutrition 8                         over-the-counter medications
  13, 328                            nutrition facts food label 48
                                     Nutrition Facts label 14              254
nausea 88, 148                       Nutrition Labeling and Education    Overactive bladder (OAB) 324
NCSBN 11                                                                 overweight 260
NCSBN Clinical Judgment                Act 9                             Oxcarbazepine 122
                                     nutritional assessment 170          oxidation 43
  Measurement Model (NCJMM)          nutritional deficiencies 68, 360    oxidative stress 117, 117, 163,
  11                                 nutritional evaluation 138
near-syncope 230                     nutritional goals 134, 136, 178       198, 274, 277, 279
necrotizing enterocolitis 356        nutritional interventions 182       oxygen saturation 193
nephrolithiasis 316, 325             nutritional lifestyle 181           oxygen therapy 290
nephron 297                          nutritional literacy 182            oxygenation 250, 257, 258, 261
nerve cells 79                       nutritional plan 140                oxyhemoglobin 90
nerve transmission 82                Nutritional Risk in Critically Ill
neural tube defects 46                                                   P
neurodegeneration 115                  (NUTRIC) 172
neurodevelopment 148                 Nutritional Risk Screening 2002     pack-years 254
neurogenesis 118                                                         PaCO 2 259
neuroinflammation 117                  (NRS2002) 172                     pain 80
Neuroleptics 121                                                         palates 66
neurologic assessment 80             O                                   Pallor 171, 257, 261
neurological development 108,                                            palpation 67, 257, 299
  113                                obesity 71, 154, 260, 397           Palpitations 261
neurological system 368              Objective data 370                  pancreas 62, 69, 129, 152, 157,
neuromuscular coordination 82        obstructive sleep apnea 257
neuromuscular junctions 78           ofatumumab 123                        335
neurons 79, 110                      oils 31                             Pancreatic amylase 26
neuropathies 85                      Olanzapine 121                      Pancreatic hemorrhage 68
neuropathy 159                       older adults 71                     pancreatic insufficiency 194
Neuroplasticity 92                   Older Americans Act 328             Pantothenic acid 47
neurotransmission 114                Oligohydramnios 318                 PaO2 259
neurotransmitter function 194        Oligosaccharides 26                 parasympathetic nervous system
neurotransmitters 79, 113            Olsalazine 360, 361
Neutropenia 171                      omega-3 30                            78
neutrophils 82, 259, 287             omega-3 fatty acids 90, 97, 111,    parathyroid gland 147
newborn 68                                                               parathyroid hormone (PTH) 147
Niacin 47, 83, 109, 164                288, 392                          parenchyma 297
Nitrogen balance 34                  omega-3 index 97, 97
490 Index

parenteral iron replacement 198     222                               prevent respiratory tract
parenteral nutrition 355          physiological factors on nutrition    infections 287
parenteral supplementation 359
paresthesia 83, 261                 177                               Prevotella 351
Parkinson's disease 73, 91, 95,   pica 171, 261                       Primary adrenal insufficiency
                                  Pineal gland 129
  119, 121, 368                   pituitary adenoma 157                 162
parotid glands 334                pituitary gland 128, 146            Primary endocrine disorders
paroxetine 123                    placenta 146
passive immunity 191              Placenta previa 189                   129, 157
Patch testing 372                 Placental abruption 189             primary health promotion 190
patent ductus arteriosus 232      placental insufficiency 275         Primary hypothyroidism 160
pathogens 71                      plant-based diet 115                Primidone 122
pediatric obesity 114             plant-forward meal plan 27          proanthocyanidins 320
Pellagra 83                       Plaque 236                          probiotic 322, 350
penicillamine 84                  plasma parathyroid hormone          probiotics 71, 163, 357
pepsin 69                                                             Processed foods 27, 28, 118
peptic ulcer disease 70             (PTH) 164                         progesterone 111, 146, 149
Peptides 79                       pneumonia 259, 261, 284, 284,       prognathism 161
percent Daily Value 49                                                prolactin 146, 147
percussion 67, 257                  287                               prolonged hypoglycemia 152
perfusion 208, 213, 250           Polycystic ovary syndrome 135       Propionibacterium 351
Periodontal disease 70            polycythemia 153, 258               proportionate short stature 161
peripheral artery disease 236     polypeptides 32                     proprioception 85
peripheral nervous system (PNS)   polypharmacy 198                    protease 63
                                  polyphenols 82, 90, 118, 381        Protein 8, 32, 148, 172, 307,
  78                              polysaccharides 26
peristalsis 69                    polyunsaturated fats 30               355, 380, 397, 398
Periumbilical ecchymosis 68       pons 79                             protein intake 91, 264, 303
Pernicious anemia 70, 85          portion sizes 139                   protein supplements 399
personality changes 88            postnatal growth 275                protein-calorie malnutrition 258
pertussis 259                     Postpartum thyroiditis 160          Proteobacteria 351
Petechiae 171                     posture 119, 370                    proteolysis 34
pH 260                            Potassium 51, 136, 214, 301,        Proton pump inhibitors 72, 85,
pH balance 322
Pharmacology 72                     306                                 116, 191
Pharyngitis 284                   potassium chloride 326              pruritis 302
Pharynx 251                       Prealbumin 91, 93, 173, 258         Psoriatic arthritis 375
phenelzine 84, 120, 121           Prebiotic 322, 350, 357             psychomotor skills 195
Phenifuramine 121                 Precocious puberty 155              psychosocial assessment 258
phenobarbital 121, 122            preeclampsia 112, 189, 351          Psychostimulants 121
Phenothiazines 121                prefrontal cortex 111               puberty 153, 155
Phentermine 121                   Pregabalin 120, 122                 Pulmonary assessment 257
phenylalanine 115                 pregnancy 108, 146, 163, 177,       pulmonary embolism 284, 288
Phenytoin 120, 122                                                    pulmonary fibrosis 283, 287
phospholipids 111                   188, 230, 274, 316, 350, 392      pulmonary function 276
Phosphorus 51, 109, 136, 301,     prenatal care 112                   pulmonary hygiene 252
                                  prenatal multivitamin 350           Pulmonary hypertension 201
  307, 380                        Prenatal vitamins 55, 149, 190,     Pulmonary rehabilitation 263
phosphorylation 94                                                    pulmonary system 250
phylloquinone 108                   395                               Pulsations 68
physical activity 115, 199, 222,  Pressure injuries 376               Pulse oximetry 260
                                  pressure ulcers 400                 pulseless electrical activity (PEA)
                                  pressure wounds 367
                                  preterm delivery 316                  208

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Index 491

Pure Food and Drugs Act 8        respiratory distress syndrome    Secretions 257
Purkinje fibers 209                259                            seizures 84, 96, 113, 117, 121
pyelonephritis 302, 316                                           selective serotonin reuptake
pyogenic infections 259          respiratory effort 257
Pyridoxine 47, 84, 109           Respiratory muscle strength        inhibitors (SSRIs) 123
                                                                  Selenium 51, 82, 89, 95, 109,
Q                                  252, 276, 278
                                 respiratory rate 257               160, 163, 262, 286, 356
Quetiapine 121                   respiratory system 250, 276      sepsis 112
                                 respiratory tract exam 257       serotonin 82, 114
R                                respiratory tract infection 276  sertraline 123
                                 Respiratory tract infections     serum creatinine 300, 302
radioactive iodine 160                                            Serum electrolyte testing 301
radiotherapeutics 160              (RTIs) 283                     serum fatty acids 149
random glucose level 158         resting membrane potential 79    serum thyroid-stimulating
range of motion (ROM) 370        Restless leg syndrome 195
reabsorption 296                 Resveratrol 118                    hormone (TSH) 157
readiness to learn 17, 17, 138   Reticulocyte 173                 sexual maturation 156
receptor cells 159               Retroperitoneal and intra-       sexual reproduction 155
Recommended Dietary Allowance                                     sexually transmitted infections
                                   abdominal hemorrhage 68
  (RDA) 54                       Rheumatoid arthritis 375           (STIs) 322
rectum 68, 69, 338               rhinitis 274, 284                shock 64
red blood cell formation 395     Riboflavin 47, 109               short bowel syndrome 194, 355
red blood cell transfusions 200  rickets 43, 396                  Shortness of breath 195, 255,
red blood cells 188, 258         Risperidone 121
Refined sugars 96                                                   280
reflexes 84                      S                                Sickle cell disease (SCD) 198
relaxin 147, 274                                                  sinoatrial node (SA node) 209
renal artery 298                 Saccharibacteria 351             Sinuses 251, 257
renal bone dysplasia 301         saliva 63                        sinusitis 259
Renal cancer 326                 Salivary amylase 26, 69          skeletal development 398
renal capsule 296                Salivary gland tumors 70         skeletal muscles 369
renal cortex 297                 salivary glands 69, 334          Skin 257, 400
renal development 318            salt substitutes 326             skin turgor 371
renal disease 35                 sarcopenia 400                   sleep 222
renal illnesses 325              satiety 29, 72                   sleep disturbances 115, 123
renal medulla 297                saturated fat 71, 217            sleep-disordered breathing 274
renal papilla 297                saturated fats 29, 30            small for gestational age (SGA)
renal pelvis 297                 scans 385
renal system 296                 scarring 283                       275
renal vein 298                   SCD 201                          small intestine 32, 69, 335
renin 298                        School Breakfast Program 13,     smell 90
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone                                     smoking 222, 254
                                   328                            smooth muscles 369
  system (RAAS) 136              Scoliosis 375                    snoring 274
reproduction 155                 Scraping 372                     Social determinants of health
Residual volume 252              screening tests 371
Resonance 257                    Screening Tools 172                (SDOH) 17, 253
Respirations 251, 257            second-hand smoke 276            social media 20, 236
respiratory acidosis 260         secondary adrenal insufficiency  Sodium 51, 71, 136, 217, 301,
respiratory alkalosis 259
Respiratory diffusion 250          162                              307
respiratory disease risk 278     secondary endocrine disorders    sodium balance 96
                                                                  sodium intake 71
                                   129, 157                       sodium substitution 326
                                 secondary health promotion 189   sodium-to-potassium ratio 51
                                 Secondary hypothyroidism 160
492 Index

sodium-potassium-chloride          sucrose 26, 162                     Telemetry 210, 214
  transporter 164                  Sulfamethoxazole-Trimethoprim       tenderness 68
                                                                       tenting 371, 378
Soft palate 337                      360, 362                          Testes 129
solid foods 356                    Sulfasalazine 360, 361              testosterone 155
soma 79                            Sulfites 262                        tetracycline antibiotics 403
somatic nervous system 78          Sulfur 51                           thalassemia 198, 200, 201
somatopause 157                    Summer Food Service Program         The Emergency Food Assistance
somatostatin 69
soy milk 262                         (SFSP) 13                           Program (TEFAP) 13
spastic paraplegia 111             superficial palpation 67            The Patrick Leahy Farm to School
Special Milk Program (SMP) 13      Supplemental Nutrition
sperm 109                                                                Program 13
sphincter of Oddi 69                 Assistance Program (SNAP) 13,     therapeutic conversation 81
spicy foods 70                       265, 328                          Thiamin 47, 109
spinal cord 79                     Supplemental Nutrition Program      thiamine 83
spiritual and cultural practices     for Women, Infants, and Children  Thiazide diuretics 165
                                     (WIC) 13, 13, 328                 thirst 99
  266                              supplements 53, 72, 99, 264         thorax 257
spirometry 252                     suprarenal gland 298                throat 251, 257
spleen 67                          Surfactant 251                      Thrombocytopenia 171
SpO2 260                           Surfactant production 276           thrombosis 201, 288
spoon-shaped nails 371             surfactant protein expression       thrombus 284
Sputum 255                           275                               thymus 191
ST segment changes 214             surgical history 369                Thyroid 129
St. John's wort 123                swallowing 69, 117                  Thyroid deficiencies 87
standardized nutritional risk      sympathetic nervous system 78       thyroid disorders 160
                                   symphysis pubis 298                 thyroid hormone synthesis 111
  assessment tool 402              symptom management 258              Thyroid hormones 156
Staphylococcus 351                 syncope 230                         thyroid hormones T4 and T3 130
starches 25, 69                    syndrome of inappropriate           thyroid medications 164
statin medications 243               antidiuretic hormone secretion    thyroid panel 140
Statins 72                           (SIADH) 97                        thyroid-stimulating hormone
stenosis 64, 237                   systemic inflammation 163
steroid use 259                    Systemic lupus erythematosus          (TSH) 147
stiff joints 369                     (SLE) 113                         thyroiditis 191
stomach 63, 70, 335                                                    thyrotropin-releasing hormone
stools 64                          T
stress 82                                                                (TRH) 146
stress response 152                T-wave abnormalities 214            thyroxine (T4) 147, 152
Stretch marks 68                   T3 130                              tingling 88
striae 68                          T3 toxicosis 160                    tissue growth 153
stroke 73, 92, 95, 112, 117, 119,  T4 130                              tissue healing 188
                                   T4 levels 151                       tissue repair 395
  236                              Tachycardia 171                     TM7 bacteria 351
Struvite stones 326                tachypnea 171                       tongue 65, 66, 261, 337
stunted growth 276                 tapping 67                          tongue depressor 65
stupor 83                          taste 90                            Tonsillitis 284
subclinical hyperthyroidism 160    tau protein 118                     tonsils 66
Subjective data 370                tau proteins 94                     topiramate 122, 122
sublingual glands 334              Tay-Sachs disease 111               Torsades de pointes 211, 214
submandibular glands 334           TBI 95                              toxic adenoma 160
succussion splash 67               Team Nutrition 13                   toxic multinodular goiter 160
                                   teeth 65, 337

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Index 493

toxicity 42                       urinalysis 301                       287, 288, 380, 381, 392, 393,
trace minerals 50                 urinary bladder 298                  396
Traditional Foods Project 137     urinary tract infection 112, 316,  vitamin D deficiency 148, 194
trans fats 31, 217                                                   Vitamin D deficiency 147
transferrin 82, 172                 320                              vitamin D metabolism 121
Transient ischemic attack (TIAs)  urination 299                      vitamin D replacement 200
                                  urine 37, 64                       vitamin D supplementation 395
  236                             urologic illnesses 324             vitamin E 43, 48, 85, 108, 135,
transient neonatal hypoglycemia   USDA 12                              171, 286
                                  uteroplacental 230                 vitamin K 43, 48, 69, 71, 108,
  152                             UTIs 320                             171, 175, 243, 380
transient tachypnea 153           uvula 66                           vitamin K deficiency bleeding
transport protein 93                                                   (VKDB) 193
Transtheoretical Model 182        V                                  vitamin K injection 193
traumatic brain injury 81                                            vitamin-mineral supplement 53,
tremors 368                       Valproic acid 120, 121, 122, 122     55
trends 20                         vascular pattern 68                vitamins 42
Triazolam 120, 123                Vascular resistance 252            vitamins B6 82
Triceps skinfold thickness (TSF)  vaso-occlusive crises 198          vitiligo 191, 377, 379
                                  vegan diet 115, 190                voice box 251
  170                             vegetarian diets 122               volvulus 64
tricyclic antidepressants 123     Vein dilation 68                   vomiting 80, 88, 148
triglycerides 29, 239, 355        veins 208                          vulnerable populations 19
triiodothyronine (T3) 147, 152    vena cava obstruction 68
Tripod breathing 261              Ventilation 250, 290               W
trypsinogen 63                    ventilation-perfusion
tuberculosis 259                                                     waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) 9
Tympany 67                          mismatching 252                  warfarin 193, 243
type 1 diabetes 112, 129, 136,    ventricles 209                     water 36, 69, 72, 99
                                  venules 212                        water balance 96
  158                             vertigo 80                         water intake 70, 116
type 2 diabetes 112, 129, 136,    visual memory 109                  water supplies 37
                                  Vital capacity 252                 Water-soluble vitamins 42, 50,
  149, 158                        vitamin A 42, 48, 108, 110, 135,
Tyramine 123                                                           243
Tzanck testing 372                  380                              WBC count 259
                                  vitamin B1 109                     weakness 84, 195
U                                 Vitamin B1 83                      weight gain 30, 122
                                  vitamin B12 69, 70, 85, 109,       weight gain during pregnancy
U-wave 214
U.S. Dietary Guidelines for         110, 116, 157, 164, 171, 174,      231
                                    190, 198                         weight loss 122, 170
 Americans for 2020-2025 29       vitamin B2 109                     weight-bearing exercise 401
ulcerative colitis (UC) 352       vitamin B3 109                     well water 37
ultraprocessed foods 27           Vitamin B3 83                      wellness 9
umbilical stump 68                vitamin B6 109                     Wernicke's encephalopathy 83
Undernutrition 109, 157, 274,     Vitamin B6 84                      Western diet 32
                                  vitamin B7 108                     wheezing 253, 255, 260, 280
  287, 355                        vitamin B9 110                     white matter 78, 114
unsaturated fats 217              vitamin C 46, 48, 108, 135, 171,   whole foods 27
upper gastrointestinal system 62    175, 286, 288, 342, 380          WHR 10
upper respiratory system 250      vitamin C deficiency 132, 172      Wilson's disease 86
Upper respiratory tract 284       vitamin C supplements 116          Wood light test 372
Urea 298                          vitamin D 29, 43, 48, 108, 110,
ureters 298                         135, 161, 165, 171, 175, 262,
urethra 298
uric acid 298
Uric stones 325
494 Index                        xeroderma 338         Z
                                 xerosis 338
World Health Organization 306                          Zinc 51, 82, 90, 109, 110, 288
wound healing 90, 171, 380,      Y                     zinc accumulation 95
                                                       Zinc deficiencies 95
  402                            yeast infections 322  zinc deficiency 113, 195, 197
                                                       Zolpidem 120, 123
X

xanthelasmas 338
xanthomas 338

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 495
