Algebra and Trigonometry 2e

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHOR

JAY ABRAMSON, ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2021 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include https://openstax.org/details/books/
    algebra-and-trigonometry-2e in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-711494-04-3
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-711494-03-6
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13     978-1-951693-40-4
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR   2021
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 RS 21
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research
university with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking
research, unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this
mission by cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the
spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                       Get started at openstax.org/details/books/algebra-and-trigonometry-2e

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Prerequisites 7

         Introduction to Prerequisites 7
         1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 7
         1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 24
         1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 39
         1.4 Polynomials 50
         1.5 Factoring Polynomials 59
         1.6 Rational Expressions 68
         Chapter Review 76
         Exercises 79

2 Equations and Inequalities 83

         Introduction to Equations and Inequalities 83
         2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 83
         2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 98
         2.3 Models and Applications 115
         2.4 Complex Numbers 125
         2.5 Quadratic Equations 134
         2.6 Other Types of Equations 149
         2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 161
         Chapter Review 172
         Exercises 175

3 Functions 181

         Introduction to Functions 181
         3.1 Functions and Function Notation 181
         3.2 Domain and Range 205
         3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 223
         3.4 Composition of Functions 239
         3.5 Transformation of Functions 255
         3.6 Absolute Value Functions 287
         3.7 Inverse Functions 295
         Chapter Review 310
         Exercises 314

4 Linear Functions 323

         Introduction to Linear Functions 323
         4.1 Linear Functions 323
         4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 360
         4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 374
         Chapter Review 388
         Exercises 389

5 Polynomial and Rational Functions 399

         Introduction to Polynomial and Rational Functions 399
              5.1 Quadratic Functions 400
              5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 419
              5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 438
              5.4 Dividing Polynomials 460
              5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 471
              5.6 Rational Functions 484
              5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 508
              5.8 Modeling Using Variation 521
              Chapter Review 531
              Exercises 535

   6 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 541

              Introduction to Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 541
              6.1 Exponential Functions 542
              6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 561
              6.3 Logarithmic Functions 575
              6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 584
              6.5 Logarithmic Properties 606
              6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 618
              6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 631
              6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 650
              Chapter Review 666
              Exercises 671

   7 The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 681

              Introduction to The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 681
              7.1 Angles 682
              7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 704
              7.3 Unit Circle 717
              7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 736
              Chapter Review 751
              Exercises 754

   8 Periodic Functions 759

              Introduction to Periodic Functions 759
              8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 759
              8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 779
              8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 800
              Chapter Review 813
              Exercises 814

   9 Trigonometric Identities and Equations 821

              Introduction to Trigonometric Identities and Equations 821
              9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions

                821
              9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 832
              9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 847
              9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 860
              9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 868

Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review 884
Exercises 887

10 Further Applications of Trigonometry 893

          Introduction to Further Applications of Trigonometry 893
          10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 893
          10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 911
          10.3 Polar Coordinates 925
          10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 939
          10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 958
          10.6 Parametric Equations 969
          10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 982
          10.8 Vectors 994
          Chapter Review 1016
          Exercises 1020

11 Systems of Equations and Inequalities 1027

Introduction to Systems of Equations and Inequalities 1027                1059
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1028
11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1047
11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables
11.4 Partial Fractions 1071
11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 1081
11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1094
11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 1108
11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1123
Chapter Review 1136
Exercises 1139

12 Analytic Geometry 1147

Introduction to Analytic Geometry 1147    1212
12.1 The Ellipse 1148
12.2 The Hyperbola 1164
12.3 The Parabola 1181
12.4 Rotation of Axes 1197
12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates
Chapter Review 1223
Exercises 1225

13 Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory 1231

Introduction to Sequences, Probability and Counting Theory          1231
13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 1231
13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 1246
13.3 Geometric Sequences 1258
13.4 Series and Their Notations 1267
13.5 Counting Principles 1281
13.6 Binomial Theorem 1292
13.7 Probability 1299
Chapter Review 1310
              Exercises 1313

   A Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1321
         Answer Key 1333
         Index 1503

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational initiative, it's
our mission to transform learning so that education works for every student. Through our partnerships with
philanthropic organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we're breaking down the most
common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resource

Customization

Algebra and Trigonometry 2e is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its
content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections
in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution
In Algebra and Trigonometry 2e, most photos and third-party illustrations contain attribution to their creator, rights
holder, host platform, and/or license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as
long as they provide the same attribution to its original source. To maximize readability and content flow, mathematical
expressions that are rendered as art do not include attribution in the text. This art can be assumed to be developed by
OpenStax and can be reused under the CC-BY license with attribution.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Algebra and Trigonometry 2e

Algebra and Trigonometry 2e provides a comprehensive exploration of algebraic principles and meets scope and
sequence requirements for a typical introductory algebra and trigonometry course. The modular approach and the
richness of content ensures that the book meets the needs of a variety of courses. Algebra and Trigonometry 2e offers a
wealth of examples with detailed, conceptual explanations, building a strong foundation in the material before asking
students to apply what they've learned.

Coverage and Scope

In determining the concepts, skills, and topics to cover, we engaged dozens of highly experienced instructors with a
range of student audiences. The resulting scope and sequence proceeds logically while allowing for a significant amount
of flexibility in instruction.

Chapters 1 and 2 provide both a review and foundation for study of functions that begins in Chapter 3. The authors
recognize that while some institutions may find this material a prerequisite, other institutions have told us that they have
a cohort that needs the prerequisite skills built into the course.

  · Chapter 1: Prerequisites
  · Chapter 2: Equations and Inequalities

Chapters 3-6: The Algebraic Functions

  · Chapter 3: Functions
2 Preface

       · Chapter 4: Linear Functions
       · Chapter 5: Polynomial and Rational Functions
       · Chapter 6: Exponential and Logarithm Functions

    Chapters 7-10: A Study of Trigonometry

       · Chapter 7: The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions
       · Chapter 8: Periodic Functions
       · Chapter 9: Trigonometric Identities and Equations
       · Chapter 10: Further Applications of Trigonometry

    Chapters 11-13: Further Study in Algebra and Trigonometry

       · Chapter 11: Systems of Equations and Inequalities
       · Chapter 12: Analytic Geometry
       · Chapter 13: Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

   Development Overview

    OpenStax Algebra and Trigonometry 2e is the product of a collaborative effort by a group of dedicated authors, editors,
    and instructors whose collective passion for this project has resulted in a text that is remarkably unified in purpose and
    voice. Special thanks is due to our Lead Author, Jay Abramson of Arizona State University, who provided the overall vision
    for the book and oversaw the development of each and every chapter, drawing up the initial blueprint, reading
    numerous drafts, and assimilating field reviews into actionable revision plans for our authors and editors.

    The collective experience of our author team allowed us to pinpoint the subtopics, exceptions, and individual
    connections that give students the most trouble. The textbook is therefore replete with well-designed features and
    highlights which help students overcome these barriers. As the students read and practice, they are coached in methods
    of thinking through problems and internalizing mathematical processes.

   Accuracy of the Content

    We understand that precision and accuracy are imperatives in mathematics, and undertook a dedicated accuracy
    program led by experienced faculty.Examples, art, problems, and solutions were reviewed by dedicated faculty, with a
    separate team evaluating the answer key and solutions.

    The text also benefits from years of usage by thousands of faculty and students. A core aspect of the second edition
    revision process included consolidating and ensuring consistency with regard to any errata and corrections that have
    been during in the series' extensive usage and incorporation into homework systems.

   Changes to the Second Edition

    The Algebra and Trigonometry 2e revision focused on mathematical clarity and accuracy as well as inclusivity. Examples,
    Exercises, and Solutions were reviewed by multiple faculty experts. All improvement suggestions and errata updates,
    driven by faculty and students from several thousand colleges, were considered and unified across the different formats
    of the text.

    OpenStax and our authors are aware of the difficulties posed by shifting problem and exercise numbers when textbooks
    are revised. In an effort to make the transition to the 2nd edition as seamless as possible, we have minimized any
    shifting of exercise numbers.

    The revision also focused on supporting inclusive and welcoming learning experiences. The introductory narratives,
    example and problem contexts, and even many of the names used for fictional people in the text were all reviewed using
    a diversity, equity, and inclusion framework. Several hundred resulting revisions improve the balance and relevance to
    the students using the text, while maintaining a variety of applications to diverse careers and academic fields. In
    particular, explanations of scientific and historical aspects of mathematics have been expanded to include more
    contributors. For example, the authors added additional historical and multicultural context regarding what is widely
    known as Pascal's Triangle, and similarly added details regarding the international process of decoding the Enigma
    machine (including the role of Polish college students). Several chapter opening narratives and in-chapter references are
    completely new, and contexts across all chapters were specifically reviewed for equity in gender representation and
    connotation.

    Finally, prior to the release of this edition, OpenStax published a series of Corequisite Skillsheets to support different
    models and approaches to instruction. These remain available, and are described in more detail below.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

Pedagogical Foundations and Features

Learning Objectives
Each chapter is divided into multiple sections (or modules), each of which is organized around a set of learning
objectives. The learning objectives are listed explicitly at the beginning of each section and are the focal point of every
instructional element
Narrative text
Narrative text is used to introduce key concepts, terms, and definitions, to provide real-world context, and to provide
transitions between topics and examples. Throughout this book, we rely on a few basic conventions to highlight the
most important ideas:

  · Key terms are boldfaced, typically when first introduced and/or when formally defined.
  · Key concepts and definitions are called out in a blue box for easy reference.
Examples
Each learning objective is supported by one or more worked examples, that demonstrate the problem-solving
approaches that students must master. The multiple Examples model different approaches to the same type of problem,
or introduce similar problems of increasing complexity.
All Examples follow a simple two- or three-part format. The question clearly lays out a mathematical problem to solve.
The Solution walks through the steps, usually providing context for the approach--in other words, why the instructor is
solving the problem in a specific manner. Finally, the Analysis (for select Examples) reflects on the broader implications
of the Solution just shown. Examples are followed by a Try It question, as explained below.
Figures
Algebra and Trigonometry 2e contains more than 2000 figures and illustrations, the vast majority of which are graphs
and diagrams. Art throughout the text adheres to a clear, understated style, drawing the eye to the most important
information in each figure while minimizing visual distractions. Color contrast is employed with discretion to distinguish
between the different functions or features of a graph.

Supporting Features
Several elements contribute to and check understanding.

  · A "How To" is a list of steps necessary to solve a certain type of problem. A How To typically precedes an Example
      that proceeds to demonstrate the steps in action.

  · A "Try It" exercise immediately follows an Example or a set of related Examples, providing the student with an
      immediate opportunity to solve a similar problem. In the PDF and the Web View version of the text, answers to the
      Try It exercises are located in the Answer Key.

  · A Q&A may appear at any point in the narrative, but most often follows an Example. This feature pre-empts
      misconceptions by posing a commonly asked yes/no question, followed by a detailed answer and explanation.

  · The "Media" icon appears at the conclusion of each section, just prior to the Section Exercises. This icon marks a list
4 Preface

           of links to online video tutorials that reinforce the concepts and skills introduced in the section.

    While we have selected tutorials that closely align to our learning objectives, we did not produce these tutorials, nor
    were they specifically produced or tailored to accompany Algebra and Trigonometry 2e.

    Section Exercises
    Each section of every chapter concludes with a well-rounded set of exercises that can be assigned as homework or used
    selectively for guided practice. With over 6300 exercises across the 13 chapters, instructors should have plenty from
    which to choose.

    Section Exercises are organized by question type, and generally appear in the following order:

       · Verbal questions assess conceptual understanding of key terms and concepts.
       · Algebraic problems require students to apply algebraic manipulations demonstrated in the section.
       · Graphical problems assess students' ability to interpret or produce a graph.
       · Numeric problems require the student to perform calculations or computations.
       · Technology problems encourage exploration through use of a graphing utility, either to visualize or verify algebraic

           results or to solve problems via an alternative to the methods demonstrated in the section.
       · Extensions pose problems more challenging than the Examples demonstrated in the section. They require students

           to synthesize multiple learning objectives or apply critical thinking to solve complex problems.
       · Real-World Applications present realistic problem scenarios from fields such as physics, geology, biology, finance,

           and the social sciences.

    Chapter Review Features
    Each chapter concludes with a review of the most important takeaways, as well as additional practice problems that
    students can use to prepare for exams.

       · Key Terms provides a formal definition for each bold-faced term in the chapter.
       · Key Equations presents a compilation of formulas, theorems, and standard-form equations.
       · Key Concepts summarizes the most important ideas introduced in each section, linking back to the relevant

           Example(s) in case students need to review.
       · Chapter Review Exercises include 40-80 practice problems that recall the most important concepts from each

           section.
       · Practice Test includes 25-50 problems assessing the most important learning objectives from the chapter. Note

           that the practice test is not organized by section, and may be more heavily weighted toward cumulative objectives
           as opposed to the foundational objectives covered in the opening sections.

    Corequisite Support
    Each Algebra and Trigonometry 2e section is paired with a thoughtfully developed, topically aligned skills module that
    prepares students for the course material. Sharon North (St. Louis Community College) developed a coordinated set of
    support resources, which provide review, instruction, and practice for algebra students. The author team identified
    foundational skills and concepts, then mapped them to each module. The corequisite sections include conceptual
    overviews, worked examples, and guided practice; they incorporate relevant material from OpenStax's Developmental
    Math series. They are available as separate, openly accessible downloads from the student and instructor resources
    pages accompanying the text.

    Additional Resources

    Student and Instructor Resources

    We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, instructor
    solution manual, Corequisite skillsheets, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor
    account, which can be requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your
    OpenStax book.

    Community Hubs
    OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer Community
    Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support OpenStax
    books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download resources
    to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant course content.
    We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research as an

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 5

opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit
www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.

Technology partners
As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost tools that
are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book page on
openstax.org.

About the Authors

Senior Contributing Author

Jay Abramson, Arizona State University
Jay Abramson has been teaching Precalculus for over 35 years, the last 20 at Arizona State University, where he is a
principal lecturer in the School of Mathematics and Statistics. His accomplishments at ASU include co-developing the
university's first hybrid and online math courses as well as an extensive library of video lectures and tutorials. In
addition, he has served as a contributing author for two of Pearson Education's math programs, NovaNet Precalculus
and Trigonometry. Prior to coming to ASU, Jay taught at Texas State Technical College and Amarillo College. He received
Teacher of the Year awards at both institutions.

Contributing Authors

Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College
Rachael Gross, Towson University
David Lippman, Pierce College
Melonie Rasmussen, Pierce College
Rick Norwood, East Tennessee State University
Nicholas Belloit, Florida State College Jacksonville
Jean-Marie Magnier, Springfield Technical Community College
Harold Whipple
Christina Fernandez

Reviewers

Phil Clark, Scottsdale Community College
Michael Cohen, Hofstra University
Charles Conrad, Volunteer State Community College
David French, Tidewater Community College
Matthew Goodell, SUNY Ulster
Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College
Dongrin Kim, Arizona State University
Cynthia Landrigan, Eerie Community College
Wendy Lightheart, Lane Community College
Chinenye Ofodile, Albany State University
Carl Penziul, Tompkins-Cortland Community College
Sandra Nite, Texas A&M University
Eugenia Peterson, Richard J. Daley College
Rhonda Porter, Albany State University
Michael Price, University of Oregon
Steven Purtee, Valencia College
William Radulovich, Florida State College Jacksonville
Camelia Salajean, City Colleges of Chicago
Katy Shields, Oakland Community College
Nathan Schrenk, ECPI University
Pablo Suarez, Delaware State University
Allen Wolmer, Atlanta Jewish Academy

The following faculty contributed to the development of OpenStax Precalculus, the text from which this product was
updated and derived.
Precalculus Reviewers
Nina Alketa, Cecil College
Kiran Bhutani, Catholic University of America
Brandie Biddy, Cecil College
Lisa Blank, Lyme Central School
6 Preface

    Bryan Blount, Kentucky Wesleyan College
    Jessica Bolz, The Bryn Mawr School
    Sheri Boyd, Rollins College
    Sarah Brewer, Alabama School of Math and Science
    Charles Buckley, St. Gregory's University
    Michael Cohen, Hofstra University
    Kenneth Crane, Texarkana College
    Rachel Cywinski, Alamo Colleges
    Nathan Czuba
    Srabasti Dutta, Ashford University
    Kristy Erickson, Cecil College
    Nicole Fernandez, Georgetown University / Kent State University
    David French, Tidewater Community College
    Douglas Furman, SUNY Ulster
    Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College
    Erinn Izzo, Nicaragua Christian Academy
    John Jaffe
    Jerry Jared, Blue Ridge School
    Stan Kopec, Mount Wachusett Community College
    Kathy Kovacs
    Cynthia Landrigan, Erie Community College
    Sara Lenhart, Christopher Newport University
    Wendy Lightheart, Lane Community College
    Joanne Manville, Bunker Hill Community College
    Karla McCavit, Albion College
    Cynthia McGinnis, Northwest Florida State College
    Lana Neal, University of Texas at Austin
    Rhonda Porter, Albany State University
    Steven Purtee, Valencia College
    William Radulovich, Florida State College Jacksonville
    Alice Ramos, Bethel College
    Nick Reynolds, Montgomery Community College
    Amanda Ross, A. A. Ross Consulting and Research, LLC
    Erica Rutter, Arizona State University
    Sutandra Sarkar, Georgia State University
    Willy Schild, Wentworth Institute of Technology
    Todd Stephen, Cleveland State University
    Scott Sykes, University of West Georgia
    Linda Tansil, Southeast Missouri State University
    John Thomas, College of Lake County
    Diane Valade, Piedmont Virginia Community College
    Allen Wolmer, Atlanta Jewish Academy

     Access for free at openstax.org
                  1 · Introduction 7

1  PREREQUISITES

Credit: Andreas Kambanls

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials
  1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation
  1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents
  1.4 Polynomials
  1.5 Factoring Polynomials
  1.6 Rational Expressions

      Introduction to Prerequisites

It's a cold day in Antarctica. In fact, it's always a cold day in Antarctica. Earth's southernmost continent, Antarctica
experiences the coldest, driest, and windiest conditions known. The coldest temperature ever recorded, over one
hundred degrees below zero on the Celsius scale, was recorded by remote satellite. It is no surprise then, that no native
human population can survive the harsh conditions. Only explorers and scientists brave the environment for any length
of time.

Measuring and recording the characteristics of weather conditions in Antarctica requires a use of different kinds of
numbers. For tens of thousands of years, humans have undertaken methods to tally, track, and record numerical
information. While we don't know much about their usage, the Lebombo Bone (dated to about 35,000 BCE) and the
Ishango Bone (dated to about 20,000 BCE) are among the earliest mathematical artifacts. Found in Africa, their clearly
deliberate groupings of notches may have been used to track time, moon cycles, or other information. Performing
calculations with them and using the results to make predictions requires an understanding of relationships among
numbers. In this chapter, we will review sets of numbers and properties of operations used to manipulate numbers. This
understanding will serve as prerequisite knowledge throughout our study of algebra and trigonometry.

1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Classify a real number as a natural, whole, integer, rational, or irrational number.
           Perform calculations using order of operations.
           Use the following properties of real numbers: commutative, associative, distributive, inverse, and identity.
           Evaluate algebraic expressions.
           Simplify algebraic expressions.
8 1 · Prerequisites

It is often said that mathematics is the language of science. If this is true, then an essential part of the language of
mathematics is numbers. The earliest use of numbers occurred 100 centuries ago in the Middle East to count, or
enumerate items. Farmers, cattle herders, and traders used tokens, stones, or markers to signify a single quantity--a
sheaf of grain, a head of livestock, or a fixed length of cloth, for example. Doing so made commerce possible, leading to
improved communications and the spread of civilization.

Three to four thousand years ago, Egyptians introduced fractions. They first used them to show reciprocals. Later, they
used them to represent the amount when a quantity was divided into equal parts.

But what if there were no cattle to trade or an entire crop of grain was lost in a flood? How could someone indicate the
existence of nothing? From earliest times, people had thought of a "base state" while counting and used various
symbols to represent this null condition. However, it was not until about the fifth century CE in India that zero was added
to the number system and used as a numeral in calculations.

Clearly, there was also a need for numbers to represent loss or debt. In India, in the seventh century CE, negative
numbers were used as solutions to mathematical equations and commercial debts. The opposites of the counting
numbers expanded the number system even further.

Because of the evolution of the number system, we can now perform complex calculations using these and other
categories of real numbers. In this section, we will explore sets of numbers, calculations with different kinds of numbers,
and the use of numbers in expressions.

Classifying a Real Number

The numbers we use for counting, or enumerating items, are the natural numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on. We describe

them in set notation as            where the ellipsis (...) indicates that the numbers continue to infinity. The natural

numbers are, of course, also called the counting numbers. Any time we enumerate the members of a team, count the

coins in a collection, or tally the trees in a grove, we are using the set of natural numbers. The set of whole numbers is

the set of natural numbers plus zero:

The set of integers adds the opposites of the natural numbers to the set of whole numbers:
                                          It is useful to note that the set of integers is made up of three distinct subsets: negative

integers, zero, and positive integers. In this sense, the positive integers are just the natural numbers. Another way to
think about it is that the natural numbers are a subset of the integers.

The set of rational numbers is written as                                     Notice from the definition that rational

numbers are fractions (or quotients) containing integers in both the numerator and the denominator, and the

denominator is never 0. We can also see that every natural number, whole number, and integer is a rational number

with a denominator of 1.

Because they are fractions, any rational number can also be expressed in decimal form. Any rational number can be
represented as either:

 a terminating decimal:                or  a repeating decimal:
We use a line drawn over the repeating block of numbers instead of writing the group multiple times.

EXAMPLE 1

Writing Integers as Rational Numbers
Write each of the following as a rational number.

7 0                     -8

     Solution

Write a fraction with the integer in the numerator and 1 in the denominator.

                                 

  TRY IT #1            Write each of the following as a rational number.

                        11  3  -4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 9

EXAMPLE 2

Identifying Rational Numbers
Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or repeating decimal.

            
  Solution

Write each fraction as a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

            a repeating decimal                         (or 3.0), a terminating decimal

            a terminating decimal

       TRY IT #2 Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or repeating decimal.

                  

Irrational Numbers

At some point in the ancient past, someone discovered that not all numbers are rational numbers. A builder, for
instance, may have found that the diagonal of a square with unit sides was not 2 or even but was something else. Or
a garment maker might have observed that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a roll of cloth was a little bit
more than 3, but still not a rational number. Such numbers are said to be irrational because they cannot be written as
fractions. These numbers make up the set of irrational numbers. Irrational numbers cannot be expressed as a fraction
of two integers. It is impossible to describe this set of numbers by a single rule except to say that a number is irrational if
it is not rational. So we write this as shown.

EXAMPLE 3

Differentiating Rational and Irrational Numbers
Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or irrational. If it is rational, determine whether it is a
terminating or repeating decimal.

  Solution                                  

  This can be simplified as                 Therefore,  is rational.

  Because it is a fraction of integers,     is a rational number. Next, simplify and divide.

So, is rational and a repeating decimal.

  This cannot be simplified any further. Therefore,     is an irrational number.

  Because it is a fraction of integers, is a rational number. Simplify and divide.

So, is rational and a terminating decimal.

              is not a terminating decimal. Also note that there is no repeating pattern because the group

of 3s increases each time. Therefore it is neither a terminating nor a repeating decimal and, hence, not a rational

number. It is an irrational number.
10 1 · Prerequisites

  TRY IT #3           Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or irrational. If it is rational,
                      determine whether it is a terminating or repeating decimal.

                                                                                      

Real Numbers

Given any number n, we know that n is either rational or irrational. It cannot be both. The sets of rational and irrational
numbers together make up the set of real numbers. As we saw with integers, the real numbers can be divided into
three subsets: negative real numbers, zero, and positive real numbers. Each subset includes fractions, decimals, and
irrational numbers according to their algebraic sign (+ or -). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative.

The real numbers can be visualized on a horizontal number line with an arbitrary point chosen as 0, with negative
numbers to the left of 0 and positive numbers to the right of 0. A fixed unit distance is then used to mark off each integer
(or other basic value) on either side of 0. Any real number corresponds to a unique position on the number line.The
converse is also true: Each location on the number line corresponds to exactly one real number. This is known as a one-
to-one correspondence. We refer to this as the real number line as shown in Figure 1.

                                     Figure 1 The real number line

EXAMPLE 4

Classifying Real Numbers
Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either rational or irrational. Does the number lie to the left or
the right of 0 on the number line?

  Solution                             

  is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0 on the number line.

  is positive and irrational. It lies to the right of 0.

                                 is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0.

  is negative and irrational. It lies to the left of 0.

                      is a repeating decimal so it is rational and positive. It lies to the right of 0.

  TRY IT #4           Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either rational or irrational. Does the
                      number lie to the left or the right of 0 on the number line?

                                                                                      

Sets of Numbers as Subsets

Beginning with the natural numbers, we have expanded each set to form a larger set, meaning that there is a subset
relationship between the sets of numbers we have encountered so far. These relationships become more obvious when
seen as a diagram, such as Figure 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 11

                                                            Figure 2 Sets of numbers
                                                           N: the set of natural numbers
                                                           W: the set of whole numbers
                                                           I: the set of integers
                                                           Q: the set of rational numbers
                                                           Q´: the set of irrational numbers

Sets of Numbers

The set of natural numbers includes the numbers used for counting:
The set of whole numbers is the set of natural numbers plus zero:
The set of integers adds the negative natural numbers to the set of whole numbers:
The set of rational numbers includes fractions written as

The set of irrational numbers is the set of numbers that are not rational, are nonrepeating, and are nonterminating:

EXAMPLE 5

Differentiating the Sets of Numbers
Classify each number as being a natural number (N), whole number (W), integer (I), rational number (Q), and/or
irrational number (Q).

  Solution    

                                  N W I Q Q

              a.                  X XXX

              b.                  X

                     c.                        X
                       d. -6      XX

              e. 3.2121121112...               X
12 1 · Prerequisites

TRY IT #5             Classify each number as being a natural number (N), whole number (W), integer (I), rational
                      number (Q), and/or irrational number (Q).

                                                            

Performing Calculations Using the Order of Operations                                             We can raise
                                                                                                 is used as a
When we multiply a number by itself, we square it or raise it to a power of 2. For example,
any number to any power. In general, the exponential notation means that the number or variable
factor times.

In this notation, is read as the nth power of or to the where is called the base and is called the exponent. A

term in exponential notation may be part of a mathematical expression, which is a combination of numbers and

operations. For example,  is a mathematical expression.

To evaluate a mathematical expression, we perform the various operations. However, we do not perform them in any
random order. We use the order of operations. This is a sequence of rules for evaluating such expressions.

Recall that in mathematics we use parentheses ( ), brackets [ ], and braces { } to group numbers and expressions so that
anything appearing within the symbols is treated as a unit. Additionally, fraction bars, radicals, and absolute value bars
are treated as grouping symbols. When evaluating a mathematical expression, begin by simplifying expressions within
grouping symbols.

The next step is to address any exponents or radicals. Afterward, perform multiplication and division from left to right
and finally addition and subtraction from left to right.

Let's take a look at the expression provided.

There are no grouping symbols, so we move on to exponents or radicals. The number 4 is raised to a power of 2, so
simplify as 16.

Next, perform multiplication or division, left to right.
Lastly, perform addition or subtraction, left to right.

Therefore,
For some complicated expressions, several passes through the order of operations will be needed. For instance, there
may be a radical expression inside parentheses that must be simplified before the parentheses are evaluated. Following
the order of operations ensures that anyone simplifying the same mathematical expression will get the same result.

  Order of Operations
  Operations in mathematical expressions must be evaluated in a systematic order, which can be simplified using the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 13

acronym PEMDAS:

P(arentheses)
E(xponents)
M(ultiplication) and D(ivision)
A(ddition) and S(ubtraction)

  ...

       HOW TO

Given a mathematical expression, simplify it using the order of operations.

Step 1.  Simplify any expressions within grouping symbols.
Step 2.  Simplify any expressions containing exponents or radicals.
Step 3.  Perform any multiplication and division in order, from left to right.
Step 4.  Perform any addition and subtraction in order, from left to right.

EXAMPLE 6

Using the Order of Operations
Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following expressions.

                                                                                



     Solution





Note that in the first step, the radical is treated as a grouping symbol, like parentheses. Also, in the third step, the
fraction bar is considered a grouping symbol so the numerator is considered to be grouped.


14 1 · Prerequisites

   

     In this example, the fraction bar separates the numerator and denominator, which we simplify separately until the
     last step.

   

TRY IT #6 Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following expressions.

                                                              
                                 

Using Properties of Real Numbers

For some activities we perform, the order of certain operations does not matter, but the order of other operations does.
For example, it does not make a difference if we put on the right shoe before the left or vice-versa. However, it does
matter whether we put on shoes or socks first. The same thing is true for operations in mathematics.

Commutative Properties
The commutative property of addition states that numbers may be added in any order without affecting the sum.

We can better see this relationship when using real numbers.

Similarly, the commutative property of multiplication states that numbers may be multiplied in any order without
affecting the product.

Again, consider an example with real numbers.

It is important to note that neither subtraction nor division is commutative. For example,  is not the same as
          Similarly,

Associative Properties
The associative property of multiplication tells us that it does not matter how we group numbers when multiplying.
We can move the grouping symbols to make the calculation easier, and the product remains the same.

Consider this example.

The associative property of addition tells us that numbers may be grouped differently without affecting the sum.

This property can be especially helpful when dealing with negative integers. Consider this example.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 15

Are subtraction and division associative? Review these examples.

As we can see, neither subtraction nor division is associative.
Distributive Property
The distributive property states that the product of a factor times a sum is the sum of the factor times each term in the
sum.

This property combines both addition and multiplication (and is the only property to do so). Let us consider an example.

Note that 4 is outside the grouping symbols, so we distribute the 4 by multiplying it by 12, multiplying it by -7, and
adding the products.
To be more precise when describing this property, we say that multiplication distributes over addition. The reverse is not
true, as we can see in this example.

A special case of the distributive property occurs when a sum of terms is subtracted.

For example, consider the difference       We can rewrite the difference of the two terms 12 and  by

turning the subtraction expression into addition of the opposite. So instead of subtracting  we add the opposite.

Now, distribute and simplify the result.

This seems like a lot of trouble for a simple sum, but it illustrates a powerful result that will be useful once we introduce
algebraic terms. To subtract a sum of terms, change the sign of each term and add the results. With this in mind, we can
rewrite the last example.

Identity Properties
The identity property of addition states that there is a unique number, called the additive identity (0) that, when added
to a number, results in the original number.

The identity property of multiplication states that there is a unique number, called the multiplicative identity (1) that,
when multiplied by a number, results in the original number.

For example, we have                  and  There are no exceptions for these properties; they work for every

real number, including 0 and 1.
16 1 · Prerequisites

Inverse Properties
The inverse property of addition states that, for every real number a, there is a unique number, called the additive
inverse (or opposite), denoted by (-a), that, when added to the original number, results in the additive identity, 0.

For example, if         the additive inverse is 8, since

The inverse property of multiplication holds for all real numbers except 0 because the reciprocal of 0 is not defined.
The property states that, for every real number a, there is a unique number, called the multiplicative inverse (or
reciprocal), denoted that, when multiplied by the original number, results in the multiplicative identity, 1.

For example, if         the reciprocal, denoted is because

Properties of Real Numbers

The following properties hold for real numbers a, b, and c.

                                 Addition                                                    Multiplication

  Commutative                                                           There exists a unique real number called the
     Property                                                          multiplicative identity, 1, such that, for any real

  Associative                                                                                   number a
   Property

  Distributive
    Property

  Identity            There exists a unique real number called the
  Property              additive identity, 0, such that, for any real
                                              number a

  Inverse             Every real number a has an additive inverse,             Every nonzero real number a has a
  Property                  or opposite, denoted -a, such that         multiplicative inverse, or reciprocal, denoted

                                                                                                  such that

EXAMPLE 7

Using Properties of Real Numbers
Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each expression. State which properties apply.

                                                                       

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 17

     Solution











  TRY IT #7          Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each expression. State which
                     properties apply.

                                              
                     

Evaluating Algebraic Expressions

So far, the mathematical expressions we have seen have involved real numbers only. In mathematics, we may see

expressions such as    or  In the expression  5 is called a constant because it does not vary

and x is called a variable because it does. (In naming the variable, ignore any exponents or radicals containing the
variable.) An algebraic expression is a collection of constants and variables joined together by the algebraic operations
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.

We have already seen some real number examples of exponential notation, a shorthand method of writing products of
the same factor. When variables are used, the constants and variables are treated the same way.

In each case, the exponent tells us how many factors of the base to use, whether the base consists of constants or
variables.

Any variable in an algebraic expression may take on or be assigned different values. When that happens, the value of the
algebraic expression changes. To evaluate an algebraic expression means to determine the value of the expression for a
given value of each variable in the expression. Replace each variable in the expression with the given value, then simplify
the resulting expression using the order of operations. If the algebraic expression contains more than one variable,
replace each variable with its assigned value and simplify the expression as before.
18 1 · Prerequisites

EXAMPLE 8

Describing Algebraic Expressions
List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression.

 x+5                             
  Solution

                                                          Constants  Variables

                                            a. x + 5      5                x

                                        b.

                                        c.                2

  TRY IT #8                List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression.

                                         2(L + W) 

EXAMPLE 9

Evaluating an Algebraic Expression at Different Values

Evaluate the expression            for each value for x.

  Solution                              

 Substitute 0 for             Substitute 1 for             Substitute for         Substitute for

  TRY IT #9                Evaluate the expression        for each value for y.

                                                                 

EXAMPLE 10

Evaluating Algebraic Expressions
Evaluate each expression for the given values.

  for                              for                    for                               for

                      for

  Solution

 Substitute for                   Substitute 10 for  Substitute 5 for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 19

 Substitute 11 for and -8 for             Substitute 2 for and 3 for

TRY IT #10 Evaluate each expression for the given values.

                         for                  for                               for

                               for                                              for

Formulas

An equation is a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions are equal. The expressions can be numerical
or algebraic. The equation is not inherently true or false, but only a proposition. The values that make the equation true,
the solutions, are found using the properties of real numbers and other results. For example, the equation
has the solution of 3 because when we substitute 3 for in the equation, we obtain the true statement

A formula is an equation expressing a relationship between constant and variable quantities. Very often, the equation is
a means of finding the value of one quantity (often a single variable) in terms of another or other quantities. One of the
most common examples is the formula for finding the area of a circle in terms of the radius of the circle:
For any value of the area can be found by evaluating the expression

EXAMPLE 11

Using a Formula
A right circular cylinder with radius and height has the surface area (in square units) given by the formula

                        See Figure 3. Find the surface area of a cylinder with radius 6 in. and height 9 in. Leave the answer in
terms of

                                         Figure 3 Right circular cylinder

     Solution                  for       and
Evaluate the expression

The surface area is      square inches.

TRY IT #11           A photograph with length L and width W is placed in a mat of width 8 centimeters (cm). The area

                     of the mat (in square centimeters, or cm2) is found to be                             See

                     Figure 4. Find the area of a mat for a photograph with length 32 cm and width 24 cm.
20 1 · Prerequisites

                                                  Figure 4

Simplifying Algebraic Expressions

Sometimes we can simplify an algebraic expression to make it easier to evaluate or to use in some other way. To do so,
we use the properties of real numbers. We can use the same properties in formulas because they contain algebraic
expressions.

EXAMPLE 12

Simplifying Algebraic Expressions
Simplify each algebraic expression.

  Solution                                                        









  TRY IT #12 Simplify each algebraic expression.

                                                                
                         

EXAMPLE 13

Simplifying a Formula      and width  has a perimeter given by      Simplify this expression.
A rectangle with length

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 21

     Solution

     TRY IT #13  If the amount is deposited into an account paying simple interest for time the total value of

                 the deposit is given by                     Simplify the expression. (This formula will be explored in

                 more detail later in the course.)

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with real numbers.

     Simplify an Expression. (http://openstax.org/l/simexpress)
     Evaluate an Expression 1. (http://openstax.org/l/ordofoper1)
     Evaluate an Expression 2. (http://openstax.org/l/ordofoper2)

        1.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Is an example of a            2. What is the order of            3. What do the Associative
    rational terminating,            operations? What acronym           Properties allow us to do
    rational repeating, or           is used to describe the order      when following the order of
    irrational number? Tell why      of operations, and what            operations? Explain your
    it fits that category.           does it stand for?                 answer.

Numeric

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

4.                               5.                                 6.

7.                               8.                                 9.

10.                              11.                                12.

13.                              14.                                15.

16.                              17.                                18.

19.                              20.                                21.

22.                              23.                                24.

25.                              26.                                27.
22 1 · Prerequisites

Algebraic

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions using the given variable.

28.                   for        29.  for                     30.                     for

31.                        for   32.                     for  33.                for

34. For the                      35.                     for  36.                for
      for

37.                   for

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

38.                              39.                          40.
                                                              43.
41.                              42.                          46.
                                                              49.
44.                              45.
                                                                52.
47.                              48.

50.                              51.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: Fred earns $40 at the community garden. He spends $10 on a
streaming subscription, puts half of what is left in a savings account, and gets another $5 for walking his neighbor's dog.

53. Write the expression that represents the number           54. How much money does Fred keep?
      of dollars Fred keeps (and does not put in his
      savings account). Remember the order of
      operations.

For the following exercises, solve the given problem.         56. Jessica and her roommate, Adriana, have decided
                                                                    to share a change jar for joint expenses. Jessica
55. According to the U.S. Mint, the diameter of a                   put her loose change in the jar first, and then
      quarter is 0.955 inches. The circumference of the             Adriana put her change in the jar. We know that it
      quarter would be the diameter multiplied by Is                does not matter in which order the change was
      the circumference of a quarter a whole number, a              added to the jar. What property of addition
      rational number, or an irrational number?                     describes this fact?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.1 · Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 23

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: There is a mound of pounds of gravel in a quarry. Throughout the
day, 400 pounds of gravel is added to the mound. Two orders of 600 pounds are sold and the gravel is removed from the
mound. At the end of the day, the mound has 1,200 pounds of gravel.

57. Write the equation that describes the situation.      58. Solve for g.

For the following exercise, solve the given problem.

59. Ramon runs the marketing department at their

     company. Their department gets a budget every

     year, and every year, they must spend the entire

     budget without going over. If they spend less than

     the budget, then the department gets a smaller

     budget the following year. At the beginning of this

     year, Ramon got $2.5 million for the annual

     marketing budget. They must spend the budget

     such that                   What property of

     addition tells us what the value of x must be?

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to solve for x. Round the answers to the nearest hundredth.

60.                                                       61.

Extensions                       63. Determine whether the           64. Determine whether the
                                       statement is true or false:         statement is true or false:
62. If a whole number is not a         The multiplicative inverse          The product of a rational
      natural number, what must        of a rational number is also        and irrational number is
      the number be?                   rational.                           always irrational.

65. Determine whether the        66. Determine whether the           67. The division of two natural
      simplified expression is         simplified expression is            numbers will always result
      rational or irrational:          rational or irrational:             in what type of number?

68. What property of real
      numbers would simplify
      the following expression:
24 1 · Prerequisites

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use the product rule of exponents.
           Use the quotient rule of exponents.
           Use the power rule of exponents.
           Use the zero exponent rule of exponents.
           Use the negative rule of exponents.
           Find the power of a product and a quotient.
           Simplify exponential expressions.
           Use scientific notation.

Mathematicians, scientists, and economists commonly encounter very large and very small numbers. But it may not be
obvious how common such figures are in everyday life. For instance, a pixel is the smallest unit of light that can be
perceived and recorded by a digital camera. A particular camera might record an image that is 2,048 pixels by 1,536
pixels, which is a very high resolution picture. It can also perceive a color depth (gradations in colors) of up to 48 bits per
frame, and can shoot the equivalent of 24 frames per second. The maximum possible number of bits of information
used to film a one-hour (3,600-second) digital film is then an extremely large number.

Using a calculator, we enter                            and press ENTER. The calculator displays 1.304596316E13.

What does this mean? The "E13" portion of the result represents the exponent 13 of ten, so there are a maximum of

approximately         bits of data in that one-hour film. In this section, we review rules of exponents first and then

apply them to calculations involving very large or small numbers.

Using the Product Rule of Exponents

Consider the product             Both terms have the same base, x, but they are raised to different exponents. Expand each

expression, and then rewrite the resulting expression.

The result is that

Notice that the exponent of the product is the sum of the exponents of the terms. In other words, when multiplying
exponential expressions with the same base, we write the result with the common base and add the exponents. This is
the product rule of exponents.

Now consider an example with real numbers.

We can always check that this is true by simplifying each exponential expression. We find that is 8, is 16, and is

128. The product      equals 128, so the relationship is true. We can use the product rule of exponents to simplify

expressions that are a product of two numbers or expressions with the same base but different exponents.

The Product Rule of Exponents

For any real number and natural numbers and the product rule of exponents states that

  EXAMPLE 1

Using the Product Rule
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 25

  Solution                      

Use the product rule to simplify each expression.

                                                                                   
At first, it may appear that we cannot simplify a product of three factors. However, using the associative property of

multiplication, begin by simplifying the first two.

Notice we get the same result by adding the three exponents in one step.

  TRY IT #1 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.

                                                       

Using the Quotient Rule of Exponents

The quotient rule of exponents allows us to simplify an expression that divides two numbers with the same base but
different exponents. In a similar way to the product rule, we can simplify an expression such as where

Consider the example Perform the division by canceling common factors.

Notice that the exponent of the quotient is the difference between the exponents of the divisor and dividend.

In other words, when dividing exponential expressions with the same base, we write the result with the common base
and subtract the exponents.

For the time being, we must be aware of the condition    Otherwise, the difference   could be zero or negative.

Those possibilities will be explored shortly. Also, instead of qualifying variables as nonzero each time, we will simplify

matters and assume from here on that all variables represent nonzero real numbers.

The Quotient Rule of Exponents

For any real number and natural numbers and such that    the quotient rule of exponents states that

  EXAMPLE 2

Using the Quotient Rule
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.
26 1 · Prerequisites

                                 

  Solution

Use the quotient rule to simplify each expression.

                                                             

       TRY IT #2 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.

                                       

Using the Power Rule of Exponents

Suppose an exponential expression is raised to some power. Can we simplify the result? Yes. To do this, we use the

power rule of exponents. Consider the expression    The expression inside the parentheses is multiplied twice

because it has an exponent of 2. Then the result is multiplied three times because the entire expression has an exponent

of 3.

The exponent of the answer is the product of the exponents:                        In other words, when raising an

exponential expression to a power, we write the result with the common base and the product of the exponents.

Be careful to distinguish between uses of the product rule and the power rule. When using the product rule, different
terms with the same bases are raised to exponents. In this case, you add the exponents. When using the power rule, a
term in exponential notation is raised to a power. In this case, you multiply the exponents.

The Power Rule of Exponents
For any real number and positive integers and the power rule of exponents states that

EXAMPLE 3

Using the Power Rule
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.

                                   

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 27

     Solution
Use the power rule to simplify each expression.

                                                         

  TRY IT #3 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further.

                                                 

Using the Zero Exponent Rule of Exponents

Return to the quotient rule. We made the condition that  so that the difference        would never be zero or

negative. What would happen if        In this case, we would use the zero exponent rule of exponents to simplify the

expression to 1. To see how this is done, let us begin with an example.

If we were to simplify the original expression using the quotient rule, we would have

If we equate the two answers, the result is      This is true for any nonzero real number, or any variable representing
a real number.

The sole exception is the expression  This appears later in more advanced courses, but for now, we will consider the
value to be undefined.

The Zero Exponent Rule of Exponents

For any nonzero real number the zero exponent rule of exponents states that

  EXAMPLE 4

Using the Zero Exponent Rule
Simplify each expression using the zero exponent rule of exponents.

                                             

     Solution
Use the zero exponent and other rules to simplify each expression.




28 1 · Prerequisites

   



  TRY IT #4 Simplify each expression using the zero exponent rule of exponents.

                                                             

Using the Negative Rule of Exponents

Another useful result occurs if we relax the condition that   in the quotient rule even further. For example, can we
                                                             is negative--we can use the negative rule of exponents to
simplify When         --that is, where the difference

simplify the expression to its reciprocal.

Divide one exponential expression by another with a larger exponent. Use our example,

If we were to simplify the original expression using the quotient rule, we would have

Putting the answers together, we have       This is true for any nonzero real number, or any variable representing
a nonzero real number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 29

A factor with a negative exponent becomes the same factor with a positive exponent if it is moved across the fraction
bar--from numerator to denominator or vice versa.

We have shown that the exponential expression is defined when is a natural number, 0, or the negative of a natural
number. That means that is defined for any integer Also, the product and quotient rules and all of the rules we will
look at soon hold for any integer

  The Negative Rule of Exponents
  For any nonzero real number and natural number the negative rule of exponents states that

  EXAMPLE 5

Using the Negative Exponent Rule
Write each of the following quotients with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive exponents.

              
                     
  Solution





  TRY IT #5   Write each of the following quotients with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers
              with positive exponents.

                         

EXAMPLE 6

Using the Product and Quotient Rules
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive exponents.

                       

  Solution

                       



  TRY IT #6   Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers
              with positive exponents.

                       

Finding the Power of a Product

To simplify the power of a product of two exponential expressions, we can use the power of a product rule of exponents,
which breaks up the power of a product of factors into the product of the powers of the factors. For instance, consider

         We begin by using the associative and commutative properties of multiplication to regroup the factors.
30 1 · Prerequisites

In other words,
  The Power of a Product Rule of Exponents
  For any real numbers and and any integer the power of a product rule of exponents states that

EXAMPLE 7

Using the Power of a Product Rule
Simplify each of the following products as much as possible using the power of a product rule. Write answers with
positive exponents.

                                           

  Solution

Use the product and quotient rules and the new definitions to simplify each expression.

                                       

                                         



  TRY IT #7             Simplify each of the following products as much as possible using the power of a product rule.
                        Write answers with positive exponents.

                                                                          

Finding the Power of a Quotient

To simplify the power of a quotient of two expressions, we can use the power of a quotient rule, which states that the
power of a quotient of factors is the quotient of the powers of the factors. For example, let's look at the following
example.

Let's rewrite the original problem differently and look at the result.

It appears from the last two steps that we can use the power of a product rule as a power of a quotient rule.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 31

The Power of a Quotient Rule of Exponents
For any real numbers and and any integer the power of a quotient rule of exponents states that

  EXAMPLE 8

Using the Power of a Quotient Rule
Simplify each of the following quotients as much as possible using the power of a quotient rule. Write answers with
positive exponents.

                                

  Solution

                      

                          



  TRY IT #8     Simplify each of the following quotients as much as possible using the power of a quotient rule.
                Write answers with positive exponents.

                                                                             

Simplifying Exponential Expressions

Recall that to simplify an expression means to rewrite it by combing terms or exponents; in other words, to write the
expression more simply with fewer terms. The rules for exponents may be combined to simplify expressions.

EXAMPLE 9

Simplifying Exponential Expressions
Simplify each expression and write the answer with positive exponents only.

                              

                  
32 1 · Prerequisites

           Solution

   

   
   

   
   
   

TRY IT #9 Simplify each expression and write the answer with positive exponents only.

                                                                 

                                   

Using Scientific Notation

Recall at the beginning of the section that we found the number  when describing bits of information in digital

images. Other extreme numbers include the width of a human hair, which is about 0.00005 m, and the radius of an

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 33

electron, which is about 0.00000000000047 m. How can we effectively work read, compare, and calculate with numbers
such as these?

A shorthand method of writing very small and very large numbers is called scientific notation, in which we express
numbers in terms of exponents of 10. To write a number in scientific notation, move the decimal point to the right of the
first digit in the number. Write the digits as a decimal number between 1 and 10. Count the number of places n that you
moved the decimal point. Multiply the decimal number by 10 raised to a power of n. If you moved the decimal left as in a
very large number, is positive. If you moved the decimal right as in a small large number, is negative.

For example, consider the number 2,780,418. Move the decimal left until it is to the right of the first nonzero digit, which
is 2.

We obtain 2.780418 by moving the decimal point 6 places to the left. Therefore, the exponent of 10 is 6, and it is positive
because we moved the decimal point to the left. This is what we should expect for a large number.

Working with small numbers is similar. Take, for example, the radius of an electron, 0.00000000000047 m. Perform the
same series of steps as above, except move the decimal point to the right.

Be careful not to include the leading 0 in your count. We move the decimal point 13 places to the right, so the exponent
of 10 is 13. The exponent is negative because we moved the decimal point to the right. This is what we should expect for
a small number.

Scientific Notation                                                      where  and is an integer.
A number is written in scientific notation if it is written in the form

  EXAMPLE 10

Converting Standard Notation to Scientific Notation
Write each number in scientific notation.

 Distance to Andromeda Galaxy from Earth: 24,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 m
 Diameter of Andromeda Galaxy: 1,300,000,000,000,000,000,000 m
 Number of stars in Andromeda Galaxy: 1,000,000,000,000
 Diameter of electron: 0.00000000000094 m
 Probability of being struck by lightning in any single year: 0.00000143

     Solution




34 1 · Prerequisites







     Analysis
Observe that, if the given number is greater than 1, as in examples a-c, the exponent of 10 is positive; and if the number
is less than 1, as in examples d-e, the exponent is negative.

       TRY IT #10 Write each number in scientific notation.

                    U.S. national debt per taxpayer (April 2014): $152,000
                    World population (April 2014): 7,158,000,000
                    World gross national income (April 2014): $85,500,000,000,000
                    Time for light to travel 1 m: 0.00000000334 s
                    Probability of winning lottery (match 6 of 49 possible numbers): 0.0000000715

Converting from Scientific to Standard Notation

To convert a number in scientific notation to standard notation, simply reverse the process. Move the decimal places
to the right if is positive or places to the left if is negative and add zeros as needed. Remember, if is positive, the
value of the number is greater than 1, and if is negative, the value of the number is less than one.

EXAMPLE 11

Converting Scientific Notation to Standard Notation
Convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation.

  Solution                           

                                     

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 35

  TRY IT #11 Convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation.

                                                                       

Using Scientific Notation in Applications

Scientific notation, used with the rules of exponents, makes calculating with large or small numbers much easier than

doing so using standard notation. For example, suppose we are asked to calculate the number of atoms in 1 L of water.

Each water molecule contains 3 atoms (2 hydrogen and 1 oxygen). The average drop of water contains around

  molecules of water and 1 L of water holds about                    average drops. Therefore, there are

approximately                                      atoms in 1 L of water. We simply multiply the decimal

terms and add the exponents. Imagine having to perform the calculation without using scientific notation!

When performing calculations with scientific notation, be sure to write the answer in proper scientific notation. For

example, consider the product                                        The answer is not in proper scientific notation

because 35 is greater than 10. Consider 35 as  That adds a ten to the exponent of the answer.

EXAMPLE 12

Using Scientific Notation
Perform the operations and write the answer in scientific notation.

                                                                     
                               
  Solution











  TRY IT #12 Perform the operations and write the answer in scientific notation.
36 1 · Prerequisites

                                              
                                            
                      

EXAMPLE 13

Applying Scientific Notation to Solve Problems
In April 2014, the population of the United States was about 308,000,000 people. The national debt was about
$17,547,000,000,000. Write each number in scientific notation, rounding figures to two decimal places, and find the
amount of the debt per U.S. citizen. Write the answer in both scientific and standard notations.

     Solution
The population was

The national debt was

To find the amount of debt per citizen, divide the national debt by the number of citizens.

The debt per citizen at the time was about  or $57,000.

TRY IT #13            An average human body contains around 30,000,000,000,000 red blood cells. Each cell measures
                      approximately 0.000008 m long. Write each number in scientific notation and find the total length
                      if the cells were laid end-to-end. Write the answer in both scientific and standard notations.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponents and scientific notation.

Exponential Notation (http://openstax.org/l/exponnot)
Properties of Exponents (http://openstax.org/l/exponprops)
Zero Exponent (http://openstax.org/l/zeroexponent)
Simplify Exponent Expressions (http://openstax.org/l/exponexpres)
Quotient Rule for Exponents (http://openstax.org/l/quotofexpon)
Scientific Notation (http://openstax.org/l/scientificnota)
Converting to Decimal Notation (http://openstax.org/l/decimalnota)

        1.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Is the same as                2. When can you add two  3. What is the purpose of
    Explain.                         exponents?               scientific notation?

4. Explain what a negative
    exponent does.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.2 · Exponents and Scientific Notation 37

Numeric

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents.

5.             6.                                                         7.

8.             9.                                                         10.

11.            12.                                                        13.

14.

For the following exercises, write each expression with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive
exponents.

15.            16.                                                        17.

18.            19.                                                        20.

For the following exercises, express the decimal in scientific notation.

21. 0.0000314       22. 148,000,000

For the following exercises, convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation.

23.                 24.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents.

25.            26.                                                        27.

28.            29.                                                        30.

31.            32.                                                        33.

34.            35.                                                        36.

37.            38.                                                        39.

40.            41.                                                        42.
38 1 · Prerequisites

     43.

Real-World Applications

44. To reach escape velocity, a     45. A dime is the thinnest coin         46. The average distance
                                          in U.S. currency. A dime's              between Earth and the Sun
     rocket must travel at the            thickness measures                      is 92,960,000 mi. Rewrite
                                                            m. Rewrite the        the distance using scientific
     rate of          ft/min.             number in standard                      notation.
                                          notation.
     Rewrite the rate in

     standard notation.

47. A terabyte is made of           48. The Gross Domestic                  49. One picometer is
      approximately                       Product (GDP) for the                   approximately
      1,099,500,000,000 bytes.            United States in the first                                   in. Rewrite
      Rewrite in scientific               quarter of 2014 was                     this length using standard
      notation.                                                    Rewrite        notation.
                                          the GDP in standard
                                          notation.

50. The value of the services
      sector of the U.S. economy
      in the first quarter of 2012
      was $10,633.6 billion.
      Rewrite this amount in
      scientific notation.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to simplify. Round the answers to the nearest hundredth.

51.                                      52.

Extensions

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents.

53.                                 54.                                     55.

56.                                 57.                                     58. Avogadro's constant is

                                                                                 used to calculate the

                                                                                 number of particles in a

                                                                                 mole. A mole is a basic unit

                                                                                 in chemistry to measure

                                                                                 the amount of a substance.

                                                                                 The constant is

                                                                                                     Write

                                                                                 Avogadro's constant in

                                                                                 standard notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 39

59. Planck's constant is an
      important unit of measure
      in quantum physics. It
      describes the relationship
      between energy and
      frequency. The constant is
      written as
                                     Write
      Planck's constant in
      standard notation.

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Evaluate square roots.
           Use the product rule to simplify square roots.
           Use the quotient rule to simplify square roots.
           Add and subtract square roots.
           Rationalize denominators.
           Use rational roots.

A hardware store sells 16-ft ladders and 24-ft ladders. A window is located 12 feet above the ground. A ladder needs to
be purchased that will reach the window from a point on the ground 5 feet from the building. To find out the length of
ladder needed, we can draw a right triangle as shown in Figure 1, and use the Pythagorean Theorem.

                                            Figure 1

Now, we need to find out the length that, when squared, is 169, to determine which ladder to choose. In other words, we
need to find a square root. In this section, we will investigate methods of finding solutions to problems such as this one.

Evaluating Square Roots

When the square root of a number is squared, the result is the original number. Since  the square root of is

The square root function is the inverse of the squaring function just as subtraction is the inverse of addition. To undo

squaring, we take the square root.

In general terms, if is a positive real number, then the square root of is a number that, when multiplied by itself,
gives The square root could be positive or negative because multiplying two negative numbers gives a positive
number. The principal square root is the nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals The square root
obtained using a calculator is the principal square root.

The principal square root of is written as The symbol is called a radical, the term under the symbol is called the
radicand, and the entire expression is called a radical expression.
40 1 · Prerequisites

Principal Square Root

The principal square root of is the nonnegative number that, when multiplied by itself, equals       It is written as a
radical expression, with a symbol called a radical over the term called the radicand:

  Q&A                 Does

                      No. Although both and  are the radical symbol implies only a nonnegative root, the principal

                      square root. The principal square root of 25 is

EXAMPLE 1

Evaluating Square Roots
Evaluate each expression.

  Solution                                     

                        because                                        because  and

                                 because                                             because         and

  Q&A                 For        can we find the square roots before adding?

                      No.                    This is not equivalent to                              The order of operations

                      requires us to add the terms in the radicand before finding the square root.

  TRY IT #1 Evaluate each expression.

                                                                       

Using the Product Rule to Simplify Square Roots

To simplify a square root, we rewrite it such that there are no perfect squares in the radicand. There are several

properties of square roots that allow us to simplify complicated radical expressions. The first rule we will look at is the

product rule for simplifying square roots, which allows us to separate the square root of a product of two numbers into

the product of two separate rational expressions. For instance, we can rewrite  as                  We can also use the

product rule to express the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical expression.

The Product Rule for Simplifying Square Roots

If and are nonnegative, the square root of the product is equal to the product of the square roots of and

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a square root radical expression, use the product rule to simplify it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 41

1. Factor any perfect squares from the radicand.
2. Write the radical expression as a product of radical expressions.
3. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 2

Using the Product Rule to Simplify Square Roots
Simplify the radical expression.

  Solution  





       TRY IT #2 Simplify

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the product of multiple radical expressions, use the product rule to combine them into one radical
  expression.
   1. Express the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical expression.
   2. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 3
Using the Product Rule to Simplify the Product of Multiple Square Roots
Simplify the radical expression.

     Solution

  TRY IT #3 Simplify  assuming

Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify Square Roots

Just as we can rewrite the square root of a product as a product of square roots, so too can we rewrite the square root of
a quotient as a quotient of square roots, using the quotient rule for simplifying square roots. It can be helpful to
separate the numerator and denominator of a fraction under a radical so that we can take their square roots separately.
42 1 · Prerequisites

We can rewrite        as

The Quotient Rule for Simplifying Square Roots
The square root of the quotient is equal to the quotient of the square roots of and where

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a radical expression, use the quotient rule to simplify it.
   1. Write the radical expression as the quotient of two radical expressions.
   2. Simplify the numerator and denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4
Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify Square Roots
Simplify the radical expression.

     Solution

       TRY IT #4 Simplify

  EXAMPLE 5
Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify an Expression with Two Square Roots
Simplify the radical expression.

     Solution

       TRY IT #5 Simplify

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 43

Adding and Subtracting Square Roots

We can add or subtract radical expressions only when they have the same radicand and when they have the same radical

type such as square roots. For example, the sum of and    is           However, it is often possible to simplify radical

expressions, and that may change the radicand. The radical expression  can be written with a in the radicand, as

so

...

     HOW TO

Given a radical expression requiring addition or subtraction of square roots, simplify.

 1. Simplify each radical expression.
 2. Add or subtract expressions with equal radicands.

EXAMPLE 6

Adding Square Roots
Add

Solution

We can rewrite      as  According the product rule, this becomes       The square root of  is 2, so the

expression becomes      which is  Now the terms have the same radicand so we can add.

       TRY IT #6 Add

  EXAMPLE 7
Subtracting Square Roots
Subtract

     Solution
Rewrite each term so they have equal radicands.

Now the terms have the same radicand so we can subtract.
       TRY IT #7 Subtract
44 1 · Prerequisites

Rationalizing Denominators

When an expression involving square root radicals is written in simplest form, it will not contain a radical in the
denominator. We can remove radicals from the denominators of fractions using a process called rationalizing the
denominator.

We know that multiplying by 1 does not change the value of an expression. We use this property of multiplication to
change expressions that contain radicals in the denominator. To remove radicals from the denominators of fractions,
multiply by the form of 1 that will eliminate the radical.

For a denominator containing a single term, multiply by the radical in the denominator over itself. In other words, if the

denominator is        multiply by

For a denominator containing the sum or difference of a rational and an irrational term, multiply the numerator and

denominator by the conjugate of the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the radical portion of the

denominator. If the denominator is  then the conjugate is

       ...

            HOW TO

Given an expression with a single square root radical term in the denominator, rationalize the denominator.

 a. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the radical in the denominator.
b. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 8

Rationalizing a Denominator Containing a Single Term

Write  in simplest form.

     Solution                       So multiply the fraction by  Then simplify.
The radical in the denominator is

TRY IT #8 Write                    in simplest form.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an expression with a radical term and a constant in the denominator, rationalize the denominator.

 1. Find the conjugate of the denominator.
 2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate.
 3. Use the distributive property.
 4. Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 45

EXAMPLE 9

Rationalizing a Denominator Containing Two Terms

Write         in simplest form.

     Solution
Begin by finding the conjugate of the denominator by writing the denominator and changing the sign. So the conjugate

of       is        Then multiply the fraction by

    TRY IT #9 Write              in simplest form.

Using Rational Roots

Although square roots are the most common rational roots, we can also find cube roots, 4th roots, 5th roots, and more.
Just as the square root function is the inverse of the squaring function, these roots are the inverse of their respective
power functions. These functions can be useful when we need to determine the number that, when raised to a certain
power, gives a certain number.

Understanding nth Roots

Suppose we know that             We want to find what number raised to the 3rd power is equal to 8. Since  we say

that 2 is the cube root of 8.

The nth root of is a number that, when raised to the nth power, gives For example, is the 5th root of

because               If is a real number with at least one nth root, then the principal nth root of is the number

with the same sign as that, when raised to the nth power, equals

The principal nth root of is written as where is a positive integer greater than or equal to 2. In the radical
expression, is called the index of the radical.

Principal th Root

If is a real number with at least one nth root, then the principal nth root of written as  is the number with
the same sign as that, when raised to the nth power, equals The index of the radical is

EXAMPLE 10

Simplifying nth Roots
Simplify each of the following:

    Solution                                        

                because

 First, express the product as a single radical expression.       because


46 1 · Prerequisites



  TRY IT #10 Simplify.

                                                       

Using Rational Exponents

Radical expressions can also be written without using the radical symbol. We can use rational (fractional) exponents.
The index must be a positive integer. If the index is even, then cannot be negative.

We can also have rational exponents with numerators other than 1. In these cases, the exponent must be a fraction in
lowest terms. We raise the base to a power and take an nth root. The numerator tells us the power and the denominator
tells us the root.

All of the properties of exponents that we learned for integer exponents also hold for rational exponents.

  Rational Exponents

  Rational exponents are another way to express principal nth roots. The general form for converting between a radical
  expression with a radical symbol and one with a rational exponent is

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an expression with a rational exponent, write the expression as a radical.

 1. Determine the power by looking at the numerator of the exponent.
 2. Determine the root by looking at the denominator of the exponent.
 3. Using the base as the radicand, raise the radicand to the power and use the root as the index.

EXAMPLE 11

Writing Rational Exponents as Radicals

Write  as a radical. Simplify.

     Solution
The 2 tells us the power and the 3 tells us the root.

We know that          because           Because the cube root is easy to find, it is easiest to find the cube root

before squaring for this problem. In general, it is easier to find the root first and then raise it to a power.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 47

  TRY IT #11 Write as a radical. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 12

Writing Radicals as Rational Exponents

Write  using a rational exponent.

     Solution                                                       We get  Using properties of exponents, we get
The power is 2 and the root is 7, so the rational exponent will be

  TRY IT #12 Write                 using a rational exponent.

EXAMPLE 13

Simplifying Rational Exponents
Simplify:

            

  Solution





                
                
                
                

       TRY IT #13 Simplify

       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with radicals and rational exponents.
      Radicals (http://openstax.org/l/introradical)
      Rational Exponents (http://openstax.org/l/rationexpon)
      Simplify Radicals (http://openstax.org/l/simpradical)
      Rationalize Denominator (http://openstax.org/l/rationdenom)
48 1 · Prerequisites

        1.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What does it mean when a       2. Where would radicals come     3. Every number will have two
    radical does not have an          in the order of operations?      square roots. What is the
    index? Is the expression          Explain why.                     principal square root?
    equal to the radicand?
    Explain.

4. Can a radical with a negative
    radicand have a real square
    root? Why or why not?

Numeric

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.

5.                                6.                               7.

8.                                9.                               10.

11.                               12.                              13.

14.                               15.                              16.

17.                               18.                              19.

20.                               21.                              22.

23.                               24.                              25.

26.                               27.                              28.

29.                               30.                              31.

32.                               33.                              34.

Access for free at openstax.org
Algebraic                                                                              1.3 · Radicals and Rational Exponents 49

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.   37.
                                                         40.
35.                               36.                    43.
                                                         46.
38.                               39.                    49.
                                                         52.
41.                               42.                    55.
                                                         58.
44.                               45.

47.                               48.

50.                               51.

53.                               54.

56.                               57.

59.                               60.                    61.

62.                               63.                    64.

Real-World Applications

65. A guy wire for a suspension bridge runs from the     66. A car accelerates at a rate of  where

     ground diagonally to the top of the closest pylon   t is the time in seconds after the car moves from
                                                         rest. Simplify the expression.
     to make a triangle. We can use the Pythagorean

     Theorem to find the length of guy wire needed.

     The square of the distance between the wire on

     the ground and the pylon on the ground is 90,000

     feet. The square of the height of the pylon is

     160,000 feet. So the length of the guy wire can be

     found by evaluating               What is

     the length of the guy wire?
50 1 · Prerequisites

Extensions

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.

67.                              68.                              69.

70.                              71.                              72.

73.

1.4 Polynomials

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomials.
           Add and subtract polynomials.
           Multiply polynomials.
           Use FOIL to multiply binomials.
           Perform operations with polynomials of several variables.

Maahi is building a little free library (a small house-shaped book repository), whose front is in the shape of a square
topped with a triangle. There will be a rectangular door through which people can take and donate books. Maahi wants
to find the area of the front of the library so that they can purchase the correct amount of paint. Using the
measurements of the front of the house, shown in Figure 1, we can create an expression that combines several variable
terms, allowing us to solve this problem and others like it.

                                                        Figure 1

First find the area of the square in square feet.

Then find the area of the triangle in square feet.

Next find the area of the rectangular door in square feet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1.4 · Polynomials 51

The area of the front of the library can be found by adding the areas of the square and the triangle, and then subtracting

the area of the rectangle. When we do this, we get             or                  ft2.

In this section, we will examine expressions such as this one, which combine several variable terms.

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of Polynomials

The formula just found is an example of a polynomial, which is a sum of or difference of terms, each consisting of a

variable raised to a nonnegative integer power. A number multiplied by a variable raised to an exponent, such as

is known as a coefficient. Coefficients can be positive, negative, or zero, and can be whole numbers, decimals, or

fractions. Each product  such as  is a term of a polynomial. If a term does not contain a variable, it is called

a constant.

A polynomial containing only one term, such as      is called a monomial. A polynomial containing two terms, such as

  is called a binomial. A polynomial containing three terms, such as                     is called a trinomial.

We can find the degree of a polynomial by identifying the highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial.
The term with the highest degree is called the leading term because it is usually written first. The coefficient of the
leading term is called the leading coefficient. When a polynomial is written so that the powers are descending, we say
that it is in standard form.

Polynomials
A polynomial is an expression that can be written in the form

Each real number ai is called a coefficient. The number that is not multiplied by a variable is called a constant.

Each product  is a term of a polynomial. The highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial is called

the degree of a polynomial. The leading term is the term with the highest power, and its coefficient is called the

leading coefficient.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a polynomial expression, identify the degree and leading coefficient.

 1. Find the highest power of x to determine the degree.
 2. Identify the term containing the highest power of x to find the leading term.
 3. Identify the coefficient of the leading term.

EXAMPLE 1

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial
For the following polynomials, identify the degree, the leading term, and the leading coefficient.

  Solution                        

 The highest power of x is 3, so the degree is 3. The leading term is the term containing that degree,     The
                                                                                                        The
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

 The highest power of t is so the degree is The leading term is the term containing that degree,

leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,
52 1 · Prerequisites

 The highest power of p is so the degree is The leading term is the term containing that degree,  The

leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

TRY IT #1 Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the polynomial

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials

We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms, which are terms that contain the same variables raised to

the same exponents. For example, and                  are like terms, and can be added to get  but and are not

like terms, and therefore cannot be added.

...

     HOW TO

Given multiple polynomials, add or subtract them to simplify the expressions.

 1. Combine like terms.
 2. Simplify and write in standard form.

  EXAMPLE 2

Adding Polynomials
Find the sum.

     Solution

                                                              
                                                              

     Analysis
We can check our answers to these types of problems using a graphing calculator. To check, graph the problem as given
along with the simplified answer. The two graphs should be equivalent. Be sure to use the same window to compare the
graphs. Using different windows can make the expressions seem equivalent when they are not.

       TRY IT #2 Find the sum.

  EXAMPLE 3
Subtracting Polynomials
Find the difference.

     Solution

     Analysis
Note that finding the difference between two polynomials is the same as adding the opposite of the second polynomial

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.4 · Polynomials 53

to the first.
       TRY IT #3 Find the difference.

Multiplying Polynomials

Multiplying polynomials is a bit more challenging than adding and subtracting polynomials. We must use the distributive
property to multiply each term in the first polynomial by each term in the second polynomial. We then combine like
terms. We can also use a shortcut called the FOIL method when multiplying binomials. Certain special products follow
patterns that we can memorize and use instead of multiplying the polynomials by hand each time. We will look at a
variety of ways to multiply polynomials.

Multiplying Polynomials Using the Distributive Property

To multiply a number by a polynomial, we use the distributive property. The number must be distributed to each term of

the polynomial. We can distribute the in  to obtain the equivalent expression  When multiplying

polynomials, the distributive property allows us to multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second.

We then add the products together and combine like terms to simplify.

...

     HOW TO

Given the multiplication of two polynomials, use the distributive property to simplify the expression.

 1. Multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second.
 2. Combine like terms.
 3. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 4

Multiplying Polynomials Using the Distributive Property
Find the product.

     Solution

                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  

     Analysis
We can use a table to keep track of our work, as shown in Table 1. Write one polynomial across the top and the other
down the side. For each box in the table, multiply the term for that row by the term for that column. Then add all of the
terms together, combine like terms, and simplify.

                                          Table 1
54 1 · Prerequisites

                                                                       Table 1

             TRY IT #4 Find the product.

    Using FOIL to Multiply Binomials

     A shortcut called FOIL is sometimes used to find the product of two binomials. It is called FOIL because we multiply the
     first terms, the outer terms, the inner terms, and then the last terms of each binomial.

     The FOIL method arises out of the distributive property. We are simply multiplying each term of the first binomial by
     each term of the second binomial, and then combining like terms.

                    ...

                      HOW TO
       Given two binomials, use FOIL to simplify the expression.
         1. Multiply the first terms of each binomial.
         2. Multiply the outer terms of the binomials.
         3. Multiply the inner terms of the binomials.
         4. Multiply the last terms of each binomial.
         5. Add the products.
         6. Combine like terms and simplify.

       EXAMPLE 5
     Using FOIL to Multiply Binomials
     Use FOIL to find the product.

           Solution
     Find the product of the first terms.

     Find the product of the outer terms.

     Find the product of the inner terms.

     Find the product of the last terms.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     1.4 · Polynomials 55

       TRY IT #5 Use FOIL to find the product.

Perfect Square Trinomials

Certain binomial products have special forms. When a binomial is squared, the result is called a perfect square
trinomial. We can find the square by multiplying the binomial by itself. However, there is a special form that each of
these perfect square trinomials takes, and memorizing the form makes squaring binomials much easier and faster. Let's
look at a few perfect square trinomials to familiarize ourselves with the form.

Notice that the first term of each trinomial is the square of the first term of the binomial and, similarly, the last term of
each trinomial is the square of the last term of the binomial. The middle term is double the product of the two terms.
Lastly, we see that the first sign of the trinomial is the same as the sign of the binomial.

  Perfect Square Trinomials
  When a binomial is squared, the result is the first term squared added to double the product of both terms and the
  last term squared.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a binomial, square it using the formula for perfect square trinomials.
   1. Square the first term of the binomial.
   2. Square the last term of the binomial.
   3. For the middle term of the trinomial, double the product of the two terms.
   4. Add and simplify.

  EXAMPLE 6
Expanding Perfect Squares
Expand

     Solution
Begin by squaring the first term and the last term. For the middle term of the trinomial, double the product of the two
terms.

Simplify.
56 1 · Prerequisites

TRY IT #6 Expand

Difference of Squares

Another special product is called the difference of squares, which occurs when we multiply a binomial by another

binomial with the same terms but the opposite sign. Let's see what happens when we multiply  using the

FOIL method.

The middle term drops out, resulting in a difference of squares. Just as we did with the perfect squares, let's look at a few
examples.

Because the sign changes in the second binomial, the outer and inner terms cancel each other out, and we are left only
with the square of the first term minus the square of the last term.

       Q&A Is there a special form for the sum of squares?
                    No. The difference of squares occurs because the opposite signs of the binomials cause the middle terms
                    to disappear. There are no two binomials that multiply to equal a sum of squares.

  Difference of Squares

  When a binomial is multiplied by a binomial with the same terms separated by the opposite sign, the result is the
  square of the first term minus the square of the last term.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a binomial multiplied by a binomial with the same terms but the opposite sign, find the difference of
squares.

 1. Square the first term of the binomials.
 2. Square the last term of the binomials.
 3. Subtract the square of the last term from the square of the first term.

EXAMPLE 7

Multiplying Binomials Resulting in a Difference of Squares
Multiply

Solution

Square the first term to get     Square the last term to get  Subtract the square of the last term from

the square of the first term to find the product of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     1.4 · Polynomials 57

       TRY IT #7 Multiply

Performing Operations with Polynomials of Several Variables

We have looked at polynomials containing only one variable. However, a polynomial can contain several variables. All of
the same rules apply when working with polynomials containing several variables. Consider an example:

  EXAMPLE 8

Multiplying Polynomials Containing Several Variables
Multiply

     Solution
Follow the same steps that we used to multiply polynomials containing only one variable.

TRY IT #8 Multiply

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polynomials.
Adding and Subtracting Polynomials (http://openstax.org/l/addsubpoly)
Multiplying Polynomials (http://openstax.org/l/multiplpoly)
Special Products of Polynomials (http://openstax.org/l/specialpolyprod)

        1.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Evaluate the following         2. Many times, multiplying two       3. You can multiply
    statement: The degree of a        binomials with two variables         polynomials with any
    polynomial in standard form       results in a trinomial. This is      number of terms and any
    is the exponent of the            not the case when there is a         number of variables using
    leading term. Explain why         difference of two squares.           four basic steps over and
    the statement is true or          Explain why the product in           over until you reach the
    false.                            this case is also a binomial.        expanded polynomial. What
                                                                           are the four steps?

4. State whether the following
    statement is true and
    explain why or why not: A
    trinomial is always a higher
    degree than a monomial.
58 1 · Prerequisites

Algebraic

For the following exercises, identify the degree of the polynomial.

5.                               6.                                  7.

8.                               9.                                  10.

For the following exercises, find the sum or difference.

11.                              12.

13.                                             14.

15.                                                       16.

For the following exercises, find the product.

17.                              18.                                 19.

20.                              21.                                 22.

23.

For the following exercises, expand the binomial.

24.                              25.                                 26.

27.                              28.                                 29.

30.

For the following exercises, multiply the binomials.

31.                              32.                                 33.

34.                              35.                                 36.

37.

For the following exercises, multiply the polynomials.

38.                              39.                                 40.

41.                              42.                                 43.

44.                              45.                                 46.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1.5 · Factoring Polynomials 59

47.         48.                                               49.

50.         51.                                               52.

Real-World Applications                                       54. A prospective buyer wants to know how much

53. A developer wants to purchase a plot of land to           grain a specific silo can hold. The area of the floor
      build a house. The area of the plot can be
      described by the following expression:                  of the silo is       The height of the silo is
                              where x is measured in meters.
      Multiply the binomials to find the area of the plot                where x is measured in feet. Expand the
      in standard form.
                                                              square and multiply by the height to find the

                                                              expression that shows how much grain the silo

                                                              can hold.

Extensions

For the following exercises, perform the given operations.

55.              56.                                                          57.

1.5 Factoring Polynomials

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Factor the greatest common factor of a polynomial.
           Factor a trinomial.
           Factor by grouping.
           Factor a perfect square trinomial.
           Factor a difference of squares.
           Factor the sum and difference of cubes.
           Factor expressions using fractional or negative exponents.

Imagine that we are trying to find the area of a lawn so that we can determine how much grass seed to purchase. The
lawn is the green portion in Figure 1.

                                                                              Figure 1
The area of the entire region can be found using the formula for the area of a rectangle.

The areas of the portions that do not require grass seed need to be subtracted from the area of the entire region. The
60 1 · Prerequisites

two square regions each have an area of               units2. The other rectangular region has one side of length
                                                                                         units2. So the region that must be
and one side of length giving an area of

subtracted has an area of                 units2.

The area of the region that requires grass seed is found by subtracting           units2. This area can also be

expressed in factored form as            units2. We can confirm that this is an equivalent expression by multiplying.

Many polynomial expressions can be written in simpler forms by factoring. In this section, we will look at a variety of
methods that can be used to factor polynomial expressions.

Factoring the Greatest Common Factor of a Polynomial

When we study fractions, we learn that the greatest common factor (GCF) of two numbers is the largest number that

divides evenly into both numbers. For instance, is the GCF of and because it is the largest number that divides

evenly into both and The GCF of polynomials works the same way: is the GCF of and                     because it is the

largest polynomial that divides evenly into both and

When factoring a polynomial expression, our first step should be to check for a GCF. Look for the GCF of the coefficients,
and then look for the GCF of the variables.

Greatest Common Factor

The greatest common factor (GCF) of polynomials is the largest polynomial that divides evenly into the polynomials.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a polynomial expression, factor out the greatest common factor.

 1. Identify the GCF of the coefficients.
 2. Identify the GCF of the variables.
 3. Combine to find the GCF of the expression.
 4. Determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each term in the expression.
 5. Write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the sum of the terms we need to multiply by.

EXAMPLE 1

Factoring the Greatest Common Factor
Factor

Solution

First, find the GCF of the expression. The GCF of 6, 45, and 21 is 3. The GCF of  , and is . (Note that the GCF of a

set of expressions in the form will always be the exponent of lowest degree.) And the GCF of          , and is .

Combine these to find the GCF of the polynomial, .

Next, determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each term of the polynomial. We find that
                                                               , and

Finally, write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the sum of the terms we needed to multiply by.

     Analysis
After factoring, we can check our work by multiplying. Use the distributive property to confirm that

TRY IT #1 Factor                          by pulling out the GCF.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.5 · Factoring Polynomials 61

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1

Although we should always begin by looking for a GCF, pulling out the GCF is not the only way that polynomial

expressions can be factored. The polynomial               has a GCF of 1, but it can be written as the product of the

factors    and

Trinomials of the form         can be factored by finding two numbers with a product of and a sum of The
trinomial
is and their sum is      for example, can be factored using the numbers and because the product of those numbers

                         The trinomial can be rewritten as the product of  and

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1

A trinomial of the form        can be written in factored form as               where        and

Q&A        Can every trinomial be factored as a product of binomials?
           No. Some polynomials cannot be factored. These polynomials are said to be prime.

         ...

              HOW TO

Given a trinomial in the form                 factor it.

1. List factors of
2. Find and a pair of factors of with a sum of
3. Write the factored expression

EXAMPLE 2

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1
Factor

Solution

We have a trinomial with leading coefficient      and     We need to find two numbers with a product of

and a sum of In the table below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum.

                               Factors of                 Sum of Factors

                                                          14

                                                          2

Now that we have identified and as and write the factored form as

     Analysis
We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that

Q&A        Does the order of the factors matter?
           No. Multiplication is commutative, so the order of the factors does not matter.
62 1 · Prerequisites

    TRY IT #2 Factor

Factoring by Grouping

Trinomials with leading coefficients other than 1 are slightly more complicated to factor. For these trinomials, we can

factor by grouping by dividing the x term into the sum of two terms, factoring each portion of the expression

separately, and then factoring out the GCF of the entire expression. The trinomial          can be rewritten as

                      using this process. We begin by rewriting the original expression as  and then factor

each portion of the expression to obtain                       We then pull out the GCF of  to find the factored

expression.

Factor by Grouping

To factor a trinomial in the form         by grouping, we find two numbers with a product of and a sum of

We use these numbers to divide the term into the sum of two terms and factor each portion of the expression

separately, then factor out the GCF of the entire expression.

        ...

             HOW TO

Given a trinomial in the form             factor by grouping.

1. List factors of

2. Find and a pair of factors of with a sum of

3. Rewrite the original expression as

4. Pull out the GCF of

5. Pull out the GCF of

6. Factor out the GCF of the expression.

EXAMPLE 3

Factoring a Trinomial by Grouping

Factor                by grouping.

     Solution                       and   First, determine                     We need to find two numbers with a
We have a trinomial with
product of and a sum of          In the table below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum.

                                          Factors of           Sum of Factors

                                                               29

                                                               13

                                                               7

So      and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.5 · Factoring Polynomials 63

     Analysis
We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that

TRY IT #3 Factor

                                      

Factoring a Perfect Square Trinomial

A perfect square trinomial is a trinomial that can be written as the square of a binomial. Recall that when a binomial is
squared, the result is the square of the first term added to twice the product of the two terms and the square of the last
term.

We can use this equation to factor any perfect square trinomial.
  Perfect Square Trinomials
  A perfect square trinomial can be written as the square of a binomial:

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a perfect square trinomial, factor it into the square of a binomial.

 1. Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares.
 2. Confirm that the middle term is twice the product of
 3. Write the factored form as

EXAMPLE 4

Factoring a Perfect Square Trinomial
Factor

Solution

Notice that  and are perfect squares because                    and         Then check to see if the middle term is
                                                                                                Therefore, the trinomial is
twice the product of and The middle term is, indeed, twice the product:

a perfect square trinomial and can be written as

       TRY IT #4 Factor

Factoring a Difference of Squares

A difference of squares is a perfect square subtracted from a perfect square. Recall that a difference of squares can be
rewritten as factors containing the same terms but opposite signs because the middle terms cancel each other out when
64 1 · Prerequisites

     the two factors are multiplied.

     We can use this equation to factor any differences of squares.
        Differences of Squares
        A difference of squares can be rewritten as two factors containing the same terms but opposite signs.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a difference of squares, factor it into binomials.
 1. Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares.
 2. Write the factored form as

  EXAMPLE 5                                                        and  The polynomial represents a difference of

Factoring a Difference of Squares
Factor

     Solution
Notice that and are perfect squares because
squares and can be rewritten as

TRY IT #5 Factor

Q&A  Is there a formula to factor the sum of squares?
     No. A sum of squares cannot be factored.

Factoring the Sum and Difference of Cubes

Now, we will look at two new special products: the sum and difference of cubes. Although the sum of squares cannot be
factored, the sum of cubes can be factored into a binomial and a trinomial.

Similarly, the difference of cubes can be factored into a binomial and a trinomial, but with different signs.

We can use the acronym SOAP to remember the signs when factoring the sum or difference of cubes. The first letter of
each word relates to the signs: Same Opposite Always Positive. For example, consider the following example.

The sign of the first 2 is the same as the sign between            The sign of the term is opposite the sign between
            And the sign of the last term, 4, is always positive.

  Sum and Difference of Cubes

  We can factor the sum of two cubes as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.5 · Factoring Polynomials 65

We can factor the difference of two cubes as

...

     HOW TO

Given a sum of cubes or difference of cubes, factor it.

1. Confirm that the first and last term are cubes,       or

2. For a sum of cubes, write the factored form as            For a difference of cubes, write the

factored form as

EXAMPLE 6

Factoring a Sum of Cubes
Factor

     Solution     are cubes because                 Rewrite the sum of cubes as
Notice that and

     Analysis
After writing the sum of cubes this way, we might think we should check to see if the trinomial portion can be factored
further. However, the trinomial portion cannot be factored, so we do not need to check.

TRY IT #6 Factor the sum of cubes:

EXAMPLE 7

Factoring a Difference of Cubes
Factor

     Solution     are cubes because                 and      Write the difference of cubes as
Notice that and

     Analysis
Just as with the sum of cubes, we will not be able to further factor the trinomial portion.

TRY IT #7 Factor the difference of cubes:

Factoring Expressions with Fractional or Negative Exponents

Expressions with fractional or negative exponents can be factored by pulling out a GCF. Look for the variable or
exponent that is common to each term of the expression and pull out that variable or exponent raised to the lowest

power. These expressions follow the same factoring rules as those with integer exponents. For instance,             can

be factored by pulling out and being rewritten as
66 1 · Prerequisites

        EXAMPLE 8
     Factoring an Expression with Fractional or Negative Exponents
     Factor

           Solution
     Factor out the term with the lowest value of the exponent. In this case, that would be

     TRY IT #8 Factor

     MEDIA
     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with factoring polynomials.
     Identify GCF (http://openstax.org/l/findgcftofact)
     Factor Trinomials when a Equals 1 (http://openstax.org/l/facttrinom1)
     Factor Trinomials when a is not equal to 1 (http://openstax.org/l/facttrinom2)
     Factor Sum or Difference of Cubes (http://openstax.org/l/sumdifcube)

        1.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. If the terms of a polynomial   2. A polynomial is factorable,      3. How do you factor by
    do not have a GCF, does that      but it is not a perfect square      grouping?
    mean it is not factorable?        trinomial or a difference of
    Explain.                          two squares. Can you factor
                                      the polynomial without
                                      finding the GCF?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

4.                                5.                                  6.

7.                                8.                                  9.

For the following exercises, factor by grouping.

10.                               11.                                 12.

13.                               14.                                 15.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          1.5 · Factoring Polynomials 67

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

16.                      17.                                         18.

19.                      20.                                         21.

22.                      23.                                         24.

25.                      26.                                         27.

28.                      29.                                         30.

31.                      32.                                         33.

34.                      35.                                         36.

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials.

37.                      38.                                         39.

40.                      41.                                         42.

43.                      44.                                         45.

46.                      47.                                         48.

49.                           50.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, consider this scenario:

Charlotte has appointed a chairperson to lead a city beautification project. The first act is to install statues and fountains

in one of the city's parks. The park is a rectangle with an area of       m2, as shown in the figure below. The

length and width of the park are perfect factors of the area.
68 1 · Prerequisites

51. Factor by grouping to find     52. A statue is to be placed in    53. At the northwest corner of
      the length and width of the        the center of the park. The        the park, the city is going
      park.                              area of the base of the            to install a fountain. The
                                         statue is                          area of the base of the
                                         Factor the area to find the        fountain is
                                         lengths of the sides of the        Factor the area to find the
                                         statue.                            lengths of the sides of the
                                                                            fountain.

For the following exercise, consider the following scenario:

A school is installing a flagpole in the central plaza. The plaza is a square with side length 100 yd. as shown in the figure

below. The flagpole will take up a square plot with area              yd2.

54. Find the length of the base of the flagpole by
      factoring.

Extensions

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials completely.

55.                                56.                                57.

58.                                59.

1.6 Rational Expressions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Simplify rational expressions.
           Multiply rational expressions.
           Divide rational expressions.
           Add and subtract rational expressions.
           Simplify complex rational expressions.

A pastry shop has fixed costs of   per week and variable costs of per box of pastries. The shop's costs per week in

terms of the number of boxes made, is               We can divide the costs per week by the number of boxes made to

determine the cost per box of pastries.

Notice that the result is a polynomial expression divided by a second polynomial expression. In this section, we will
explore quotients of polynomial expressions.

Simplifying Rational Expressions

The quotient of two polynomial expressions is called a rational expression. We can apply the properties of fractions to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1.6 · Rational Expressions 69

rational expressions, such as simplifying the expressions by canceling common factors from the numerator and the
denominator. To do this, we first need to factor both the numerator and denominator. Let's start with the rational
expression shown.

We can factor the numerator and denominator to rewrite the expression.

Then we can simplify that expression by canceling the common factor

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a rational expression, simplify it.
   1. Factor the numerator and denominator.
   2. Cancel any common factors.

  EXAMPLE 1
Simplifying Rational Expressions
Simplify

     Solution

     Analysis
We can cancel the common factor because any expression divided by itself is equal to 1.

Q&A  Can the term be cancelled in Example 1?

     No. A factor is an expression that is multiplied by another expression. The         term is not a factor of the
     numerator or the denominator.

TRY IT #1 Simplify

Multiplying Rational Expressions

Multiplication of rational expressions works the same way as multiplication of any other fractions. We multiply the
numerators to find the numerator of the product, and then multiply the denominators to find the denominator of the
product. Before multiplying, it is helpful to factor the numerators and denominators just as we did when simplifying
rational expressions. We are often able to simplify the product of rational expressions.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given two rational expressions, multiply them.

   1. Factor the numerator and denominator.
70 1 · Prerequisites

         2. Multiply the numerators.
         3. Multiply the denominators.
         4. Simplify.

        EXAMPLE 2
     Multiplying Rational Expressions
     Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form:

           Solution

TRY IT #2 Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form:

Dividing Rational Expressions

Division of rational expressions works the same way as division of other fractions. To divide a rational expression by
another rational expression, multiply the first expression by the reciprocal of the second. Using this approach, we would

rewrite  as the product            Once the division expression has been rewritten as a multiplication expression,

we can multiply as we did before.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given two rational expressions, divide them.
   1. Rewrite as the first rational expression multiplied by the reciprocal of the second.
   2. Factor the numerators and denominators.
   3. Multiply the numerators.
   4. Multiply the denominators.
   5. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 3

Dividing Rational Expressions
Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.6 · Rational Expressions 71

Solution

       TRY IT #3 Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest form:

Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions

Adding and subtracting rational expressions works just like adding and subtracting numerical fractions. To add fractions,
we need to find a common denominator. Let's look at an example of fraction addition.

We have to rewrite the fractions so they share a common denominator before we are able to add. We must do the same
thing when adding or subtracting rational expressions.

The easiest common denominator to use will be the least common denominator, or LCD. The LCD is the smallest

multiple that the denominators have in common. To find the LCD of two rational expressions, we factor the expressions

and multiply all of the distinct factors. For instance, if the factored denominators were  and

then the LCD would be

Once we find the LCD, we need to multiply each expression by the form of 1 that will change the denominator to the

LCD. We would need to multiply the expression with a denominator of  by                    and the expression with a

denominator of                 by

...

     HOW TO

Given two rational expressions, add or subtract them.

 1. Factor the numerator and denominator.
 2. Find the LCD of the expressions.
 3. Multiply the expressions by a form of 1 that changes the denominators to the LCD.
 4. Add or subtract the numerators.
 5. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 4

Adding Rational Expressions
Add the rational expressions:

Solution
72 1 · Prerequisites

First, we have to find the LCD. In this case, the LCD will be  We then multiply each expression by the appropriate form
of 1 to obtain as the denominator for each fraction.

Now that the expressions have the same denominator, we simply add the numerators to find the sum.

     Analysis
Multiplying by or does not change the value of the original expression because any number divided by itself is 1,
and multiplying an expression by 1 gives the original expression.

  EXAMPLE 5
Subtracting Rational Expressions
Subtract the rational expressions:

     Solution

Q&A                   Do we have to use the LCD to add or subtract rational expressions?
                      No. Any common denominator will work, but it is easiest to use the LCD.

TRY IT #4 Subtract the rational expressions:

Simplifying Complex Rational Expressions

A complex rational expression is a rational expression that contains additional rational expressions in the numerator, the

denominator, or both. We can simplify complex rational expressions by rewriting the numerator and denominator as

single rational expressions and dividing. The complex rational expression  can be simplified by rewriting the

numerator as the fraction and combining the expressions in the denominator as                  We can then rewrite the

expression as a multiplication problem using the reciprocal of the denominator. We get         which is equal to

...

     HOW TO

Given a complex rational expression, simplify it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.6 · Rational Expressions 73

1. Combine the expressions in the numerator into a single rational expression by adding or subtracting.
2. Combine the expressions in the denominator into a single rational expression by adding or subtracting.
3. Rewrite as the numerator divided by the denominator.
4. Rewrite as multiplication.
5. Multiply.
6. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 6

Simplifying Complex Rational Expressions

Simplify:  .

     Solution
Begin by combining the expressions in the numerator into one expression.

                                                   

                                                   

Now the numerator is a single rational expression and the denominator is a single rational expression.

We can rewrite this as division, and then multiplication.

TRY IT #5 Simplify:

Q&A        Can a complex rational expression always be simplified?
           Yes. We can always rewrite a complex rational expression as a simplified rational expression.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with rational expressions.

Simplify Rational Expressions (http://openstax.org/l/simpratexpress)
Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions (http://openstax.org/l/multdivratex)
Add and Subtract Rational Expressions (http://openstax.org/l/addsubratex)
Simplify a Complex Fraction (http://openstax.org/l/complexfract)
74 1 · Prerequisites

        1.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How can you use factoring     2. How do you use the LCD to    3. Tell whether the following
    to simplify rational             combine two rational            statement is true or false
    expressions?                     expressions?                    and explain why: You only
                                                                     need to find the LCD when
                                                                     adding or subtracting
                                                                     rational expressions.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expressions.

4.                               5.                              6.

7.                               8.                              9.

10.                              11.                             12.

13.

For the following exercises, multiply the rational expressions and express the product in simplest form.

14.                              15.                             16.

17.                              18.                             19.

20.                              21.                             22.

23.

For the following exercises, divide the rational expressions.

24.                              25.                             26.

27.                              28.                             29.

30.                              31.                             32.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1.6 · Rational Expressions 75

For the following exercises, add and subtract the rational expressions, and then simplify.

33.                                34.                                   35.

36.                                37.                                   38.

39.                                40.                                   41.

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expression.

42.                                43.                                   44.

45.                                46.                                   47.

48.                                49.                                   50.

Real-World Applications

51. Brenda is placing tile on her           52. The area of Lijuan's yard is  53. Elroi wants to mulch his
                                                                                    garden. His garden is
     bathroom floor. The area of the                   ft2. A patch of                                   ft2. One bag

     floor is        ft2. The area          sod has an area of                      of mulch covers
                                                                                    ft2. Divide the expressions
     of one tile is                To find             ft2. Divide                  and simplify to find how
                                                                                    many bags of mulch Elroi
     the number of tiles needed,            the two areas and simplify              needs to mulch his garden.

     simplify the rational expression:      to find how many pieces of

                                            sod Lijuan needs to cover

                                            her yard.

Extensions

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify.

54.                                         55.                               56.

57.
76 1 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

algebraic expression constants and variables combined using addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division

associative property of addition the sum of three numbers may be grouped differently without affecting the result;

in symbols,

associative property of multiplication the product of three numbers may be grouped differently without affecting

the result; in symbols,

base in exponential notation, the expression that is being multiplied

binomial a polynomial containing two terms

coefficient any real number in a polynomial in the form

commutative property of addition two numbers may be added in either order without affecting the result; in

symbols,

commutative property of multiplication two numbers may be multiplied in any order without affecting the result; in

symbols,

constant a quantity that does not change value

degree the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial

difference of squares the binomial that results when a binomial is multiplied by a binomial with the same terms, but

the opposite sign

distributive property the product of a factor times a sum is the sum of the factor times each term in the sum; in

symbols,

equation a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions are equal

exponent in exponential notation, the raised number or variable that indicates how many times the base is being

multiplied

exponential notation a shorthand method of writing products of the same factor

factor by grouping a method for factoring a trinomial in the form            by dividing the x term into the sum of

two terms, factoring each portion of the expression separately, and then factoring out the GCF of the entire

expression

formula an equation expressing a relationship between constant and variable quantities

greatest common factor the largest polynomial that divides evenly into each polynomial

identity property of addition there is a unique number, called the additive identity, 0, which, when added to a

number, results in the original number; in symbols,

identity property of multiplication there is a unique number, called the multiplicative identity, 1, which, when

multiplied by a number, results in the original number; in symbols,

index the number above the radical sign indicating the nth root

integers the set consisting of the natural numbers, their opposites, and 0:

inverse property of addition for every real number there is a unique number, called the additive inverse (or

opposite), denoted which, when added to the original number, results in the additive identity, 0; in symbols,

inverse property of multiplication for every non-zero real number there is a unique number, called the
    multiplicative inverse (or reciprocal), denoted which, when multiplied by the original number, results in the

    multiplicative identity, 1; in symbols,

irrational numbers the set of all numbers that are not rational; they cannot be written as either a terminating or
    repeating decimal; they cannot be expressed as a fraction of two integers

leading coefficient the coefficient of the leading term
leading term the term containing the highest degree
least common denominator the smallest multiple that two denominators have in common
monomial a polynomial containing one term
natural numbers the set of counting numbers:
order of operations a set of rules governing how mathematical expressions are to be evaluated, assigning priorities to

    operations
perfect square trinomial the trinomial that results when a binomial is squared
polynomial a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a nonnegative integer power
principal nth root the number with the same sign as that when raised to the nth power equals
principal square root the nonnegative square root of a number that, when multiplied by itself, equals
radical the symbol used to indicate a root
radical expression an expression containing a radical symbol
radicand the number under the radical symbol

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1 · Chapter Review 77

rational expression the quotient of two polynomial expressions

rational numbers the set of all numbers of the form where and are integers and   Any rational number

may be written as a fraction or a terminating or repeating decimal.

real number line a horizontal line used to represent the real numbers. An arbitrary fixed point is chosen to represent

0; positive numbers lie to the right of 0 and negative numbers to the left.

real numbers the sets of rational numbers and irrational numbers taken together

scientific notation a shorthand notation for writing very large or very small numbers in the form  where

               and is an integer

term of a polynomial any  of a polynomial in the form

trinomial a polynomial containing three terms

variable a quantity that may change value

whole numbers the set consisting of 0 plus the natural numbers:

Key Equations

                         Rules of Exponents
For nonzero real numbers and and integers and

Product rule

Quotient rule

Power rule
Zero exponent rule

Negative rule

Power of a product rule

Power of a quotient rule

  perfect square trinomial

    difference of squares

    difference of squares

  perfect square trinomial

          sum of cubes

      difference of cubes

Key Concepts

1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials

  · Rational numbers may be written as fractions or terminating or repeating decimals. See Example 1 and Example 2.
  · Determine whether a number is rational or irrational by writing it as a decimal. See Example 3.
  · The rational numbers and irrational numbers make up the set of real numbers. See Example 4. A number can be

      classified as natural, whole, integer, rational, or irrational. See Example 5.
78 1 · Chapter Review

  · The order of operations is used to evaluate expressions. See Example 6.
  · The real numbers under the operations of addition and multiplication obey basic rules, known as the properties of

      real numbers. These are the commutative properties, the associative properties, the distributive property, the
      identity properties, and the inverse properties. See Example 7.
  · Algebraic expressions are composed of constants and variables that are combined using addition, subtraction,
      multiplication, and division. See Example 8. They take on a numerical value when evaluated by replacing variables
      with constants. See Example 9, Example 10, and Example 12
  · Formulas are equations in which one quantity is represented in terms of other quantities. They may be simplified or
      evaluated as any mathematical expression. See Example 11 and Example 13.

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation

  · Products of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding exponents. See Example 1.
  · Quotients of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting exponents. See Example

      2.
  · Powers of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by multiplying exponents. See Example 3.
  · An expression with exponent zero is defined as 1. See Example 4.
  · An expression with a negative exponent is defined as a reciprocal. See Example 5 and Example 6.
  · The power of a product of factors is the same as the product of the powers of the same factors. See Example 7.
  · The power of a quotient of factors is the same as the quotient of the powers of the same factors. See Example 8.
  · The rules for exponential expressions can be combined to simplify more complicated expressions. See Example 9.
  · Scientific notation uses powers of 10 to simplify very large or very small numbers. See Example 10 and Example 11.
  · Scientific notation may be used to simplify calculations with very large or very small numbers. See Example 12 and

      Example 13.

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents

  · The principal square root of a number is the nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals See
      Example 1.

  · If and are nonnegative, the square root of the product is equal to the product of the square roots of and
      See Example 2 and Example 3.

  · If and are nonnegative, the square root of the quotient is equal to the quotient of the square roots of and
      See Example 4 and Example 5.

  · We can add and subtract radical expressions if they have the same radicand and the same index. See Example 6 and
      Example 7.

  · Radical expressions written in simplest form do not contain a radical in the denominator. To eliminate the square
      root radical from the denominator, multiply both the numerator and the denominator by the conjugate of the
      denominator. See Example 8 and Example 9.

  · The principal nth root of is the number with the same sign as that when raised to the nth power equals These
      roots have the same properties as square roots. See Example 10.

  · Radicals can be rewritten as rational exponents and rational exponents can be rewritten as radicals. See Example 11
      and Example 12.

  · The properties of exponents apply to rational exponents. See Example 13.

1.4 Polynomials

  · A polynomial is a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a non-negative integer power. The degree is
      the highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial. The leading term is the term containing the highest
      degree, and the leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term. See Example 1.

  · We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms. See Example 2 and Example 3.
  · To multiply polynomials, use the distributive property to multiply each term in the first polynomial by each term in

      the second. Then add the products. See Example 4.
  · FOIL (First, Outer, Inner, Last) is a shortcut that can be used to multiply binomials. See Example 5.
  · Perfect square trinomials and difference of squares are special products. See Example 6 and Example 7.
  · Follow the same rules to work with polynomials containing several variables. See Example 8.

1.5 Factoring Polynomials

  · The greatest common factor, or GCF, can be factored out of a polynomial. Checking for a GCF should be the first
      step in any factoring problem. See Example 1.

  · Trinomials with leading coefficient 1 can be factored by finding numbers that have a product of the third term and a
      sum of the second term. See Example 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1 · Exercises 79

    · Trinomials can be factored using a process called factoring by grouping. See Example 3.
    · Perfect square trinomials and the difference of squares are special products and can be factored using equations.

        See Example 4 and Example 5.
    · The sum of cubes and the difference of cubes can be factored using equations. See Example 6 and Example 7.
    · Polynomials containing fractional and negative exponents can be factored by pulling out a GCF. See Example 8.

1.6 Rational Expressions

  · Rational expressions can be simplified by cancelling common factors in the numerator and denominator. See
      Example 1.

  · We can multiply rational expressions by multiplying the numerators and multiplying the denominators. See
      Example 2.

  · To divide rational expressions, multiply by the reciprocal of the second expression. See Example 3.
  · Adding or subtracting rational expressions requires finding a common denominator. See Example 4 and Example 5.
  · Complex rational expressions have fractions in the numerator or the denominator. These expressions can be

      simplified. See Example 6.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials

For the following exercises, perform the given operations.

1.                        2.                                3.

For the following exercises, solve the equation.

4.                        5.

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

6.                        7.

For the following exercises, identify the number as rational, irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive
answer.

8. 11                     9. 0                              10.

11.

Exponents and Scientific Notation
For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

12.                       13.                               14.

15.                       16.                               17.

18.                       19.                               20. Write the number in

                                                                 standard notation:
80 1 · Exercises

21. Write the number in
      scientific notation:
      16,340,000

Radicals and Rational Expressions

For the following exercises, find the principal square root.

22.                                23.                                   24.

25.                                26.                                   27.

28.                                29.                                   30.

31.                                32.                                   33.

34.

Polynomials

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify.

35.                                     36.                                   37.

38.                                     39.                                   40.

41.                                42.                                   43.

44.

Factoring Polynomials

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

45.                                46.                                   47.

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

48.                                49.                                   50.

51.                                52.                                   53.

54.                                55.                                   56.

57.                                58.                                   59.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    1 · Exercises 81

60.

Rational Expressions
For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

61.                       62.                               63.

64.                       65.                               66.

67.                       68.                               69.

70.

Practice Test

For the following exercises, identify the number as rational, irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive
answer.

1.                        2.

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression.

3.                        4.                                5. Write the number in
                                                                standard notation:

6. Write the number in
    scientific notation:
    0.0000000212.

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

7.                        8.                                9.

10.                       11.                               12.

13.                       14.                               15.

16.                       17.                               18.

19.                                                    20.
82 1 · Exercises

21.                                                    22.

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

23.                              24.                        25.

26.

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

27.                              28.                        29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                               2 · Introduction 83

2  EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES

From the air, a landscape of circular crop fields may seem random, but they are laid out and irrigated very precisely.
Farmers and irrigation providers combining agricultural science, engineering, and mathematics to achieve the most
productive and efficient array. (Credit: Modification of "Aerial Phot of Center Pivot Irrigations Systems (1)" by Soil
Science/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
  2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable
  2.3 Models and Applications
  2.4 Complex Numbers
  2.5 Quadratic Equations
  2.6 Other Types of Equations
  2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities

      Introduction to Equations and Inequalities

Irrigation is a critical aspect of agriculture, which can expand the yield of farms and enable farming in areas not naturally
viable for crops. But the materials, equipment, and the water itself are expensive and complex. To be efficient and
productive, farm owners and irrigation specialists must carefully lay out the network of pipes, pumps, and related
equipment. The available land can be divided into regular portions (similar to a grid), and the different sizes of irrigation
systems and conduits can be installed within the plotted area.

2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Plot ordered pairs in a Cartesian coordinate system.
           Graph equations by plotting points.
           Graph equations with a graphing utility.
           Find x-intercepts and y-intercepts.
           Use the distance formula.
           Use the midpoint formula.
84 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                                              Figure 1

Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way, she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is
indicated by a red dot in Figure 1. Laying a rectangular coordinate grid over the map, we can see that each stop aligns
with an intersection of grid lines. In this section, we will learn how to use grid lines to describe locations and changes in
locations.

Plotting Ordered Pairs in the Cartesian Coordinate System

An old story describes how seventeenth-century philosopher/mathematician René Descartes, while sick in bed, invented
the system that has become the foundation of algebra. According to the story, Descartes was staring at a fly crawling on
the ceiling when he realized that he could describe the fly's location in relation to the perpendicular lines formed by the
adjacent walls of his room. He viewed the perpendicular lines as horizontal and vertical axes. Further, by dividing each
axis into equal unit lengths, Descartes saw that it was possible to locate any object in a two-dimensional plane using just
two numbers--the displacement from the horizontal axis and the displacement from the vertical axis.

While there is evidence that ideas similar to Descartes' grid system existed centuries earlier, it was Descartes who
introduced the components that comprise the Cartesian coordinate system, a grid system having perpendicular axes.
Descartes named the horizontal axis the x-axis and the vertical axis the y-axis.

The Cartesian coordinate system, also called the rectangular coordinate system, is based on a two-dimensional plane
consisting of the x-axis and the y-axis. Perpendicular to each other, the axes divide the plane into four sections. Each
section is called a quadrant; the quadrants are numbered counterclockwise as shown in Figure 2

                                                  Figure 2

The center of the plane is the point at which the two axes cross. It is known as the origin, or point  From the origin,

each axis is further divided into equal units: increasing, positive numbers to the right on the x-axis and up the y-axis;

decreasing, negative numbers to the left on the x-axis and down the y-axis. The axes extend to positive and negative

infinity as shown by the arrowheads in Figure 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 85

                                                         Figure 3

Each point in the plane is identified by its x-coordinate, or horizontal displacement from the origin, and its

y-coordinate, or vertical displacement from the origin. Together, we write them as an ordered pair indicating the

combined distance from the origin in the form            An ordered pair is also known as a coordinate pair because it

consists of x- and y-coordinates. For example, we can represent the point  in the plane by moving three units to

the right of the origin in the horizontal direction, and one unit down in the vertical direction. See Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4

When dividing the axes into equally spaced increments, note that the x-axis may be considered separately from the
y-axis. In other words, while the x-axis may be divided and labeled according to consecutive integers, the y-axis may be
divided and labeled by increments of 2, or 10, or 100. In fact, the axes may represent other units, such as years against
the balance in a savings account, or quantity against cost, and so on. Consider the rectangular coordinate system
primarily as a method for showing the relationship between two quantities.

Cartesian Coordinate System

A two-dimensional plane where the

· x-axis is the horizontal axis
· y-axis is the vertical axis

A point in the plane is defined as an ordered pair,      such that x is determined by its horizontal distance from the

origin and y is determined by its vertical distance from the origin.

EXAMPLE 1

Plotting Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

Plot the points    and             in the plane.

Solution

To plot the point  begin at the origin. The x-coordinate is -2, so move two units to the left. The y-coordinate is 4,

so then move four units up in the positive y direction.
86 2 · Equations and Inequalities

To plot the point  begin again at the origin. The x-coordinate is 3, so move three units to the right. The

y-coordinate is also 3, so move three units up in the positive y direction.

To plot the point                  begin again at the origin. The x-coordinate is 0. This tells us not to move in either direction

along the x-axis. The y-coordinate is -3, so move three units down in the negative y direction. See the graph in Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5

     Analysis
Note that when either coordinate is zero, the point must be on an axis. If the x-coordinate is zero, the point is on the
y-axis. If the y-coordinate is zero, the point is on the x-axis.

Graphing Equations by Plotting Points

We can plot a set of points to represent an equation. When such an equation contains both an x variable and a y
variable, it is called an equation in two variables. Its graph is called a graph in two variables. Any graph on a two-
dimensional plane is a graph in two variables.

Suppose we want to graph the equation  We can begin by substituting a value for x into the equation and

determining the resulting value of y. Each pair of x- and y-values is an ordered pair that can be plotted. Table 1 lists

values of x from -3 to 3 and the resulting values for y.

                                                        Table 1
We can plot the points in the table. The points for this particular equation form a line, so we can connect them. See
Figure 6. This is not true for all equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 87

                                                                              Figure 6

Note that the x-values chosen are arbitrary, regardless of the type of equation we are graphing. Of course, some
situations may require particular values of x to be plotted in order to see a particular result. Otherwise, it is logical to
choose values that can be calculated easily, and it is always a good idea to choose values that are both negative and
positive. There is no rule dictating how many points to plot, although we need at least two to graph a line. Keep in mind,
however, that the more points we plot, the more accurately we can sketch the graph.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an equation, graph by plotting points.

   1. Make a table with one column labeled x, a second column labeled with the equation, and a third column listing
        the resulting ordered pairs.

   2. Enter x-values down the first column using positive and negative values. Selecting the x-values in numerical
        order will make the graphing simpler.

   3. Select x-values that will yield y-values with little effort, preferably ones that can be calculated mentally.
   4. Plot the ordered pairs.
   5. Connect the points if they form a line.

EXAMPLE 2

Graphing an Equation in Two Variables by Plotting Points

Graph the equation  by plotting points.

     Solution
First, we construct a table similar to Table 2. Choose x values and calculate y.

                    Table 2
88 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                               Table 2
     Now, plot the points. Connect them if they form a line. See Figure 7

                                              Figure 7

TRY IT #1 Construct a table and graph the equation by plotting points:

Graphing Equations with a Graphing Utility

Most graphing calculators require similar techniques to graph an equation. The equations sometimes have to be

manipulated so they are written in the style  The TI-84 Plus, and many other calculator makes and models,

have a mode function, which allows the window (the screen for viewing the graph) to be altered so the pertinent parts of

a graph can be seen.

For example, the equation        has been entered in the TI-84 Plus shown in Figure 8a. In Figure 8b, the resulting

graph is shown. Notice that we cannot see on the screen where the graph crosses the axes. The standard window screen

on the TI-84 Plus shows          and          See Figure 8c.

        Figure 8 a. Enter the equation. b. This is the graph in the original window. c. These are the original settings.

By changing the window to show more of the positive x-axis and more of the negative y-axis, we have a much better
view of the graph and the x- and y-intercepts. See Figure 9a and Figure 9b.

Figure 9 a. This screen shows the new window settings. b. We can clearly view the intercepts in the new window.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 89

  EXAMPLE 3
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph an Equation
Use a graphing utility to graph the equation:

     Solution
Enter the equation in the y= function of the calculator. Set the window settings so that both the x- and y- intercepts are
showing in the window. See Figure 10.

                                                                             Figure 10

Finding x-intercepts and y-intercepts

The intercepts of a graph are points at which the graph crosses the axes. The x-intercept is the point at which the
graph crosses the x-axis. At this point, the y-coordinate is zero. The y-intercept is the point at which the graph crosses
the y-axis. At this point, the x-coordinate is zero.
To determine the x-intercept, we set y equal to zero and solve for x. Similarly, to determine the y-intercept, we set x
equal to zero and solve for y. For example, lets find the intercepts of the equation
To find the x-intercept, set

To find the y-intercept, set

We can confirm that our results make sense by observing a graph of the equation as in Figure 11. Notice that the graph
crosses the axes where we predicted it would.

                                         Figure 11

Given an equation, find the intercepts.

· Find the x-intercept by setting        and solving for
90 2 · Equations and Inequalities

     · Find the y-intercept by setting  and solving for

EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Intercepts of the Given Equation

Find the intercepts of the equation           Then sketch the graph using only the intercepts.

     Solution

Set  to find the x-intercept.

Set  to find the y-intercept.

Plot both points, and draw a line passing through them as in Figure 12.

                                              Figure 12

     TRY IT #2 Find the intercepts of the equation and sketch the graph:

Using the Distance Formula

Derived from the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance formula is used to find the distance between two points in the

plane. The Pythagorean Theorem,               is based on a right triangle where a and b are the lengths of the legs

adjacent to the right angle, and c is the length of the hypotenuse. See Figure 13.

                                              Figure 13

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 91

The relationship of sides       and               to side d is the same as that of sides a and b to side c. We use the

absolute value symbol to indicate that the length is a positive number because the absolute value of any number is

positive. (For example,         ) The symbols          and                                   indicate that the lengths of the sides of the

triangle are positive. To find the length c, take the square root of both sides of the Pythagorean Theorem.

It follows that the distance formula is given as

We do not have to use the absolute value symbols in this definition because any number squared is positive.

The Distance Formula

Given endpoints            and        the distance between two points is given by

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Distance between Two Points

Find the distance between the points              and

     Solution
Let us first look at the graph of the two points. Connect the points to form a right triangle as in Figure 14.

                                                                             Figure 14
Then, calculate the length of d using the distance formula.

TRY IT #3 Find the distance between two points:                                         and

  EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Distance between Two Locations
Let's return to the situation introduced at the beginning of this section.
Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way, she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is
92 2 · Equations and Inequalities

indicated by a red dot in Figure 1. Find the total distance that Tracie traveled. Compare this with the distance between
her starting and final positions.

Solution

The first thing we should do is identify ordered pairs to describe each position. If we set the starting position at the

origin, we can identify each of the other points by counting units east (right) and north (up) on the grid. For example, the

first stop is 1 block east and 1 block north, so it is at  The next stop is 5 blocks to the east, so it is at  After

that, she traveled 3 blocks east and 2 blocks north to     Lastly, she traveled 4 blocks north to         We can label

these points on the grid as in Figure 15.

                                                           Figure 15

Next, we can calculate the distance. Note that each grid unit represents 1,000 feet.

· From her starting location to her first stop at          Tracie might have driven north 1,000 feet and then east 1,000

feet, or vice versa. Either way, she drove 2,000 feet to her first stop.

· Her second stop is at            So from  to             Tracie drove east 4,000 feet.

· Her third stop is at             There are a number of routes from         to   Whatever route Tracie decided to use,

the distance is the same, as there are no angular streets between the two points. Let's say she drove east 3,000 feet

and then north 2,000 feet for a total of 5,000 feet.

· Tracie's final stop is at        This is a straight drive north from        for a total of 4,000 feet.

Next, we will add the distances listed in Table 3.

                                            From/To        Number of Feet Driven

                                            to                        2,000

                                            to                        4,000

                                            to                        5,000

                                            to                        4,000

                                            Total                     15,000

                                   Table 3

The total distance Tracie drove is 15,000 feet, or 2.84 miles. This is not, however, the actual distance between her starting

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 93

and ending positions. To find this distance, we can use the distance formula between the points  and

At 1,000 feet per grid unit, the distance between Elmhurst, IL, to Franklin Park is 10,630.14 feet, or 2.01 miles. The

distance formula results in a shorter calculation because it is based on the hypotenuse of a right triangle, a straight

diagonal from the origin to the point   Perhaps you have heard the saying "as the crow flies," which means the

shortest distance between two points because a crow can fly in a straight line even though a person on the ground has

to travel a longer distance on existing roadways.

Using the Midpoint Formula

When the endpoints of a line segment are known, we can find the point midway between them. This point is known as

the midpoint and the formula is known as the midpoint formula. Given the endpoints of a line segment,                   and

the midpoint formula states how to find the coordinates of the midpoint

A graphical view of a midpoint is shown in Figure 16. Notice that the line segments on either side of the midpoint are
congruent.

                                                   Figure 16

EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Midpoint of the Line Segment

Find the midpoint of the line segment with the endpoints      and

     Solution
Use the formula to find the midpoint of the line segment.

TRY IT #4 Find the midpoint of the line segment with endpoints           and

  EXAMPLE 8                               and              Find the center of the circle.

Finding the Center of a Circle
The diameter of a circle has endpoints
94 2 · Equations and Inequalities

           Solution
     The center of a circle is the center, or midpoint, of its diameter. Thus, the midpoint formula will yield the center point.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the Cartesian coordinate system.

     Plotting points on the coordinate plane (http://openstax.org/l/coordplotpnts)
     Find x and y intercepts based on the graph of a line (http://openstax.org/l/xyintsgraph)

        2.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Is it possible for a point     2. Describe the process for      3. Describe in your own words
    plotted in the Cartesian          finding the x-intercept and      what the y-intercept of a
    coordinate system to not lie      the y-intercept of a graph       graph is.
    in one of the four                algebraically.
    quadrants? Explain.

4. When using the distance
    formula

    explain the correct order of
    operations that are to be
    performed to obtain the
    correct answer.

Algebraic

For each of the following exercises, find the x-intercept and the y-intercept without graphing. Write the coordinates of
each intercept.

5.                                6.                               7.

8.                                9.                               10.

For each of the following exercises, solve the equation for y in terms of x.

11.                               12.                              13.

14.                               15.                              16.

For each of the following exercises, find the distance between the two points. Simplify your answers, and write the exact
answer in simplest radical form for irrational answers.

17.  and                          18.  and                         19.        and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 95

20.  and                         21. Find the distance between
                                       the two points given using
                                       your calculator, and round
                                       your answer to the nearest
                                       hundredth.

                                                  and

For each of the following exercises, find the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment that joins the two given
points.

22.        and                   23.         and                          24.       and

25.  and                         26.         and

Graphical

For each of the following exercises, identify the information requested.

27. What are the coordinates     28. If a point is located on the         29. If a point is located on the
      of the origin?                   y-axis, what is the                      x-axis, what is the
                                       x-coordinate?                            y-coordinate?

For each of the following exercises, plot the three points on the given coordinate plane. State whether the three points
you plotted appear to be collinear (on the same line).

30.                                   31.                                      32.

33. Name the coordinates of the       34. Name the quadrant in
      points graphed.                       which the following points
                                            would be located. If the
                                            point is on an axis, name
                                            the axis.

                                                  
                                                  
                                           
96 2 · Equations and Inequalities

For each of the following exercises, construct a table and graph the equation by plotting at least three points.

35.                                 36.                                  37.

Numeric

For each of the following exercises, find and plot the x- and y-intercepts, and graph the straight line based on those two
points.

38.                                 39.                                  40.

41.                                 42.

For each of the following exercises, use the graph in the figure below.

43. Find the distance between       44. Find the coordinates of the      45. Find the distance that
      the two endpoints using             midpoint of the line                           is from the origin.
      the distance formula.               segment connecting the
      Round to three decimal              two points.
      places.

46. Find the distance that          47. Which point is closer to the
      is from the origin. Round to        origin?
      three decimal places.

Technology

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the linear graphs in the Y= graph menu.

After graphing it, use the 2nd CALC button and 1:value button, hit enter. At the lower part of the screen you will see "x="
and a blinking cursor. You may enter any number for x and it will display the y value for any x value you input. Use this
and plug in x = 0, thus finding the y-intercept, for each of the following graphs.

48.                                 49.                                  50.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.1 · The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 97

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the linear graphs in the Y= graph menu.

After graphing it, use the 2nd CALC button and 2:zero button, hit ENTER. At the lower part of the screen you will see "left
bound?" and a blinking cursor on the graph of the line. Move this cursor to the left of the x-intercept, hit ENTER. Now it
says "right bound?" Move the cursor to the right of the x-intercept, hit ENTER. Now it says "guess?" Move your cursor to
the left somewhere in between the left and right bound near the x-intercept. Hit ENTER. At the bottom of your screen it
will display the coordinates of the x-intercept or the "zero" to the y-value. Use this to find the x-intercept.

Note: With linear/straight line functions the zero is not really a "guess," but it is necessary to enter a "guess" so it will
search and find the exact x-intercept between your right and left boundaries. With other types of functions (more than
one x-intercept), they may be irrational numbers so "guess" is more appropriate to give it the correct limits to find a very
close approximation between the left and right boundaries.

51.                                 52.                              53.               Round your

                                                                             answer to the nearest
                                                                             thousandth.

Extensions                          55. If the road was made in the  56. Given these four points:
                                          previous exercise, how
54. Someone drove 10 mi                   much shorter would the                  ,          ,         ,
      directly east from their            person's one-way trip be
      home, made a left turn at           every day?                         and             find the
      an intersection, and then
      traveled 5 mi north to their                                           coordinates of the
      place of work. If a road was
      made directly from the                                                 midpoint of line segments
      home to the place of work,
      what would its distance be                                                  and
      to the nearest tenth of a
      mile?

57. After finding the two           58. Given the graph of the rectangle 59. In the previous exercise,
      midpoints in the previous
      exercise, find the distance        shown and the coordinates of its         find the coordinates of the
      between the two midpoints
      to the nearest thousandth.         vertices, prove that the diagonals of midpoint for each

                                         the rectangle are of equal length.       diagonal.
98 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications

60. The coordinates on a map          61. If San Jose's coordinates        62. A small craft in Lake

for San Francisco are                 are    , where the                   Ontario sends out a

and those for                         coordinates represent                distress signal. The

Sacramento are                     .  miles, find the distance             coordinates of the boat in

Note that coordinates                 between San Jose and San             trouble were               One

represent miles. Find the             Francisco to the nearest             rescue boat is at the

distance between the cities           mile.                                coordinates                and a

to the nearest mile.                                                       second Coast Guard craft is

                                                                           at coordinates             .

                                                                           Assuming both rescue craft

                                                                           travel at the same rate,

                                                                           which one would get to the

                                                                           distressed boat the fastest?

63. A person on the top of a          64. If we rent a truck and pay a
      building wants to have a              $75/day fee plus $.20 for
      guy wire extend to a point            every mile we travel, write
      on the ground 20 ft from              a linear equation that
      the building. To the nearest          would express the total
      foot, how long will the wire          cost per day using to
      have to be if the building is         represent the number of
      50 ft tall?                           miles we travel. Graph this
                                            function on your graphing
                                            calculator and find the total
                                            cost for one day if we travel
                                            70 mi.

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve equations in one variable algebraically.
           Solve a rational equation.
           Find a linear equation.
           Given the equations of two lines, determine whether their graphs are parallel or perpendicular.
           Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given line.

Caroline is a full-time college student planning a spring break vacation. To earn enough money for the trip, she has
taken a part-time job at the local bank that pays $15.00/hr, and she opened a savings account with an initial deposit of
$400 on January 15. She arranged for direct deposit of her payroll checks. If spring break begins March 20 and the trip
will cost approximately $2,500, how many hours will she have to work to earn enough to pay for her vacation? If she can
only work 4 hours per day, how many days per week will she have to work? How many weeks will it take? In this section,
we will investigate problems like this and others, which generate graphs like the line in Figure 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 99

                                             Figure 1

Solving Linear Equations in One Variable

A linear equation is an equation of a straight line, written in one variable. The only power of the variable is 1. Linear

equations in one variable may take the form  and are solved using basic algebraic operations.

We begin by classifying linear equations in one variable as one of three types: identity, conditional, or inconsistent. An
identity equation is true for all values of the variable. Here is an example of an identity equation.

The solution set consists of all values that make the equation true. For this equation, the solution set is all real numbers
because any real number substituted for will make the equation true.

A conditional equation is true for only some values of the variable. For example, if we are to solve the equation
                        we have the following:

The solution set consists of one number:     It is the only solution and, therefore, we have solved a conditional
equation.

An inconsistent equation results in a false statement. For example, if we are to solve         we have the
following:

Indeed,  There is no solution because this is an inconsistent equation.

Solving linear equations in one variable involves the fundamental properties of equality and basic algebraic operations.
A brief review of those operations follows.

Linear Equation in One Variable

A linear equation in one variable can be written in the form

where a and b are real numbers,

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a linear equation in one variable, use algebra to solve it.
The following steps are used to manipulate an equation and isolate the unknown variable, so that the last line reads

                      if x is the unknown. There is no set order, as the steps used depend on what is given:
100 2 · Equations and Inequalities

1. We may add, subtract, multiply, or divide an equation by a number or an expression as long as we do the same
     thing to both sides of the equal sign. Note that we cannot divide by zero.

2. Apply the distributive property as needed:
3. Isolate the variable on one side of the equation.
4. When the variable is multiplied by a coefficient in the final stage, multiply both sides of the equation by the

     reciprocal of the coefficient.

EXAMPLE 1

Solving an Equation in One Variable
Solve the following equation:

Solution

This equation can be written in the form  by subtracting from both sides. However, we may proceed to

solve the equation in its original form by performing algebraic operations.

The solution is 6.

       TRY IT #1 Solve the linear equation in one variable:

  EXAMPLE 2
Solving an Equation Algebraically When the Variable Appears on Both Sides
Solve the following equation:

     Solution
Apply standard algebraic properties.

     Analysis
This problem requires the distributive property to be applied twice, and then the properties of algebra are used to reach
the final line,

TRY IT #2 Solve the equation in one variable:

Solving a Rational Equation

In this section, we look at rational equations that, after some manipulation, result in a linear equation. If an equation
contains at least one rational expression, it is a considered a rational equation.

Recall that a rational number is the ratio of two numbers, such as or  A rational expression is the ratio, or quotient,
of two polynomials. Here are three examples.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 101

Rational equations have a variable in the denominator in at least one of the terms. Our goal is to perform algebraic
operations so that the variables appear in the numerator. In fact, we will eliminate all denominators by multiplying both
sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).

Finding the LCD is identifying an expression that contains the highest power of all of the factors in all of the
denominators. We do this because when the equation is multiplied by the LCD, the common factors in the LCD and in
each denominator will equal one and will cancel out.

EXAMPLE 3

Solving a Rational Equation
Solve the rational equation:

    Solution

We have three denominators;   and 3. The LCD must contain        and 3. An LCD of contains all three

denominators. In other words, each denominator can be divided evenly into the LCD. Next, multiply both sides of the

equation by the LCD

A common mistake made when solving rational equations involves finding the LCD when one of the denominators is a

binomial--two terms added or subtracted--such as         Always consider a binomial as an individual factor--the

terms cannot be separated. For example, suppose a problem has three terms and the denominators are    and

    First, factor all denominators. We then have         and     as the denominators. (Note the parentheses

placed around the second denominator.) Only the last two denominators have a common factor of       The in the

first denominator is separate from the in the     denominators. An effective way to remember this is to write

factored and binomial denominators in parentheses, and consider each parentheses as a separate unit or a separate

factor. The LCD in this instance is found by multiplying together the one factor of     and the 3. Thus, the LCD is

the following:

So, both sides of the equation would be multiplied by    Leave the LCD in factored form, as this makes it easier
to see how each denominator in the problem cancels out.

Another example is a problem with two denominators, such as and  Once the second denominator is factored

as                   there is a common factor of x in both denominators and the LCD is

Sometimes we have a rational equation in the form of a proportion; that is, when one fraction equals another fraction
and there are no other terms in the equation.

We can use another method of solving the equation without finding the LCD: cross-multiplication. We multiply terms by
crossing over the equal sign.
102 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Multiply  and       which results in

Any solution that makes a denominator in the original expression equal zero must be excluded from the possibilities.

Rational Equations

A rational equation contains at least one rational expression where the variable appears in at least one of the
denominators.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a rational equation, solve it.

 1. Factor all denominators in the equation.
 2. Find and exclude values that set each denominator equal to zero.
 3. Find the LCD.
 4. Multiply the whole equation by the LCD. If the LCD is correct, there will be no denominators left.
 5. Solve the remaining equation.
 6. Make sure to check solutions back in the original equations to avoid a solution producing zero in a denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4

Solving a Rational Equation without Factoring
Solve the following rational equation:

Solution

We have three denominators:         and     No factoring is required. The product of the first two denominators is equal
                                            Only one value is excluded from a solution set, 0. Next, multiply the whole
to the third denominator, so, the LCD is

equation (both sides of the equal sign) by

The proposed solution is -1, which is not an excluded value, so the solution set contains one number, or
written in set notation.

       TRY IT #3 Solve the rational equation:
  EXAMPLE 5
Solving a Rational Equation by Factoring the Denominator
Solve the following rational equation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 103

  Solution

First find the common denominator. The three denominators in factored form are    and                The

smallest expression that is divisible by each one of the denominators is  Only  is an excluded value. Multiply

the whole equation by

The solution is

  TRY IT #4 Solve the rational equation:

EXAMPLE 6

Solving Rational Equations with a Binomial in the Denominator
Solve the following rational equations and state the excluded values:

  Solution                             

                       have nothing in common. Therefore, the LCD is the product       However, for

The denominators and

this problem, we can cross-multiply.

The solution is 15. The excluded values are and

                   Multiply both sides of the equation by

The LCD is

The solution is The excluded value is
104 2 · Equations and Inequalities        Multiply both sides of the equation by

    

       The least common denominator is

The solution is 4. The excluded value is

     TRY IT #5 Solve                      State the excluded values.

EXAMPLE 7

Solving a Rational Equation with Factored Denominators and Stating Excluded Values

Solve the rational equation after factoring the denominators:         State the excluded values.

Solution

We must factor the denominator            We recognize this as the difference of squares, and factor it as

Thus, the LCD that contains each denominator is                Multiply the whole equation by the LCD, cancel out the

denominators, and solve the remaining equation.

The solution is The excluded values are and

     TRY IT #6 Solve the rational equation:

Finding a Linear Equation

Perhaps the most familiar form of a linear equation is the slope-intercept form, written as                 where

and        Let us begin with the slope.

The Slope of a Line

The slope of a line refers to the ratio of the vertical change in y over the horizontal change in x between any two points
on a line. It indicates the direction in which a line slants as well as its steepness. Slope is sometimes described as rise
over run.

If the slope is positive, the line slants to the right. If the slope is negative, the line slants to the left. As the slope
increases, the line becomes steeper. Some examples are shown in Figure 2. The lines indicate the following slopes:

                      and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 105

                                                         Figure 2

The Slope of a Line

The slope of a line, m, represents the change in y over the change in x. Given two points,  and             the

following formula determines the slope of a line containing these points:

EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Slope of a Line Given Two Points

Find the slope of a line that passes through the points        and

     Solution
We substitute the y-values and the x-values into the formula.

The slope is

Analysis

It does not matter which point is called      or         As long as we are consistent with the order of the y terms

and the order of the x terms in the numerator and denominator, the calculation will yield the same result.

TRY IT #7 Find the slope of the line that passes through the points        and

  EXAMPLE 9

Identifying the Slope and y-intercept of a Line Given an Equation
Identify the slope and y-intercept, given the equation
106 2 · Equations and Inequalities

     Solution                       form, the given line has a slope of       The y-intercept is
As the line is in

Analysis

The y-intercept is the point at which the line crosses the y-axis. On the y-axis,  We can always identify the

y-intercept when the line is in slope-intercept form, as it will always equal b. Or, just substitute  and solve for y.

The Point-Slope Formula

Given the slope and one point on a line, we can find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula.

This is an important formula, as it will be used in other areas of college algebra and often in calculus to find the equation
of a tangent line. We need only one point and the slope of the line to use the formula. After substituting the slope and
the coordinates of one point into the formula, we simplify it and write it in slope-intercept form.

  The Point-Slope Formula

  Given one point and the slope, the point-slope formula will lead to the equation of a line:

EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Equation of a Line Given the Slope and One Point

Write the equation of the line with slope  and passing through the point           Write the final equation in slope-

intercept form.

Solution

Using the point-slope formula, substitute for m and the point                 for

     Analysis
Note that any point on the line can be used to find the equation. If done correctly, the same final equation will be
obtained.

TRY IT #8 Given                     find the equation of the line in slope-intercept form passing through the point

EXAMPLE 11

Finding the Equation of a Line Passing Through Two Given Points

Find the equation of the line passing through the points                 and       Write the final equation in slope-intercept

form.

     Solution
First, we calculate the slope using the slope formula and two points.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 107

Next, we use the point-slope formula with the slope of and either point. Let's pick the point  for

In slope-intercept form, the equation is written as                     and see if we get the same equation.

     Analysis
To prove that either point can be used, let us use the second point

We see that the same line will be obtained using either point. This makes sense because we used both points to calculate
the slope.

Standard Form of a Line

Another way that we can represent the equation of a line is in standard form. Standard form is given as

where        and  are integers. The x- and y-terms are on one side of the equal sign and the constant term is on the

other side.

EXAMPLE 12

Finding the Equation of a Line and Writing It in Standard Form

Find the equation of the line with       and passing through the point      Write the equation in standard form.

     Solution
We begin using the point-slope formula.

From here, we multiply through by 2, as no fractions are permitted in standard form, and then move both variables to
the left aside of the equal sign and move the constants to the right.

This equation is now written in standard form.                              and passing through the point
       TRY IT #9 Find the equation of the line in standard form with slope

Vertical and Horizontal Lines

The equations of vertical and horizontal lines do not require any of the preceding formulas, although we can use the
formulas to prove that the equations are correct. The equation of a vertical line is given as

where c is a constant. The slope of a vertical line is undefined, and regardless of the y-value of any point on the line, the
x-coordinate of the point will be c.
108 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Suppose that we want to find the equation of a line containing the following points:                      and

First, we will find the slope.

Zero in the denominator means that the slope is undefined and, therefore, we cannot use the point-slope formula.
However, we can plot the points. Notice that all of the x-coordinates are the same and we find a vertical line through

            See Figure 3.

The equation of a horizontal line is given as

where c is a constant. The slope of a horizontal line is zero, and for any x-value of a point on the line, the y-coordinate
will be c.

Suppose we want to find the equation of a line that contains the following set of points:                      and

We can use the point-slope formula. First, we find the slope using any two points on the line.

Use any point for                   in the formula, or use the y-intercept.

The graph is a horizontal line through  Notice that all of the y-coordinates are the same. See Figure 3.

                   Figure 3 The line x = -3 is a vertical line. The line y = -2 is a horizontal line.

EXAMPLE 13

Finding the Equation of a Line Passing Through the Given Points

Find the equation of the line passing through the given points:              and

     Solution
The x-coordinate of both points is 1. Therefore, we have a vertical line,

TRY IT #10 Find the equation of the line passing through                          and

Determining Whether Graphs of Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular

Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. Lines that are parallel to each other will never intersect. For
example, Figure 4 shows the graphs of various lines with the same slope,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 109

            Figure 4 Parallel lines

All of the lines shown in the graph are parallel because they have the same slope and different y-intercepts.

Lines that are perpendicular intersect to form a -angle. The slope of one line is the negative reciprocal of the other.

We can show that two lines are perpendicular if the product of the two slopes is                        For example, Figure

5 shows the graph of two perpendicular lines. One line has a slope of 3; the other line has a slope of

            Figure 5 Perpendicular lines

EXAMPLE 14

Graphing Two Equations, and Determining Whether the Lines are Parallel, Perpendicular, or Neither

Graph the equations of the given lines, and state whether they are parallel, perpendicular, or neither:        and

     Solution
The first thing we want to do is rewrite the equations so that both equations are in slope-intercept form.

First equation:
110 2 · Equations and Inequalities

      Second equation:
      See the graph of both lines in Figure 6

                                                                              Figure 6
From the graph, we can see that the lines appear perpendicular, but we must compare the slopes.

The slopes are negative reciprocals of each other, confirming that the lines are perpendicular.

TRY IT #11  Graph the two lines and determine whether they are parallel, perpendicular, or neither:
                              and

Writing the Equations of Lines Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line

As we have learned, determining whether two lines are parallel or perpendicular is a matter of finding the slopes. To
write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to another line, we follow the same principles as we do for finding
the equation of any line. After finding the slope, use the point-slope formula to write the equation of the new line.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given an equation for a line, write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to it.

 1. Find the slope of the given line. The easiest way to do this is to write the equation in slope-intercept form.
 2. Use the slope and the given point with the point-slope formula.
 3. Simplify the line to slope-intercept form and compare the equation to the given line.

EXAMPLE 15

Writing the Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line Passing Through a Given Point

Write the equation of line parallel to a       and passing through the point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 111

     Solution
First, we will write the equation in slope-intercept form to find the slope.

The slope is  The y-intercept is but that really does not enter into our problem, as the only thing we need for

two lines to be parallel is the same slope. The one exception is that if the y-intercepts are the same, then the two lines
are the same line. The next step is to use this slope and the given point with the point-slope formula.

The equation of the line is  See Figure 7.

                                                Figure 7

TRY IT #12 Find the equation of the line parallel to                          and passing through the point

EXAMPLE 16

Finding the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line Passing Through a Given Point

Find the equation of the line perpendicular to                    and passing through the point

     Solution
The first step is to write the equation in slope-intercept form.

We see that the slope is     This means that the slope of the line perpendicular to the given line is the negative

reciprocal, or Next, we use the point-slope formula with this new slope and the given point.
112 2 · Equations and Inequalities

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with linear equations.

     Solving rational equations (http://openstax.org/l/rationaleqs)
     Equation of a line given two points (http://openstax.org/l/twopointsline)
     Finding the equation of a line perpendicular to another line through a given point (http://openstax.org/l/
     findperpline)
     Finding the equation of a line parallel to another line through a given point (http://openstax.org/l/findparaline)

        2.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What does it mean when we        2. What is the relationship      3. How do we recognize when
    say that two lines are              between the slopes of            an equation, for example
    parallel?                           perpendicular lines                               will be a straight
                                        (assuming neither is             line (linear) when graphed?
                                        horizontal nor vertical)?

4. What does it mean when we        5. When solving the following
    say that a linear equation is       equation:
    inconsistent?

                                         explain why we must

                                         exclude     and

                                         as possible solutions from

                                         the solution set.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, solve the equation for

6.                                  7.                               8.

9.                                  10.                              11.

12.                                 13.                              14.

15.

For the following exercises, solve each rational equation for  State all x-values that are excluded from the solution set.
                                                                           18.
16.                                 17.

19.                                 20.                              21.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable 113

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula. Write all the final equations using
the slope-intercept form.

22.  with a slope of              23.  with a slope of        24. x-intercept is 1, and

25. y-intercept is 2, and         26.     and                 27.

28. parallel to            and    29. perpendicular to

     passes through the point                  and passes

                                       through the point   .

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the given information.

30.      and                      31.  and                    32. The slope is undefined and
                                                                    it passes through the point

33. The slope equals zero and 34. The slope is                          35.              and

     it passes through the point       and it passes through the point

                                       .

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the pair of equations on the same axes, and state whether they are parallel,
perpendicular, or neither.

36.                               37.                         38.

39.

Numeric

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes through the given points.

40.  and                          41.     and                 42.            and

43.      and                      44.     and

For the following exercises, find the slope of the lines that pass through each pair of points and determine whether the
lines are parallel or perpendicular.

45.                               46.
114 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Technology

For the following exercises, express the equations in slope intercept form (rounding each number to the thousandths
place). Enter this into a graphing calculator as Y1, then adjust the ymin and ymax values for your window to include
where the y-intercept occurs. State your ymin and ymax values.

47.                                        48.                                   49.

Extensions

50. Starting with the point-               51. Starting with the standard        52. Use the above derived
                                                 form of an equation                   formula to put the
     slope formula                                                   solve this        following standard
                                                 expression for in terms of            equation in slope intercept
                                    solve                   and . Then put the         form:
                                                 expression in slope-
     this expression for in                      intercept form.

     terms of       and .

53. Given that the following               54. Find the slopes of the
      coordinates are the                        diagonals in the previous
      vertices of a rectangle,                   exercise. Are they
      prove that this truly is a                 perpendicular?
      rectangle by showing the
      slopes of the sides that
      meet are perpendicular.

                                  and

Real-World Applications                                 56. If the profit equation for a small business selling
                                                              number of item one and number of item two is
55. The slope for a wheelchair ramp for a home has to                            find the value when
      be If the vertical distance from the ground to
      the door bottom is 2.5 ft, find the distance the
      ramp has to extend from the home in order to
      comply with the needed slope.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The cost of renting a car is $45/wk plus $0.25/mi traveled during that week.

An equation to represent the cost would be              where is the number of miles traveled.

57. What is your cost if you               58. If your cost were                 59. Suppose you have a
      travel 50 mi?                              how many miles were you               maximum of $100 to spend
                                                 charged for traveling?                for the car rental. What
                                                                                       would be the maximum
                                                                                       number of miles you could
                                                                                       travel?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        2.3 · Models and Applications 115

2.3 Models and Applications

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Set up a linear equation to solve a real-world application.
           Use a formula to solve a real-world application.

         Figure 1 Credit: Kevin Dooley

Neka is hoping to get an A in his college algebra class. He has scores of 75, 82, 95, 91, and 94 on his first five tests. Only
the final exam remains, and the maximum of points that can be earned is 100. Is it possible for Neka to end the course
with an A? A simple linear equation will give Neka his answer.

Many real-world applications can be modeled by linear equations. For example, a cell phone package may include a
monthly service fee plus a charge per minute of talk-time; it costs a widget manufacturer a certain amount to produce x
widgets per month plus monthly operating charges; a car rental company charges a daily fee plus an amount per mile
driven. These are examples of applications we come across every day that are modeled by linear equations. In this
section, we will set up and use linear equations to solve such problems.

Setting up a Linear Equation to Solve a Real-World Application

To set up or model a linear equation to fit a real-world application, we must first determine the known quantities and

define the unknown quantity as a variable. Then, we begin to interpret the words as mathematical expressions using

mathematical symbols. Let us use the car rental example above. In this case, a known cost, such as $0.10/mi, is

multiplied by an unknown quantity, the number of miles driven. Therefore, we can write  This expression

represents a variable cost because it changes according to the number of miles driven.

If a quantity is independent of a variable, we usually just add or subtract it, according to the problem. As these amounts
do not change, we call them fixed costs. Consider a car rental agency that charges $0.10/mi plus a daily fee of $50. We
can use these quantities to model an equation that can be used to find the daily car rental cost

When dealing with real-world applications, there are certain expressions that we can translate directly into math. Table 1
lists some common verbal expressions and their equivalent mathematical expressions.

         Verbal                                                           Translation to Math Operations

         One number exceeds another by a

         Twice a number

         One number is a more than another number

         One number is a less than twice another number

         The product of a number and a, decreased by b

The quotient of a number and the number plus a is three times the number

Table 1
116 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                   Verbal                  Translation to Math Operations

   The product of three times a number and the number decreased by b is c

Table 1

         ...

             HOW TO

Given a real-world problem, model a linear equation to fit it.

 1. Identify known quantities.
 2. Assign a variable to represent the unknown quantity.
 3. If there is more than one unknown quantity, find a way to write the second unknown in terms of the first.
 4. Write an equation interpreting the words as mathematical operations.
 5. Solve the equation. Be sure the solution can be explained in words, including the units of measure.

  EXAMPLE 1

Modeling a Linear Equation to Solve an Unknown Number Problem
Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities: One number exceeds another number by and
their sum is Find the two numbers.

     Solution
Let equal the first number. Then, as the second number exceeds the first by 17, we can write the second number as

          The sum of the two numbers is 31. We usually interpret the word is as an equal sign.

The two numbers are and

TRY IT #1  Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities: One number is three more
           than twice another number. If the sum of the two numbers is find the numbers.

  EXAMPLE 2

Setting Up a Linear Equation to Solve a Real-World Application
There are two cell phone companies that offer different packages. Company A charges a monthly service fee of $34 plus
$.05/min talk-time. Company B charges a monthly service fee of $40 plus $.04/min talk-time.

 Write a linear equation that models the packages offered by both companies.
 If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, which company offers the better plan?
 If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, which company offers the better plan?
 How many minutes of talk-time would yield equal monthly statements from both companies?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.3 · Models and Applications 117

    Solution

 The model for Company A can be written as  This includes the variable cost of               plus the

monthly service charge of $34. Company B's package charges a higher monthly fee of $40, but a lower variable cost

of  Company B's model can be written as



If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, we have the following:

So, Company B offers the lower monthly cost of $86.40 as compared with the $92 monthly cost offered by Company A
when the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160.



If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, we have the following:

If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, then Company A offers a lower monthly cost of $55
compared to Company B's monthly cost of $56.80.



To answer the question of how many talk-time minutes would yield the same bill from both companies, we should

think about the problem in terms of  coordinates: At what point are both the x-value and the y-value equal? We

can find this point by setting the equations equal to each other and solving for x.

Check the x-value in each equation.
Therefore, a monthly average of 600 talk-time minutes renders the plans equal. See Figure 2
118 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                       Figure 2

TRY IT #2          Find a linear equation to model this real-world application: It costs ABC electronics company $2.50
                   per unit to produce a part used in a popular brand of desktop computers. The company has
                   monthly operating expenses of $350 for utilities and $3,300 for salaries. What are the company's
                   monthly expenses?

Using a Formula to Solve a Real-World Application

Many applications are solved using known formulas. The problem is stated, a formula is identified, the known quantities

are substituted into the formula, the equation is solved for the unknown, and the problem's question is answered.

Typically, these problems involve two equations representing two trips, two investments, two areas, and so on. Examples

of formulas include the area of a rectangular region,            the perimeter of a rectangle,  and the

volume of a rectangular solid,           When there are two unknowns, we find a way to write one in terms of the

other because we can solve for only one variable at a time.

EXAMPLE 3

Solving an Application Using a Formula
It takes Andrew 30 min to drive to work in the morning. He drives home using the same route, but it takes 10 min longer,
and he averages 10 mi/h less than in the morning. How far does Andrew drive to work?

Solution

This is a distance problem, so we can use the formula        where distance equals rate multiplied by time. Note that

when rate is given in mi/h, time must be expressed in hours. Consistent units of measurement are key to obtaining a

correct solution.

First, we identify the known and unknown quantities. Andrew's morning drive to work takes 30 min, or h at rate His
drive home takes 40 min, or h, and his speed averages 10 mi/h less than the morning drive. Both trips cover distance

   A table, such as Table 2, is often helpful for keeping track of information in these types of problems.

                                           To Work
                                           To Home
                                         Table 2

Write two equations, one for each trip.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   2.3 · Models and Applications 119

As both equations equal the same distance, we set them equal to each other and solve for r.

We have solved for the rate of speed to work, 40 mph. Substituting 40 into the rate on the return trip yields 30 mi/h. Now
we can answer the question. Substitute the rate back into either equation and solve for d.
The distance between home and work is 20 mi.

     Analysis
Note that we could have cleared the fractions in the equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD to
solve for

TRY IT #3  On Saturday morning, it took Jennifer 3.6 h to drive to her mother's house for the weekend. On
           Sunday evening, due to heavy traffic, it took Jennifer 4 h to return home. Her speed was 5 mi/h
           slower on Sunday than on Saturday. What was her speed on Sunday?

EXAMPLE 4

Solving a Perimeter Problem                      ft. The length is ft greater than the width. What are the dimensions
The perimeter of a rectangular outdoor patio is
of the patio?

Solution

The perimeter formula is standard:               We have two unknown quantities, length and width. However, we can

write the length in terms of the width as        Substitute the perimeter value and the expression for length into

the formula. It is often helpful to make a sketch and label the sides as in Figure 3.

                                                                              Figure 3
Now we can solve for the width and then calculate the length.
120 2 · Equations and Inequalities

The dimensions are                  ft and  ft.

TRY IT #4           Find the dimensions of a rectangle given that the perimeter is       cm and the length is 1 cm more
                    than twice the width.

EXAMPLE 5

Solving an Area Problem                                           in. more than the width. Find the area of the graph
The perimeter of a tablet of graph paper is 48 in. The length is
paper.

Solution

The standard formula for area is            however, we will solve the problem using the perimeter formula. The reason

we use the perimeter formula is because we know enough information about the perimeter that the formula will allow

us to solve for one of the unknowns. As both perimeter and area use length and width as dimensions, they are often

used together to solve a problem such as this one.

We know that the length is 6 in. more than the width, so we can write length as          Substitute the value of the
perimeter and the expression for length into the perimeter formula and find the length.

Now, we find the area given the dimensions of       in. and       in.

The area is in.2.

TRY IT #5           A game room has a perimeter of 70 ft. The length is five more than twice the width. How many ft2
                    of new carpeting should be ordered?

  EXAMPLE 6

Solving a Volume Problem
Find the dimensions of a shipping box given that the length is twice the width, the height is inches, and the volume is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 2.3 · Models and Applications 121

1,600 in.3.

Solution

The formula for the volume of a box is given as        the product of length, width, and height. We are given that

             and    The volume is  cubic inches.

The dimensions are  in.,           in., and       in.

     Analysis
Note that the square root of would result in a positive and a negative value. However, because we are describing
width, we can use only the positive result.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with models and applications of linear
equations.

Problem solving using linear equations (http://openstax.org/l/lineqprobsolve)
Problem solving using equations (http://openstax.org/l/equationprsolve)
Finding the dimensions of area given the perimeter (http://openstax.org/l/permareasolve)
Find the distance between the cities using the distance = rate * time formula (http://openstax.org/l/ratetimesolve)
Linear equation application (Write a cost equation) (http://openstax.org/l/lineqappl)

        2.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. To set up a model linear      2. Use your own words to        3. If the total amount of
    equation to fit real-world       describe this equation          money you had to invest
    applications, what should        where n is a number:            was $2,000 and you deposit
    always be the first step?                                           amount in one
                                                                     investment, how can you
                                                                     represent the remaining
                                                                     amount?

4. If a carpenter sawed a 10-ft  5. If Bill was traveling mi/h,
    board into two sections and      how would you represent
    one section was ft long,         Daemon's speed if he was
    how long would the other         traveling 10 mi/h faster?
    section be in terms of ?
122 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use the information to find a linear algebraic equation model to use to answer the question
being asked.

6. Mark and Don are planning        7. Beth and Ann are joking that  8. Ruden originally filled out 8
    to sell each of their marble        their combined ages equal        more applications than
    collections at a garage sale.       Sam's age. If Beth is twice      Hanh. Then each boy filled
    If Don has 1 more than 3            Ann's age and Sam is 69 yr       out 3 additional
    times the number of                 old, what are Beth and           applications, bringing the
    marbles Mark has, how               Ann's ages?                      total to 28. How many
    many does each boy have to                                           applications did each boy
    sell if the total number of                                          originally fill out?
    marbles is 113?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: Two different telephone carriers offer the following plans that a person is
considering. Company A has a monthly fee of $20 and charges of $.05/min for calls. Company B has a monthly fee of $5
and charges $.10/min for calls.

9. Find the model of the total      10. Find the model of the total  11. Find out how many
    cost of Company A's plan,             cost of Company B's plan,        minutes of calling would
    using for the minutes.                using for the minutes.           make the two plans equal.

12. If the person makes a
      monthly average of 200
      min of calls, which plan
      should for the person
      choose?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A wireless carrier offers the following plans that a person is considering.
The Family Plan: $90 monthly fee, unlimited talk and text on up to 8 lines, and data charges of $40 for each device for up
to 2 GB of data per device. The Mobile Share Plan: $120 monthly fee for up to 10 devices, unlimited talk and text for all
the lines, and data charges of $35 for each device up to a shared total of 10 GB of data. Use for the number of devices
that need data plans as part of their cost.

13. Find the model of the total     14. Find the model of the total  15. Assuming they stay under
      cost of the Family Plan.            cost of the Mobile Share         their data limit, find the
                                          Plan.                            number of devices that
                                                                           would make the two plans
                                                                           equal in cost.

16. If a family has 3 smart
      phones, which plan should
      they choose?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              2.3 · Models and Applications 123

For exercises 17 and 18, use this scenario: A retired woman has $50,000 to invest but needs to make $6,000 a year from
the interest to meet certain living expenses. One bond investment pays 15% annual interest. The rest of it she wants to
put in a CD that pays 7%.

17. If we let be the amount         18. Set up and solve the             19. Two planes fly in opposite
      the woman invests in the            equation for how much the            directions. One travels 450
      15% bond, how much will             woman should invest in               mi/h and the other 550 mi/
      she be able to invest in the        each option to sustain a             h. How long will it take
      CD?                                 $6,000 annual return.                before they are 4,000 mi
                                                                               apart?

20. Ben starts walking along a      21. Fiora starts riding her bike     22. A chemistry teacher needs
      path at 4 mi/h. One and a           at 20 mi/h. After a while,           to mix a 30% salt solution
      half hours after Ben leaves,        she slows down to 12 mi/h,           with a 70% salt solution to
      his sister Amanda begins            and maintains that speed             make 20 qt of a 40% salt
      jogging along the same              for the rest of the trip. The        solution. How many quarts
      path at 6 mi/h. How long            whole trip of 70 mi takes            of each solution should the
      will it be before Amanda            her 4.5 h. For what distance         teacher mix to get the
      catches up to Ben?                  did she travel at 20 mi/h?           desired result?

23. Raúl has $20,000 to invest.
      His intent is to earn 11%
      interest on his investment.
      He can invest part of his
      money at 8% interest and
      part at 12% interest. How
      much does Raúl need to
      invest in each option to
      make get a total 11%
      return on his $20,000?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A truck rental agency offers two kinds of plans. Plan A charges $75/wk plus
$.10/mi driven. Plan B charges $100/wk plus $.05/mi driven.

24. Write the model equation        25. Write the model equation         26. Find the number of miles
      for the cost of renting a           for the cost of renting a            that would generate the
      truck with plan A.                  truck with plan B.                   same cost for both plans.

27. If Tim knows he has to
      travel 300 mi, which plan
      should he choose?

For the following exercises, use the formula given to solve for the required value.

28.  is used to                     29. The formula                      30.         indicates that

     find the principal amount P          relates force , velocity            force (F) equals mass (m)
                                              , mass , and resistance
     deposited, earning r%                     . Find when                    times acceleration (a). Find
                                                   and
     interest, for t years. Use                                               the acceleration of a mass

     this to find what principal                                              of 50 kg if a force of 12 N is

     amount P David invested at                                               exerted on it.

     a 3% rate for 20 yr if
124 2 · Equations and Inequalities

31.               is the formula

     for an infinite series sum. If
     the sum is 5, find

For the following exercises, solve for the given variable in the formula. After obtaining a new version of the formula, you
will use it to solve a question.

32. Solve for W:                     33. Use the formula from the     34. Solve for
                                           previous question to find
                                           the width, of a
                                           rectangle whose length is
                                           15 and whose perimeter is
                                           58.

35. Use the formula from the         36. Solve for in the slope-      37. Use the formula from the
      previous question to find            intercept formula:
      when                                                            previous question to find

                                                                      when the coordinates of

                                                                      the point are     and

38. The area of a trapezoid is       39. Solve for h:                 40. Use the formula from the
      given by
                                                                      previous question to find
      Use the formula to find the
      area of a trapezoid with                                        the height of a trapezoid

                                                                      with                     ,

                                                                      and

41. Find the dimensions of an        42. Distance equals rate times   43. Using the formula in the
      American football field. The                                          previous exercise, find the
      length is 200 ft more than     time,        Find the                  distance that Susan travels
      the width, and the                                                    if she is moving at a rate of
      perimeter is 1,040 ft. Find    distance Tom travels if he is          60 mi/h for 6.75 h.
      the length and width. Use
      the perimeter formula          moving at a rate of 55 mi/h

                                     for 3.5 h.

44. What is the total distance       45. If the area model for a      46. Solve for h:
      that two people travel in 3
      h if one of them is riding a   triangle is         find
      bike at 15 mi/h and the
      other is walking at 3 mi/h?    the area of a triangle with a
                                     height of 16 in. and a base
                                     of 11 in.

47. Use the formula from the         48. The volume formula for a     49. Solve for h:
      previous question to find
      the height to the nearest      cylinder is            Using
      tenth of a triangle with a
      base of 15 and an area of      the symbol in your
      215.
                                     answer, find the volume of

                                     a cylinder with a radius,

                                     of 4 cm and a height of 14

                                     cm.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        2.4 · Complex Numbers 125

50. Use the formula from the        51. Solve for r:                   52. Use the formula from the
      previous question to find                                              previous question to find
      the height of a cylinder                                               the radius of a cylinder
      with a radius of 8 and a                                               with a height of 36 and a
      volume of                                                              volume of

53. The formula for the             54. Solve the formula from the
      circumference of a circle is        previous question for
                     Find the             Notice why is sometimes
      circumference of a circle           defined as the ratio of the
      with a diameter of 12 in.           circumference to its
      (diameter = 2r). Use the            diameter.
      symbol in your final
      answer.

2.4 Complex Numbers

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Add and subtract complex numbers.
           Multiply and divide complex numbers.
           Simplify powers of

                                                                              Figure 1
Discovered by Benoit Mandelbrot around 1980, the Mandelbrot Set is one of the most recognizable fractal images. The
image is built on the theory of self-similarity and the operation of iteration. Zooming in on a fractal image brings many
surprises, particularly in the high level of repetition of detail that appears as magnification increases. The equation that
generates this image turns out to be rather simple.
In order to better understand it, we need to become familiar with a new set of numbers. Keep in mind that the study of
mathematics continuously builds upon itself. Negative integers, for example, fill a void left by the set of positive integers.
The set of rational numbers, in turn, fills a void left by the set of integers. The set of real numbers fills a void left by the
set of rational numbers. Not surprisingly, the set of real numbers has voids as well. In this section, we will explore a set
of numbers that fills voids in the set of real numbers and find out how to work within it.

Expressing Square Roots of Negative Numbers as Multiples of

We know how to find the square root of any positive real number. In a similar way, we can find the square root of any
negative number. The difference is that the root is not real. If the value in the radicand is negative, the root is said to be
an imaginary number. The imaginary number is defined as the square root of

So, using properties of radicals,

We can write the square root of any negative number as a multiple of Consider the square root of
126 2 · Equations and Inequalities

We use and not because the principal root of is the positive root.

A complex number is the sum of a real number and an imaginary number. A complex number is expressed in standard

form when written                   where is the real part and is the imaginary part. For example,  is a complex number.

So, too, is

Imaginary numbers differ from real numbers in that a squared imaginary number produces a negative real number.
Recall that when a positive real number is squared, the result is a positive real number and when a negative real number
is squared, the result is also a positive real number. Complex numbers consist of real and imaginary numbers.

Imaginary and Complex Numbers

A complex number is a number of the form    where

    · is the real part of the complex number.
    · is the imaginary part of the complex number.

If           then     is a real number. If  and is not equal to 0, the complex number is called a pure imaginary

number. An imaginary number is an even root of a negative number.

         ...

              HOW TO

Given an imaginary number, express it in the standard form of a complex number.

1. Write           as
2. Express            as
3. Write
                    in simplest form.

EXAMPLE 1

Expressing an Imaginary Number in Standard Form

Express       in standard form.

    Solution

In standard form, this is

    TRY IT #1 Express                  in standard form.

Plotting a Complex Number on the Complex Plane

We cannot plot complex numbers on a number line as we might real numbers. However, we can still represent them
graphically. To represent a complex number, we need to address the two components of the number. We use the
complex plane, which is a coordinate system in which the horizontal axis represents the real component and the vertical
axis represents the imaginary component. Complex numbers are the points on the plane, expressed as ordered pairs

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.4 · Complex Numbers 127

where represents the coordinate for the horizontal axis and represents the coordinate for the vertical axis.

Let's consider the number  The real part of the complex number is and the imaginary part is 3. We plot the

ordered pair  to represent the complex number     as shown in Figure 2.

                                                                            Figure 2

Complex Plane

In the complex plane, the horizontal axis is the real axis, and the vertical axis is the imaginary axis, as shown in Figure
3.

                                                                            Figure 3

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a complex number, represent its components on the complex plane.
 1. Determine the real part and the imaginary part of the complex number.
 2. Move along the horizontal axis to show the real part of the number.
 3. Move parallel to the vertical axis to show the imaginary part of the number.
 4. Plot the point.

EXAMPLE 2

Plotting a Complex Number on the Complex Plane

Plot the complex number    on the complex plane.

     Solution                           and the imaginary part is -4. We plot the ordered pair  as shown in
The real part of the complex number is
Figure 4.
128 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                    Figure 4

  TRY IT #2 Plot the complex number                 on the complex plane.

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers

Just as with real numbers, we can perform arithmetic operations on complex numbers. To add or subtract complex
numbers, we combine the real parts and then combine the imaginary parts.

  Complex Numbers: Addition and Subtraction

  Adding complex numbers:

Subtracting complex numbers:

           ...

              HOW TO

Given two complex numbers, find the sum or difference.

 1. Identify the real and imaginary parts of each number.
 2. Add or subtract the real parts.
 3. Add or subtract the imaginary parts.

EXAMPLE 3

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers
Add or subtract as indicated.

  Solution                          

We add the real parts and add the imaginary parts.

                                        

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.4 · Complex Numbers 129

TRY IT #3 Subtract                from

Multiplying Complex Numbers

Multiplying complex numbers is much like multiplying binomials. The major difference is that we work with the real and
imaginary parts separately.

Multiplying a Complex Number by a Real Number

Lets begin by multiplying a complex number by a real number. We distribute the real number just as we would with a

binomial. Consider, for example,  :

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a complex number and a real number, multiply to find the product.
   1. Use the distributive property.
   2. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 4

Multiplying a Complex Number by a Real Number
Find the product

     Solution
Distribute the 4.

       TRY IT #4 Find the product:

Multiplying Complex Numbers Together

Now, let's multiply two complex numbers. We can use either the distributive property or more specifically the FOIL
method because we are dealing with binomials. Recall that FOIL is an acronym for multiplying First, Inner, Outer, and
Last terms together. The difference with complex numbers is that when we get a squared term, it equals

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given two complex numbers, multiply to find the product.
   1. Use the distributive property or the FOIL method.
   2. Remember that
   3. Group together the real terms and the imaginary terms
130 2 · Equations and Inequalities

         EXAMPLE 5
       Multiplying a Complex Number by a Complex Number
       Multiply:

            Solution

TRY IT #5 Multiply:

Dividing Complex Numbers

Dividing two complex numbers is more complicated than adding, subtracting, or multiplying because we cannot divide

by an imaginary number, meaning that any fraction must have a real-number denominator to write the answer in

standard form      We need to find a term by which we can multiply the numerator and the denominator that will

eliminate the imaginary portion of the denominator so that we end up with a real number as the denominator. This term

is called the complex conjugate of the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the imaginary part of the

complex number. In other words, the complex conjugate of  is           For example, the product of  and

is

The result is a real number.

Note that complex conjugates have an opposite relationship: The complex conjugate of  is            and the complex

conjugate of   is                Further, when a quadratic equation with real coefficients has complex solutions, the

solutions are always complex conjugates of one another.

Suppose we want to divide         by  where neither nor equals zero. We first write the division as a fraction,

then find the complex conjugate of the denominator, and multiply.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator.

Apply the distributive property.

Simplify, remembering that

The Complex Conjugate

The complex conjugate of a complex number  is             It is found by changing the sign of the imaginary part

of the complex number. The real part of the number is left unchanged.

· When a complex number is multiplied by its complex conjugate, the result is a real number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.4 · Complex Numbers 131

  · When a complex number is added to its complex conjugate, the result is a real number.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding Complex Conjugates
Find the complex conjugate of each number.

  Solution  

 The number is already in the form          The complex conjugate is  or

 We can rewrite this number in the form         as  The complex conjugate is               or      This can be

written simply as

     Analysis
Although we have seen that we can find the complex conjugate of an imaginary number, in practice we generally find
the complex conjugates of only complex numbers with both a real and an imaginary component. To obtain a real
number from an imaginary number, we can simply multiply by

     TRY IT #6 Find the complex conjugate of

           ...

              HOW TO

Given two complex numbers, divide one by the other.
 1. Write the division problem as a fraction.
 2. Determine the complex conjugate of the denominator.
 3. Multiply the numerator and denominator of the fraction by the complex conjugate of the denominator.
 4. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 7

Dividing Complex Numbers

Divide:     by

     Solution
We begin by writing the problem as a fraction.

Then we multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator.

To multiply two complex numbers, we expand the product as we would with polynomials (using FOIL).
132 2 · Equations and Inequalities

      Note that this expresses the quotient in standard form.

    Simplifying Powers of i

      The powers of are cyclic. Let's look at what happens when we raise to increasing powers.

We can see that when we get to the fifth power of it is equal to the first power. As we continue to multiply by
increasing powers, we will see a cycle of four. Let's examine the next four powers of

The cycle is repeated continuously:  every four powers.

EXAMPLE 8

Simplifying Powers of
Evaluate:

Solution

Since      we can simplify the problem by factoring out as many factors of  as possible. To do so, first determine

how many times 4 goes into 35:

TRY IT #7 Evaluate:

Q&A        Can we write in other helpful ways?
           As we saw in Example 8, we reduced to by dividing the exponent by 4 and using the remainder to
           find the simplified form. But perhaps another factorization of may be more useful. Table 1 shows
           some other possible factorizations.

                                    Factorization of

                                        Reduced form

                                       Simplified form

                                  Table 1

           Each of these will eventually result in the answer we obtained above but may require several more steps
           than our earlier method.

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with complex numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   2.4 · Complex Numbers 133

     Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers (http://openstax.org/l/addsubcomplex)
     Multiply Complex Numbers (http://openstax.org/l/multiplycomplex)
     Multiplying Complex Conjugates (http://openstax.org/l/multcompconj)
     Raising i to Powers (http://openstax.org/l/raisingi)

        2.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain how to add complex     2. What is the basic principle in  3. Give an example to show
    numbers.                          multiplication of complex          that the product of two
                                      numbers?                           imaginary numbers is not
                                                                         always imaginary.

4. What is a characteristic of
    the plot of a real number in
    the complex plane?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, evaluate the algebraic expressions.

5. If         evaluate            6. If      evaluate                7. If                evaluate
    given                             given                                 given  evaluate

8. If         evaluate 9. If                 evaluate given          10. If
       given                                                               given

Graphical

For the following exercises, plot the complex numbers on the complex plane.

11.                               12.                                13.

14.

Numeric

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and express the result as a simplified complex number.

15.                               16.                                17.

18.                               19.                                20.

21.                               22.                                23.

24.                               25.                                26.
134 2 · Equations and Inequalities

27.                                 28.                                29.

30.                                 31.                                32.

33.                                 34.                                35.

36.                                 37.                                38.

39.                                 40.                                41.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to help answer the questions.

42. Evaluate              for       43. Evaluate              for      44. Evaluate
                   and  . Predict                      and  . Predict
                                                                             for     and    . Predict
      the value if                        the value if
                                                                             the value for

45. Show that a solution of         46. Show that a solution of
                      is                                 is

Extensions

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, writing the result as a simplified complex number.

47.                                 48.                                49.

50.                                 51.                                52.

53.                                 54.                                55.

56.

2.5 Quadratic Equations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve quadratic equations by factoring.
           Solve quadratic equations by the square root property.
           Solve quadratic equations by completing the square.
           Solve quadratic equations by using the quadratic formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.5 · Quadratic Equations 135

                                                   Figure 1

The computer monitor on the left in Figure 1 is a 23.6-inch model and the one on the right is a 27-inch model.
Proportionally, the monitors appear very similar. If there is a limited amount of space and we desire the largest monitor
possible, how do we decide which one to choose? In this section, we will learn how to solve problems such as this using
four different methods.

Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring

An equation containing a second-degree polynomial is called a quadratic equation. For example, equations such as

and                        are quadratic equations. They are used in countless ways in the fields of engineering,

architecture, finance, biological science, and, of course, mathematics.

Often the easiest method of solving a quadratic equation is factoring. Factoring means finding expressions that can be
multiplied together to give the expression on one side of the equation.

If a quadratic equation can be factored, it is written as a product of linear terms. Solving by factoring depends on the

zero-product property, which states that if  then            or          where a and b are real numbers or algebraic

expressions. In other words, if the product of two numbers or two expressions equals zero, then one of the numbers or

one of the expressions must equal zero because zero multiplied by anything equals zero.

Multiplying the factors expands the equation to a string of terms separated by plus or minus signs. So, in that sense, the
operation of multiplication undoes the operation of factoring. For example, expand the factored expression

                     by multiplying the two factors together.

The product is a quadratic expression. Set equal to zero,                is a quadratic equation. If we were to factor the
equation, we would get back the factors we multiplied.

The process of factoring a quadratic equation depends on the leading coefficient, whether it is 1 or another integer. We

will look at both situations; but first, we want to confirm that the equation is written in standard form,

where a, b, and c are real numbers, and      The equation                is in standard form.

We can use the zero-product property to solve quadratic equations in which we first have to factor out the greatest
common factor (GCF), and for equations that have special factoring formulas as well, such as the difference of squares,
both of which we will see later in this section.

The Zero-Product Property and Quadratic Equations

The zero-product property states

where a and b are real numbers or algebraic expressions.
A quadratic equation is an equation containing a second-degree polynomial; for example

where a, b, and c are real numbers, and if   it is in standard form.

Solving Quadratics with a Leading Coefficient of 1

In the quadratic equation                    the leading coefficient, or the coefficient of  is 1. We have one method of
136 2 · Equations and Inequalities

factoring quadratic equations in this form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a quadratic equation with the leading coefficient of 1, factor it.

1. Find two numbers whose product equals c and whose sum equals b.

2. Use those numbers to write two factors of the form                             where k is one of the numbers found in

step 1. Use the numbers exactly as they are. In other words, if the two numbers are 1 and the factors are

3. Solve using the zero-product property by setting each factor equal to zero and solving for the variable.

EXAMPLE 1

Factoring and Solving a Quadratic with Leading Coefficient of 1
Factor and solve the equation:

Solution

To factor                           we look for two numbers whose product equals  and whose sum equals 1. Begin by looking

at the possible factors of

The last pair,  sums to 1, so these are the numbers. Note that only one pair of numbers will work. Then, write the
factors.

To solve this equation, we use the zero-product property. Set each factor equal to zero and solve.

The two solutions are and           We can see how the solutions relate to the graph in Figure 2. The solutions are the
x-intercepts of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.5 · Quadratic Equations 137

                                            Figure 2

TRY IT #1 Factor and solve the quadratic equation:

EXAMPLE 2

Solve the Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Solve the quadratic equation by factoring:

     Solution                          and whose sum equals  List the factors of
Find two numbers whose product equals

The numbers that add to 8 are 3 and 5. Then, write the factors, set each factor equal to zero, and solve.

The solutions are and
       TRY IT #2 Solve the quadratic equation by factoring:
138 2 · Equations and Inequalities

         EXAMPLE 3

      Using the Zero-Product Property to Solve a Quadratic Equation Written as the Difference of Squares
      Solve the difference of squares equation using the zero-product property:

            Solution
      Recognizing that the equation represents the difference of squares, we can write the two factors by taking the square
      root of each term, using a minus sign as the operator in one factor and a plus sign as the operator in the other. Solve
      using the zero-factor property.

The solutions are and

TRY IT #3 Solve by factoring:

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring when the Leading Coefficient is not 1

When the leading coefficient is not 1, we factor a quadratic equation using the method called grouping, which requires
four terms. With the equation in standard form, let's review the grouping procedures:

1. With the quadratic in standard form,                   multiply

2. Find two numbers whose product equals and whose sum equals

3. Rewrite the equation replacing the term with two terms using the numbers found in step 1 as coefficients of x.

4. Factor the first two terms and then factor the last two terms. The expressions in parentheses must be exactly the

same to use grouping.

5. Factor out the expression in parentheses.

6. Set the expressions equal to zero and solve for the variable.

EXAMPLE 4

Solving a Quadratic Equation Using Grouping
Use grouping to factor and solve the quadratic equation:

     Solution          Then list the factors of
First, multiply

The only pair of factors that sums to is      Rewrite the equation replacing the b term,      with two terms using 3

and 12 as coefficients of x. Factor the first two terms, and then factor the last two terms.

Solve using the zero-product property.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     2.5 · Quadratic Equations 139

The solutions are and See Figure 3.

                                                                              Figure 3

       TRY IT #4 Solve using factoring by grouping:

  EXAMPLE 5
Solving a Polynomial of Higher Degree by Factoring
Solve the equation by factoring:

     Solution
This equation does not look like a quadratic, as the highest power is 3, not 2. Recall that the first thing we want to do
when solving any equation is to factor out the GCF, if one exists. And it does here. We can factor out from all of the
terms and then proceed with grouping.

Use grouping on the expression in parentheses.

Now, we use the zero-product property. Notice that we have three factors.
140 2 · Equations and Inequalities

The solutions are  and

       TRY IT #5 Solve by factoring:

Using the Square Root Property

When there is no linear term in the equation, another method of solving a quadratic equation is by using the square
root property, in which we isolate the term and take the square root of the number on the other side of the equals
sign. Keep in mind that sometimes we may have to manipulate the equation to isolate the term so that the square
root property can be used.

  The Square Root Property

  With the term isolated, the square root property states that:

where k is a nonzero real number.

...

     HOW TO

Given a quadratic equation with an term but no term, use the square root property to solve it.

1. Isolate the term on one side of the equal sign.                sign before the expression on the side opposite
2. Take the square root of both sides of the equation, putting a

     the squared term.
3. Simplify the numbers on the side with the sign.

EXAMPLE 6

Solving a Simple Quadratic Equation Using the Square Root Property                    sign before the radical symbol.
Solve the quadratic using the square root property:

     Solution
Take the square root of both sides, and then simplify the radical. Remember to use a

The solutions are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.5 · Quadratic Equations 141

EXAMPLE 7

Solving a Quadratic Equation Using the Square Root Property
Solve the quadratic equation:

     Solution       term. Then take the square root of both sides.
First, isolate the

The solutions are     and

TRY IT #6 Solve the quadratic equation using the square root property:

Completing the Square

Not all quadratic equations can be factored or can be solved in their original form using the square root property. In
these cases, we may use a method for solving a quadratic equation known as completing the square. Using this
method, we add or subtract terms to both sides of the equation until we have a perfect square trinomial on one side of
the equal sign. We then apply the square root property. To complete the square, the leading coefficient, a, must equal 1.
If it does not, then divide the entire equation by a. Then, we can use the following procedures to solve a quadratic
equation by completing the square.

We will use the example         to illustrate each step.

1. Given a quadratic equation that cannot be factored, and with     first add or subtract the constant term to the
     right side of the equal sign.

2. Multiply the b term by and square it.

3. Add              to both sides of the equal sign and simplify the right side. We have

4. The left side of the equation can now be factored as a perfect square.
5. Use the square root property and solve.

6. The solutions are       and
142 2 · Equations and Inequalities

         EXAMPLE 8
       Solving a Quadratic by Completing the Square
       Solve the quadratic equation by completing the square:

            Solution
       First, move the constant term to the right side of the equal sign.
      Then, take of the b term and square it.

       Add the result to both sides of the equal sign.

       Factor the left side as a perfect square and simplify the right side.

       Use the square root property and solve.

The solutions are  and           .

TRY IT #7 Solve by completing the square:

Using the Quadratic Formula

The fourth method of solving a quadratic equation is by using the quadratic formula, a formula that will solve all
quadratic equations. Although the quadratic formula works on any quadratic equation in standard form, it is easy to
make errors in substituting the values into the formula. Pay close attention when substituting, and use parentheses
when inserting a negative number.

We can derive the quadratic formula by completing the square. We will assume that the leading coefficient is positive; if

it is negative, we can multiply the equation by and obtain a positive a. Given  we will

complete the square as follows:

1. First, move the constant term to the right side of the equal sign:

2. As we want the leading coefficient to equal 1, divide through by a:

3. Then, find of the middle term, and add  to both sides of the equal sign:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        2.5 · Quadratic Equations 143

4. Next, write the left side as a perfect square. Find the common denominator of the right side and write it as a single
     fraction:

5. Now, use the square root property, which gives

6. Finally, add  to both sides of the equation and combine the terms on the right side. Thus,

The Quadratic Formula       any quadratic equation can be solved using the quadratic formula:
Written in standard form,

where a, b, and c are real numbers and

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a quadratic equation, solve it using the quadratic formula
 1. Make sure the equation is in standard form:
 2. Make note of the values of the coefficients and constant term, and
 3. Carefully substitute the values noted in step 2 into the equation. To avoid needless errors, use parentheses

      around each number input into the formula.
 4. Calculate and solve.

EXAMPLE 9

Solve the Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
Solve the quadratic equation:

     Solution               Then use the quadratic formula.
Identify the coefficients:

  EXAMPLE 10

Solving a Quadratic Equation with the Quadratic Formula
Use the quadratic formula to solve
144 2 · Equations and Inequalities

  Solution

First, we identify the coefficients:         and

Substitute these values into the quadratic formula.

The solutions to the equation are       and

     TRY IT #8 Solve the quadratic equation using the quadratic formula:

The Discriminant

The quadratic formula not only generates the solutions to a quadratic equation, it tells us about the nature of the

solutions when we consider the discriminant, or the expression under the radical,      The discriminant tells us

whether the solutions are real numbers or complex numbers, and how many solutions of each type to expect. Table 1

relates the value of the discriminant to the solutions of a quadratic equation.

                                    Value of Discriminant    Results

                                                             One rational solution (double solution)

                                      perfect square         Two rational solutions

                                      not a perfect square   Two irrational solutions

                                                             Two complex solutions

                  Table 1

The Discriminant

For               , where , , and are real numbers, the discriminant is the expression under the radical in

the quadratic formula:                It tells us whether the solutions are real numbers or complex numbers and how

many solutions of each type to expect.

EXAMPLE 11

Using the Discriminant to Find the Nature of the Solutions to a Quadratic Equation
Use the discriminant to find the nature of the solutions to the following quadratic equations:

  Solution                                                                       

Calculate the discriminant            for each equation and state the expected type of solutions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   2.5 · Quadratic Equations 145



                                             There will be one rational double solution.



                                                  As is a perfect square, there will be two rational solutions.



                                                    As is a perfect square, there will be two rational solutions.



                                                       There will be two complex solutions.

Using the Pythagorean Theorem

One of the most famous formulas in mathematics is the Pythagorean Theorem. It is based on a right triangle, and

states the relationship among the lengths of the sides as                               where and refer to the legs of a right triangle

adjacent to the angle, and refers to the hypotenuse. It has immeasurable uses in architecture, engineering, the

sciences, geometry, trigonometry, and algebra, and in everyday applications.

We use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve for the length of one side of a triangle when we have the lengths of the other
two. Because each of the terms is squared in the theorem, when we are solving for a side of a triangle, we have a
quadratic equation. We can use the methods for solving quadratic equations that we learned in this section to solve for
the missing side.

The Pythagorean Theorem is given as

where and refer to the legs of a right triangle adjacent to the                         angle, and refers to the hypotenuse, as shown in
Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4
  EXAMPLE 12
Finding the Length of the Missing Side of a Right Triangle
Find the length of the missing side of the right triangle in Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5
146 2 · Equations and Inequalities

            Solution
      As we have measurements for side b and the hypotenuse, the missing side is a.

    TRY IT #9  Use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve the right triangle problem: Leg a measures 4 units, leg b
               measures 3 units. Find the length of the hypotenuse.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with quadratic equations.

    Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring (http://openstax.org/l/quadreqfactor)
    The Zero-Product Property (http://openstax.org/l/zeroprodprop)
    Completing the Square (http://openstax.org/l/complthesqr)
    Quadratic Formula with Two Rational Solutions (http://openstax.org/l/quadrformrat)
    Length of a leg of a right triangle (http://openstax.org/l/leglengthtri)

        2.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How do we recognize when       2. When we solve a quadratic           3. When we solve a quadratic
    an equation is quadratic?                                                equation by factoring, why
                                      equation, how many                     do we move all terms to one
                                                                             side, having zero on the
                                      solutions should we always             other side?

                                      start out seeking? Explain

                                      why when solving a

                                      quadratic equation in the

                                      form                we

                                      may graph the equation

                                            and have

                                      no zeroes (x-intercepts).

4. In the quadratic formula,      5. Describe two scenarios
                                      where using the square root
    what is the name of the           property to solve a
                                      quadratic equation would
    expression under the radical      be the most efficient
                                      method.
    sign   and how does

    it determine the number of

    and nature of our solutions?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring.

6.                                7.                                     8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     2.5 · Quadratic Equations 147

9.          10.  11.

12.         13.  14.

15.         16.  17.

18.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the square root property.

19.         20.  21.

22.         23.  24.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by completing the square. Show each step.

25.         26.  27.

28.         29.  30.

31.

For the following exercises, determine the discriminant, and then state how many solutions there are and the nature of
the solutions. Do not solve.

32.         33.  34.

35.         36.  37.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the quadratic formula. If the solutions are not real,
state No Real Solution.

38.         39.  40.

41.         42.  43.

Technology

For the following exercises, enter the expressions into your graphing utility and find the zeroes to the equation (the
x-intercepts) by using 2nd CALC 2:zero. Recall finding zeroes will ask left bound (move your cursor to the left of the
zero,enter), then right bound (move your cursor to the right of the zero,enter), then guess (move your cursor between
the bounds near the zero, enter). Round your answers to the nearest thousandth.

44.         45.  46.
148 2 · Equations and Inequalities         48. To solve the quadratic
                                                 equation
       47. To solve the quadratic                                             we can
             equation                            graph these two equations
             we can graph these two
             equations

and find the points of                     and find the points of
intersection. Recall 2nd                   intersection. Recall 2nd
CALC 5:intersection. Do this               CALC 5:intersection. Do this
and find the solutions to                  and find the solutions to
the nearest tenth.                         the nearest tenth.

Extensions                                 50. Show that the sum of the               51. A person has a garden that
                                                 two solutions to the                       has a length 10 feet longer
49. Beginning with the general                   quadratic equation is .                    than the width. Set up a
      form of a quadratic                                                                   quadratic equation to find
      equation,                                                                             the dimensions of the
                                solve for                                                   garden if its area is 119 ft.2.
      x by using the completing                                                             Solve the quadratic
      the square method, thus                                                               equation to find the length
      deriving the quadratic                                                                and width.
      formula.

52. Abercrombie and Fitch                  53. Suppose that an equation
      stock had a price given as                 is given

where is the time in                       where represents the
                                           number of items sold at an
months from 1999 to 2001.                  auction and is the profit
                                           made by the business that
(  is January 1999).                       ran the auction. How many
                                           items sold would make this
Find the two months in                     profit a maximum? Solve
                                           this by graphing the
which the price of the stock               expression in your
                                           graphing utility and finding
was $30.                                   the maximum using 2nd
                                           CALC maximum. To obtain
                                           a good window for the
                                           curve, set [0,200] and
                                           [0,10000].

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.6 · Other Types of Equations 149

Real-World Applications              55. The cost function for a                56. A falling object travels a
                                           certain company is
54. A formula for the normal                                     and the        distance given by the
      systolic blood pressure for a        revenue is given by
      man age measured in                                              Recall   formula                ft,
      mmHg, is given as                    that profit is revenue
                                           minus cost. Set up a                 where is measured in
      Find the age to the nearest          quadratic equation and
      year of a man whose normal           find two values of x                 seconds. How long will it
      blood pressure measures              (production level) that will
      125 mmHg.                            create a profit of $300.             take for the object to travel

                                                                                74 ft?

57. A vacant lot is being converted       58. An epidemiological study
      into a community garden. The              of the spread of a certain
      garden and the walkway around             influenza strain that hit a
      its perimeter have an area of 378         small school population
      ft2. Find the width of the walkway        found that the total
      if the garden is 12 ft. wide by 15        number of students, ,
      ft. long.                                 who contracted the flu
                                                days after it broke out is
                                                given by the model

                                          where                       Find the

                                          day that 160 students had

                                          the flu. Recall that the

                                          restriction on is at most 6.

2.6 Other Types of Equations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve equations involving rational exponents.
           Solve equations using factoring.
           Solve radical equations.
           Solve absolute value equations.
           Solve other types of equations.

We have solved linear equations, rational equations, and quadratic equations using several methods. However, there are
many other types of equations, and we will investigate a few more types in this section. We will look at equations
involving rational exponents, polynomial equations, radical equations, absolute value equations, equations in quadratic
form, and some rational equations that can be transformed into quadratics. Solving any equation, however, employs the
same basic algebraic rules. We will learn some new techniques as they apply to certain equations, but the algebra never
changes.

Solving Equations Involving Rational Exponents

Rational exponents are exponents that are fractions, where the numerator is a power and the denominator is a root. For

example,  is another way of writing       is another way of writing                     The ability to work with rational

exponents is a useful skill, as it is highly applicable in calculus.

We can solve equations in which a variable is raised to a rational exponent by raising both sides of the equation to the
reciprocal of the exponent. The reason we raise the equation to the reciprocal of the exponent is because we want to
eliminate the exponent on the variable term, and a number multiplied by its reciprocal equals 1. For example,
150 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                       and so on.
         Rational Exponents
         A rational exponent indicates a power in the numerator and a root in the denominator. There are multiple ways of
         writing an expression, a variable, or a number with a rational exponent:

         EXAMPLE 1
      Evaluating a Number Raised to a Rational Exponent
      Evaluate

            Solution
      Whether we take the root first or the power first depends on the number. It is easy to find the cube root of 8, so rewrite

            as

              TRY IT #1 Evaluate
         EXAMPLE 2
      Solve the Equation Including a Variable Raised to a Rational Exponent
      Solve the equation in which a variable is raised to a rational exponent:

            Solution
      The way to remove the exponent on x is by raising both sides of the equation to a power that is the reciprocal of
      which is

              TRY IT #2 Solve the equation
         EXAMPLE 3
      Solving an Equation Involving Rational Exponents and Factoring
      Solve

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   2.6 · Other Types of Equations 151

     Solution
This equation involves rational exponents as well as factoring rational exponents. Let us take this one step at a time.
First, put the variable terms on one side of the equal sign and set the equation equal to zero.

Now, it looks like we should factor the left side, but what do we factor out? We can always factor the term with the lowest
exponent. Rewrite as Then, factor out from both terms on the left.

Where did come from? Remember, when we multiply two numbers with the same base, we add the exponents.
Therefore, if we multiply back in using the distributive property, we get the expression we had before the factoring,
which is what should happen. We need an exponent such that when added to equals Thus, the exponent on x in
the parentheses is
Let us continue. Now we have two factors and can use the zero factor theorem.

The two solutions are and

       TRY IT #3 Solve:

Solving Equations Using Factoring

We have used factoring to solve quadratic equations, but it is a technique that we can use with many types of polynomial
equations, which are equations that contain a string of terms including numerical coefficients and variables. When we
are faced with an equation containing polynomials of degree higher than 2, we can often solve them by factoring.

  Polynomial Equations

  A polynomial of degree n is an expression of the type

where n is a positive integer and  are real numbers and
152 2 · Equations and Inequalities

         Setting the polynomial equal to zero gives a polynomial equation. The total number of solutions (real and complex)
        to a polynomial equation is equal to the highest exponent n.

         EXAMPLE 4
      Solving a Polynomial by Factoring
      Solve the polynomial by factoring:

            Solution
      First, set the equation equal to zero. Then factor out what is common to both terms, the GCF.

Notice that we have the difference of squares in the factor  which we will continue to factor and obtain two

solutions. The first term,       generates, technically, two solutions as the exponent is 2, but they are the same solution.

The solutions are                and

     Analysis
We can see the solutions on the graph in Figure 1. The x-coordinates of the points where the graph crosses the x-axis are
the solutions--the x-intercepts. Notice on the graph that at the solution the graph touches the x-axis and bounces
back. It does not cross the x-axis. This is typical of double solutions.

                                      Figure 1

TRY IT #4 Solve by factoring:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   2.6 · Other Types of Equations 153

  EXAMPLE 5

Solve a Polynomial by Grouping
Solve a polynomial by grouping:

     Solution
This polynomial consists of 4 terms, which we can solve by grouping. Grouping procedures require factoring the first two
terms and then factoring the last two terms. If the factors in the parentheses are identical, we can continue the process
and solve, unless more factoring is suggested.

The grouping process ends here, as we can factor        using the difference of squares formula.

The solutions are  and Note that the highest exponent is 3 and we obtained 3 solutions. We can see the

solutions, the x-intercepts, on the graph in Figure 2.

                                                                              Figure 2
     Analysis
We looked at solving quadratic equations by factoring when the leading coefficient is 1. When the leading coefficient is
not 1, we solved by grouping. Grouping requires four terms, which we obtained by splitting the linear term of quadratic
equations. We can also use grouping for some polynomials of degree higher than 2, as we saw here, since there were
already four terms.

Solving Radical Equations

Radical equations are equations that contain variables in the radicand (the expression under a radical symbol), such as

Radical equations may have one or more radical terms, and are solved by eliminating each radical, one at a time. We
have to be careful when solving radical equations, as it is not unusual to find extraneous solutions, roots that are not, in
fact, solutions to the equation. These solutions are not due to a mistake in the solving method, but result from the
process of raising both sides of an equation to a power. However, checking each answer in the original equation will
confirm the true solutions.
154 2 · Equations and Inequalities

         Radical Equations
         An equation containing terms with a variable in the radicand is called a radical equation.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Given a radical equation, solve it.
          1. Isolate the radical expression on one side of the equal sign. Put all remaining terms on the other side.
          2. If the radical is a square root, then square both sides of the equation. If it is a cube root, then raise both sides of

               the equation to the third power. In other words, for an nth root radical, raise both sides to the nth power. Doing
               so eliminates the radical symbol.
          3. Solve the remaining equation.
          4. If a radical term still remains, repeat steps 1-2.
          5. Confirm solutions by substituting them into the original equation.

         EXAMPLE 6
      Solving an Equation with One Radical
      Solve

            Solution
      The radical is already isolated on the left side of the equal side, so proceed to square both sides.

      We see that the remaining equation is a quadratic. Set it equal to zero and solve.

      The proposed solutions are and Let us check each solution back in the original equation. First, check

      This is an extraneous solution. While no mistake was made solving the equation, we found a solution that does not
      satisfy the original equation.
      Check

      The solution is

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   2.6 · Other Types of Equations 155

       TRY IT #5 Solve the radical equation:
  EXAMPLE 7
Solving a Radical Equation Containing Two Radicals
Solve

     Solution
As this equation contains two radicals, we isolate one radical, eliminate it, and then isolate the second radical.

Use the perfect square formula to expand the right side:

Now that both radicals have been eliminated, set the quadratic equal to zero and solve.

The proposed solutions are and Check each solution in the original equation.

One solution is
Check

The only solution is We see that is an extraneous solution.
       TRY IT #6 Solve the equation with two radicals:
156 2 · Equations and Inequalities

Solving an Absolute Value Equation                                                                         we notice that
                                                                                            This leads to two different
Next, we will learn how to solve an absolute value equation. To solve an equation such as
the absolute value will be equal to 8 if the quantity inside the absolute value bars is or
equations we can solve independently.

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is useful. For example, we may need to identify
numbers or points on a line that are at a specified distance from a given reference point.

  Absolute Value Equations

  The absolute value of x is written as It has the following properties:

For real numbers and                an equation of the form       with    will have solutions when  or
                                         has no solution.
If     the equation

An absolute value equation in the form                       has the following properties:

       ...

            HOW TO

Given an absolute value equation, solve it.

1. Isolate the absolute value expression on one side of the equal sign.

2. If         write and solve two equations:                 and

EXAMPLE 8

Solving Absolute Value Equations
Solve the following absolute value equations:

    Solution                                                            



Write two equations and solve each:

The two solutions are and                      

                                               There is no solution as an absolute value cannot be negative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.6 · Other Types of Equations 157



Isolate the absolute value expression and then write two equations.

There are two solutions: and



(d)
The equation is set equal to zero, so we have to write only one equation.

There is one solution:

     TRY IT #7 Solve the absolute value equation:

Solving Other Types of Equations

There are many other types of equations in addition to the ones we have discussed so far. We will see more of them
throughout the text. Here, we will discuss equations that are in quadratic form, and rational equations that result in a
quadratic.

Solving Equations in Quadratic Form

Equations in quadratic form are equations with three terms. The first term has a power other than 2. The middle term
has an exponent that is one-half the exponent of the leading term. The third term is a constant. We can solve equations
in this form as if they were quadratic. A few examples of these equations include

and                     In each one, doubling the exponent of the middle term equals the exponent on the leading

term. We can solve these equations by substituting a variable for the middle term.

Quadratic Form

If the exponent on the middle term is one-half of the exponent on the leading term, we have an equation in
quadratic form, which we can solve as if it were a quadratic. We substitute a variable for the middle term to solve
equations in quadratic form.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an equation quadratic in form, solve it.

 1. Identify the exponent on the leading term and determine whether it is double the exponent on the middle term.
 2. If it is, substitute a variable, such as u, for the variable portion of the middle term.
 3. Rewrite the equation so that it takes on the standard form of a quadratic.
 4. Solve using one of the usual methods for solving a quadratic.
 5. Replace the substitution variable with the original term.
158 2 · Equations and Inequalities

6. Solve the remaining equation.

EXAMPLE 9

Solving a Fourth-degree Equation in Quadratic Form
Solve this fourth-degree equation:

Solution

This equation fits the main criteria, that the power on the leading term is double the power on the middle term. Next, we

will make a substitution for the variable term in the middle. Let         Rewrite the equation in u.

Now solve the quadratic.

Solve each factor and replace the original term for u.

The solutions are                   and

TRY IT #8 Solve using substitution:

EXAMPLE 10

Solving an Equation in Quadratic Form Containing a Binomial
Solve the equation in quadratic form:

Solution

This equation contains a binomial in place of the single variable. The tendency is to expand what is presented. However,

recognizing that it fits the criteria for being in quadratic form makes all the difference in the solving process. First, make

a substitution, letting                  Then rewrite the equation in u.

Solve using the zero-factor property and then replace u with the original expression.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     2.6 · Other Types of Equations 159

The second factor results in

We have two solutions:        and

TRY IT #9 Solve:

Solving Rational Equations Resulting in a Quadratic

Earlier, we solved rational equations. Sometimes, solving a rational equation results in a quadratic. When this happens,
we continue the solution by simplifying the quadratic equation by one of the methods we have seen. It may turn out that
there is no solution.

EXAMPLE 11

Solving a Rational Equation Leading to a Quadratic
Solve the following rational equation:

Solution

We want all denominators in factored form to find the LCD. Two of the denominators cannot be factored further.

However,                           Then, the LCD is  Next, we multiply the whole equation by the LCD.

In this case, either solution produces a zero in the denominator in the original equation. Thus, there is no solution.

       TRY IT #10 Solve

       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with different types of equations.
      Rational Equation with no Solution (http://openstax.org/l/rateqnosoln)
      Solving equations with rational exponents using reciprocal powers (http://openstax.org/l/ratexprecpexp)
      Solving radical equations part 1 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/radeqsolvepart1)
      Solving radical equations part 2 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/radeqsolvepart2)
160 2 · Equations and Inequalities

        2.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. In a radical equation, what      2. Explain why possible          3. Your friend tries to calculate
    does it mean if a number is         solutions must be checked
    an extraneous solution?             in radical equations.              the value  and keeps

                                                                           getting an ERROR message.

                                                                           What mistake are they

                                                                           probably making?

4. Explain why                      5. Explain how to change a
    has no solutions.                   rational exponent into the
                                        correct radical expression.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, solve the rational exponent equation. Use factoring where necessary.

6.                                  7.                               8.

9.                                  10.                              11.

12.

For the following exercises, solve the following polynomial equations by grouping and factoring.

13.                                 14.                              15.

16.                                 17.                              18.

19.

For the following exercises, solve the radical equation. Be sure to check all solutions to eliminate extraneous solutions.

20.                                 21.                              22.

23.                                 24.                              25.

26.                                 27.                              28.

For the following exercises, solve the equation involving absolute value.

29.                                 30.                              31.

32.                                 33.                              34.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 161

35.                                36.

For the following exercises, solve the equation by identifying the quadratic form. Use a substitute variable and find all
real solutions by factoring.

37.                                38.                                 39.

40.                                41.

Extensions

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown variable.

42.                                43.                                 44.

45.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use the model for the period of a pendulum,    such that  where the length of

the pendulum is L and the acceleration due to gravity is

46. If the acceleration due to     47. If the gravity is 32 ft/s2 and
      gravity is 9.8 m/s2 and the        the period equals 1 s, find
      period equals 1 s, find the        the length to the nearest
      length to the nearest cm           in. (12 in. = 1 ft). Round
      (100 cm = 1 m).                    your answer to the nearest
                                         in.

For the following exercises, use a model for body surface area, BSA, such that         where w = weight in kg
and h = height in cm.

48. Find the height of a 72-kg     49. Find the weight of a
      female to the nearest cm           177-cm male to the nearest
      whose                              kg whose

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use interval notation
           Use properties of inequalities.
           Solve inequalities in one variable algebraically.
           Solve absolute value inequalities.
162 2 · Equations and Inequalities

                                                       Figure 1

It is not easy to make the honor roll at most top universities. Suppose students were required to carry a course load of at
least 12 credit hours and maintain a grade point average of 3.5 or above. How could these honor roll requirements be
expressed mathematically? In this section, we will explore various ways to express different sets of numbers,
inequalities, and absolute value inequalities.

Using Interval Notation                                can be achieved in several ways.

Indicating the solution to an inequality such as

We can use a number line as shown in Figure 2. The blue ray begins at  and, as indicated by the arrowhead,

continues to infinity, which illustrates that the solution set includes all real numbers greater than or equal to 4.

                                                       Figure 2

We can use set-builder notation:    which translates to "all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal

to 4." Notice that braces are used to indicate a set.

The third method is interval notation, in which solution sets are indicated with parentheses or brackets. The solutions

to  are represented as  This is perhaps the most useful method, as it applies to concepts studied later in

this course and to other higher-level math courses.

The main concept to remember is that parentheses represent solutions greater or less than the number, and brackets

represent solutions that are greater than or equal to or less than or equal to the number. Use parentheses to represent

infinity or negative infinity, since positive and negative infinity are not numbers in the usual sense of the word and,

therefore, cannot be "equaled." A few examples of an interval, or a set of numbers in which a solution falls, are

or all numbers between and including but not including                 all real numbers between, but not including

    and and   all real numbers less than and including Table 1 outlines the possibilities.

                                   Set Indicated                 Set-Builder Notation    Interval Notation
    All real numbers between a and b, but not including a or b
                                                                                                   
        All real numbers greater than a, but not including a

    All real numbers less than b, but not including b                                       

    All real numbers greater than a, including a                                            

    All real numbers less than b, including b                                               

               All real numbers between a and b, including a
              All real numbers between a and b, including b
    Table 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 163

                          Set Indicated                         Set-Builder Notation  Interval Notation
All real numbers between a and b, including a and b
                                                                                               
    All real numbers less than a or greater than b

           All real numbers                                                                  

Table 1

EXAMPLE 1

Using Interval Notation to Express All Real Numbers Greater Than or Equal to a
Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers greater than or equal to

     Solution                                                  The bracket indicates that    is included in the
Use a bracket on the left of and parentheses after infinity:
set with all real numbers greater than to infinity.

TRY IT #1 Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers between and including and

EXAMPLE 2

Using Interval Notation to Express All Real Numbers Less Than or Equal to a or Greater Than or Equal to b
Write the interval expressing all real numbers less than or equal to or greater than or equal to

     Solution
We have to write two intervals for this example. The first interval must indicate all real numbers less than or equal to 1.

So, this interval begins at  and ends at which is written as 

The second interval must show all real numbers greater than or equal to which is written as  However, we

want to combine these two sets. We accomplish this by inserting the union symbol, between the two intervals.

                                                              

       TRY IT #2 Express all real numbers less than or greater than or equal to 3 in interval notation.

Using the Properties of Inequalities

When we work with inequalities, we can usually treat them similarly to but not exactly as we treat equalities. We can use
the addition property and the multiplication property to help us solve them. The one exception is when we multiply or
divide by a negative number; doing so reverses the inequality symbol.

  Properties of Inequalities

These properties also apply to  and
164 2 · Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 3

Demonstrating the Addition Property
Illustrate the addition property for inequalities by solving each of the following:

1. 
2. 
3. 

     Solution
The addition property for inequalities states that if an inequality exists, adding or subtracting the same number on both
sides does not change the inequality.

                                    



  TRY IT #3 Solve:

EXAMPLE 4

Demonstrating the Multiplication Property
Illustrate the multiplication property for inequalities by solving each of the following:

1. 
2. 
3. 

  Solution

            



       TRY IT #4 Solve:

Solving Inequalities in One Variable Algebraically

As the examples have shown, we can perform the same operations on both sides of an inequality, just as we do with
equations; we combine like terms and perform operations. To solve, we isolate the variable.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 165

  EXAMPLE 5
Solving an Inequality Algebraically
Solve the inequality:

     Solution
Solving this inequality is similar to solving an equation up until the last step.

The solution set is given by the interval   or all real numbers less than and including 1.

       TRY IT #5 Solve the inequality and write the answer using interval notation:

  EXAMPLE 6
Solving an Inequality with Fractions
Solve the following inequality and write the answer in interval notation:

     Solution
We begin solving in the same way we do when solving an equation.

The solution set is the interval 

TRY IT #6 Solve the inequality and write the answer in interval notation:

Understanding Compound Inequalities

A compound inequality includes two inequalities in one statement. A statement such as       means                  and

There are two ways to solve compound inequalities: separating them into two separate inequalities or leaving the

compound inequality intact and performing operations on all three parts at the same time. We will illustrate both

methods.

EXAMPLE 7

Solving a Compound Inequality
Solve the compound inequality:

Solution

The first method is to write two separate inequalities:  and  We solve them independently.
166 2 · Equations and Inequalities

       Then, we can rewrite the solution as a compound inequality, the same way the problem began.

       In interval notation, the solution is written as
       The second method is to leave the compound inequality intact, and perform solving procedures on the three parts at the
       same time.

       We get the same solution:
              TRY IT #7 Solve the compound inequality:

         EXAMPLE 8
       Solving a Compound Inequality with the Variable in All Three Parts
       Solve the compound inequality with variables in all three parts:

            Solution
       Let's try the first method. Write two inequalities:

The solution set is              or in interval notation            Notice that when we write the solution in interval

notation, the smaller number comes first. We read intervals from left to right, as they appear on a number line. See
Figure 3.

                                                          Figure 3

       TRY IT #8 Solve the compound inequality:

Solving Absolute Value Inequalities

As we know, the absolute value of a quantity is a positive number or zero. From the origin, a point located at          has

an absolute value of as it is x units away. Consider absolute value as the distance from one point to another point.

Regardless of direction, positive or negative, the distance between the two points is represented as a positive number or

zero.

An absolute value inequality is an equation of the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 167

Where A, and sometimes B, represents an algebraic expression dependent on a variable x. Solving the inequality means
finding the set of all -values that satisfy the problem. Usually this set will be an interval or the union of two intervals
and will include a range of values.

There are two basic approaches to solving absolute value inequalities: graphical and algebraic. The advantage of the
graphical approach is we can read the solution by interpreting the graphs of two equations. The advantage of the
algebraic approach is that solutions are exact, as precise solutions are sometimes difficult to read from a graph.

Suppose we want to know all possible returns on an investment if we could earn some amount of money within $200 of

$600. We can solve algebraically for the set of x-values such that the distance between and 600 is less than or equal to

200. We represent the distance between and 600 as  and therefore,                       or

This means our returns would be between $400 and $800.

To solve absolute value inequalities, just as with absolute value equations, we write two inequalities and then solve them
independently.

Absolute Value Inequalities

For an algebraic expression X, and  an absolute value inequality is an inequality of the form

These statements also apply to      and

  EXAMPLE 9

Determining a Number within a Prescribed Distance
Describe all values within a distance of 4 from the number 5.

     Solution
We want the distance between and 5 to be less than or equal to 4. We can draw a number line, such as in Figure 4, to
represent the condition to be satisfied.

                                                                              Figure 4  Write the values of that satisfy

The distance from to 5 can be represented using an absolute value symbol,
the condition as an absolute value inequality.

We need to write two inequalities as there are always two solutions to an absolute value equation.

If the solution set is  and          then the solution set is an interval including all real numbers between and
                                    in interval notation.
including 1 and 9.

So  is equivalent to

    TRY IT #9 Describe all x-values within a distance of 3 from the number 2.
168 2 · Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 10

Solving an Absolute Value Inequality

Solve               .

Solution

EXAMPLE 11

Using a Graphical Approach to Solve Absolute Value Inequalities

Given the equation                       determine the x-values for which the y-values are negative.

     Solution                            which is when           We begin by isolating the absolute value.
We are trying to determine where

Next, we solve for the equality

Now, we can examine the graph to observe where the y-values are negative. We observe where the branches are below

the x-axis. Notice that it is not important exactly what the graph looks like, as long as we know that it crosses the

horizontal axis at                  and  and that the graph opens downward. See Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5

       TRY IT #10 Solve
       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with linear inequalities and absolute value
      inequalities.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 169

     Interval notation (http://openstax.org/l/intervalnotn)
     How to solve linear inequalities (http://openstax.org/l/solvelinineq)
     How to solve an inequality (http://openstax.org/l/solveineq)
     Absolute value equations (http://openstax.org/l/absvaleq)
     Compound inequalities (http://openstax.org/l/compndineqs)
     Absolute value inequalities (http://openstax.org/l/absvalineqs)

        2.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. When solving an inequality,  2. When solving an inequality,  3. When writing our solution in
    explain what happened           we arrive at:                   interval notation, how do we
    from Step 1 to Step 2:                                          represent all the real
                                                                    numbers?

                                     Explain what our solution
                                     set is.

4. When solving an inequality,  5. Describe how to graph
    we arrive at:

     Explain what our solution
     set is.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final answer in interval notation.

6.                              7.                              8.

9.                              10.                             11.

12.                             13.                             14.

For the following exercises, solve the inequality involving absolute value. Write your final answer in interval notation.

15.                             16.                             17.

18.                             19.                             20.

21.                             22.                             23.

For the following exercises, describe all the x-values within or including a distance of the given values.

24. Distance of 5 units from    25. Distance of 3 units from    26. Distance of 10 units from
      the number 7                    the number 9                    the number 4
170 2 · Equations and Inequalities

27. Distance of 11 units from
      the number 1

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Express your answer using inequality signs, and then write
your answer using interval notation.

28.                                 29.                                   30.

31.                                      32.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the function. Observe the points of intersection and shade the x-axis representing the
solution set to the inequality. Show your graph and write your final answer in interval notation.

33.                                 34.                                   35.

36.                                 37.

For the following exercises, graph both straight lines (left-hand side being y1 and right-hand side being y2) on the same
axes. Find the point of intersection and solve the inequality by observing where it is true comparing the y-values of the
lines.

38.                                 39.                                   40.

41.                                 42.

Numeric

For the following exercises, write the set in interval notation.

43.                                 44.                                   45.

46.

For the following exercises, write the interval in set-builder notation.

47.                                 48.                                   49.

50.        

For the following exercises, write the set of numbers represented on the number line in interval notation.

51.                                 52.                                        53.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 2.7 · Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 171

Technology

For the following exercises, input the left-hand side of the inequality as a Y1 graph in your graphing utility. Enter y2 = the
right-hand side. Entering the absolute value of an expression is found in the MATH menu, Num, 1:abs(. Find the points of
intersection, recall (2nd CALC 5:intersection, 1st curve, enter, 2nd curve, enter, guess, enter). Copy a sketch of the graph
and shade the x-axis for your solution set to the inequality. Write final answers in interval notation.

54.                                  55.                                         56.

57.                                  58.

Extensions

59. Solve                            60. Solve                                   61.

62.                             is

     a profit formula for a small

     business. Find the set of

     x-values that will keep this

     profit positive.

Real-World Applications              64. A basic cellular package
                                           costs $20/mo. for 60 min of
63. In chemistry the volume                calling, with an additional
      for a certain gas is given by        charge of $.30/min beyond
                    where V is             that time.. The cost
      measured in cc and T is              formula would be
      temperature in ºC. If the                                              If
      temperature varies                   you have to keep your bill
      between 80ºC and 120ºC,              no greater than $50, what
      find the set of volume               is the maximum calling
      values.                              minutes you can use?
172 2 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

absolute value equation an equation in which the variable appears in absolute value bars, typically with two solutions,

one accounting for the positive expression and one for the negative expression

area in square units, the area formula used in this section is used to find the area of any two-dimensional rectangular

region:

Cartesian coordinate system a grid system designed with perpendicular axes invented by René Descartes

completing the square a process for solving quadratic equations in which terms are added to or subtracted from both

sides of the equation in order to make one side a perfect square

complex conjugate a complex number containing the same terms as another complex number, but with the opposite

operator. Multiplying a complex number by its conjugate yields a real number.

complex number the sum of a real number and an imaginary number; the standard form is                  where a is the real

part and is the complex part.

complex plane the coordinate plane in which the horizontal axis represents the real component of a complex number,

and the vertical axis represents the imaginary component, labeled i.

compound inequality a problem or a statement that includes two inequalities

conditional equation an equation that is true for some values of the variable

discriminant the expression under the radical in the quadratic formula that indicates the nature of the solutions, real

or complex, rational or irrational, single or double roots.

distance formula a formula that can be used to find the length of a line segment if the endpoints are known

equation in two variables a mathematical statement, typically written in x and y, in which two expressions are equal

equations in quadratic form equations with a power other than 2 but with a middle term with an exponent that is

one-half the exponent of the leading term

extraneous solutions any solutions obtained that are not valid in the original equation

graph in two variables the graph of an equation in two variables, which is always shown in two variables in the two-

dimensional plane

identity equation an equation that is true for all values of the variable

imaginary number the square root of :

inconsistent equation an equation producing a false result

intercepts the points at which the graph of an equation crosses the x-axis and the y-axis

interval an interval describes a set of numbers within which a solution falls

interval notation a mathematical statement that describes a solution set and uses parentheses or brackets to indicate

where an interval begins and ends

linear equation an algebraic equation in which each term is either a constant or the product of a constant and the first

power of a variable

linear inequality similar to a linear equation except that the solutions will include sets of numbers

midpoint formula a formula to find the point that divides a line segment into two parts of equal length

ordered pair a pair of numbers indicating horizontal displacement and vertical displacement from the origin; also

known as a coordinate pair,

origin the point where the two axes cross in the center of the plane, described by the ordered pair

perimeter in linear units, the perimeter formula is used to find the linear measurement, or outside length and width,

around a two-dimensional regular object; for a rectangle:

polynomial equation an equation containing a string of terms including numerical coefficients and variables raised to

whole-number exponents

Pythagorean Theorem a theorem that states the relationship among the lengths of the sides of a right triangle, used

to solve right triangle problems

quadrant one quarter of the coordinate plane, created when the axes divide the plane into four sections

quadratic equation an equation containing a second-degree polynomial; can be solved using multiple methods

quadratic formula a formula that will solve all quadratic equations

radical equation an equation containing at least one radical term where the variable is part of the radicand

rational equation an equation consisting of a fraction of polynomials

slope the change in y-values over the change in x-values

solution set the set of all solutions to an equation

square root property one of the methods used to solve a quadratic equation, in which the term is isolated so that

the square root of both sides of the equation can be taken to solve for x

volume in cubic units, the volume measurement includes length, width, and depth:

x-axis the common name of the horizontal axis on a coordinate plane; a number line increasing from left to right

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 2 · Chapter Review 173

x-coordinate the first coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the horizontal displacement and direction from the
    origin

x-intercept the point where a graph intersects the x-axis; an ordered pair with a y-coordinate of zero
y-axis the common name of the vertical axis on a coordinate plane; a number line increasing from bottom to top
y-coordinate the second coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the vertical displacement and direction from the

    origin
y-intercept a point where a graph intercepts the y-axis; an ordered pair with an x-coordinate of zero
zero-product property the property that formally states that multiplication by zero is zero, so that each factor of a

    quadratic equation can be set equal to zero to solve equations

Key Equations

  quadratic formula

Key Concepts

2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs

· We can locate, or plot, points in the Cartesian coordinate system using ordered pairs, which are defined as
   displacement from the x-axis and displacement from the y-axis. See Example 1.

· An equation can be graphed in the plane by creating a table of values and plotting points. See Example 2.
· Using a graphing calculator or a computer program makes graphing equations faster and more accurate. Equations

   usually have to be entered in the form y=_____. See Example 3.
· Finding the x- and y-intercepts can define the graph of a line. These are the points where the graph crosses the

    axes. See Example 4.
· The distance formula is derived from the Pythagorean Theorem and is used to find the length of a line segment. See

    Example 5 and Example 6.
· The midpoint formula provides a method of finding the coordinates of the midpoint dividing the sum of the

   x-coordinates and the sum of the y-coordinates of the endpoints by 2. See Example 7 and Example 8.

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable

· We can solve linear equations in one variable in the form      using standard algebraic properties. See

Example 1 and Example 2.

· A rational expression is a quotient of two polynomials. We use the LCD to clear the fractions from an equation. See

Example 3 and Example 4.

· All solutions to a rational equation should be verified within the original equation to avoid an undefined term, or

zero in the denominator. See Example 5 and Example 6 and Example 7.

· Given two points, we can find the slope of a line using the slope formula. See Example 8.

· We can identify the slope and y-intercept of an equation in slope-intercept form. See Example 9.

· We can find the equation of a line given the slope and a point. See Example 10.

· We can also find the equation of a line given two points. Find the slope and use the point-slope formula. See

Example 11.

· The standard form of a line has no fractions. See Example 12.

· Horizontal lines have a slope of zero and are defined as       where c is a constant.

· Vertical lines have an undefined slope (zero in the denominator), and are defined as       where c is a constant.

See Example 13.

· Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. See Example 14 and Example 15.

· Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each other unless one is horizontal and the other is

vertical. See Example 16.

2.3 Models and Applications

· A linear equation can be used to solve for an unknown in a number problem. See Example 1.

· Applications can be written as mathematical problems by identifying known quantities and assigning a variable to

unknown quantities. See Example 2.

· There are many known formulas that can be used to solve applications. Distance problems, for example, are solved

using the        formula. See Example 3.

· Many geometry problems are solved using the perimeter formula                    the area formula              or the
174 2 · Chapter Review

volume formula                   See Example 4, Example 5, and Example 6.

2.4 Complex Numbers

· The square root of any negative number can be written as a multiple of See Example 1.
· To plot a complex number, we use two number lines, crossed to form the complex plane. The horizontal axis is the

    real axis, and the vertical axis is the imaginary axis. See Example 2.
· Complex numbers can be added and subtracted by combining the real parts and combining the imaginary parts.

    See Example 3.
· Complex numbers can be multiplied and divided.

     To multiply complex numbers, distribute just as with polynomials. See Example 4 and Example 5.
     To divide complex numbers, multiply both numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the

        denominator to eliminate the complex number from the denominator. See Example 6 and Example 7.

· The powers of are cyclic, repeating every fourth one. See Example 8.

2.5 Quadratic Equations

· Many quadratic equations can be solved by factoring when the equation has a leading coefficient of 1 or if the
    equation is a difference of squares. The zero-product property is then used to find solutions. See Example 1,
    Example 2, and Example 3.

· Many quadratic equations with a leading coefficient other than 1 can be solved by factoring using the grouping
    method. See Example 4 and Example 5.

· Another method for solving quadratics is the square root property. The variable is squared. We isolate the squared
    term and take the square root of both sides of the equation. The solution will yield a positive and negative solution.
    See Example 6 and Example 7.

· Completing the square is a method of solving quadratic equations when the equation cannot be factored. See
    Example 8.

· A highly dependable method for solving quadratic equations is the quadratic formula, based on the coefficients and
    the constant term in the equation. See Example 9 and Example 10.

· The discriminant is used to indicate the nature of the roots that the quadratic equation will yield: real or complex,
    rational or irrational, and how many of each. See Example 11.

· The Pythagorean Theorem, among the most famous theorems in history, is used to solve right-triangle problems
    and has applications in numerous fields. Solving for the length of one side of a right triangle requires solving a
    quadratic equation. See Example 12.

2.6 Other Types of Equations

· Rational exponents can be rewritten several ways depending on what is most convenient for the problem. To solve,
    both sides of the equation are raised to a power that will render the exponent on the variable equal to 1. See
    Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3.

· Factoring extends to higher-order polynomials when it involves factoring out the GCF or factoring by grouping. See
    Example 4 and Example 5.

· We can solve radical equations by isolating the radical and raising both sides of the equation to a power that
    matches the index. See Example 6 and Example 7.

· To solve absolute value equations, we need to write two equations, one for the positive value and one for the
    negative value. See Example 8.

· Equations in quadratic form are easy to spot, as the exponent on the first term is double the exponent on the
    second term and the third term is a constant. We may also see a binomial in place of the single variable. We use
    substitution to solve. See Example 9 and Example 10.

· Solving a rational equation may also lead to a quadratic equation or an equation in quadratic form. See Example 11.

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities

· Interval notation is a method to indicate the solution set to an inequality. Highly applicable in calculus, it is a system
    of parentheses and brackets that indicate what numbers are included in a set and whether the endpoints are
    included as well. See Table 1 and Example 2.

· Solving inequalities is similar to solving equations. The same algebraic rules apply, except for one: multiplying or
    dividing by a negative number reverses the inequality. See Example 3, Example 4, Example 5, and Example 6.

· Compound inequalities often have three parts and can be rewritten as two independent inequalities. Solutions are
    given by boundary values, which are indicated as a beginning boundary or an ending boundary in the solutions to
    the two inequalities. See Example 7 and Example 8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          2 · Exercises 175

  · Absolute value inequalities will produce two solution sets due to the nature of absolute value. We solve by writing
      two equations: one equal to a positive value and one equal to a negative value. See Example 9 and Example 10.

  · Absolute value inequalities can also be solved by graphing. At least we can check the algebraic solutions by
      graphing, as we cannot depend on a visual for a precise solution. See Example 11.

Exercises

Review Exercises

The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs

For the following exercises, find the x-intercept and the y-intercept without graphing.

1.                                2.

For the following exercises, solve for y in terms of x, putting the equation in slope-intercept form.

3.                                4.

For the following exercises, find the distance between the two points.

5.                                6.                                    7. Find the distance between

                                                                             the two points

                                                                             and             using your

                                                                             calculator, and round your

                                                                             answer to the nearest

                                                                             thousandth.

For the following exercises, find the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment that joins the two given points.

8.   and                          9.    and

For the following exercises, construct a table and graph the equation by plotting at least three points.

10.                               11.

Linear Equations in One Variable

For the following exercises, solve for

12.                               13.                                   14.

15.                               16.

For the following exercises, solve for State all x-values that are excluded from the solution set.

17.                               18.
176 2 · Exercises

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula.

19. Passes through these two       20. Passes through the point          21. Passes through the point
      points:                                      and has a slope of                    and is parallel to

                                                                               the graph

22. Passes through these two
      points:

Models and Applications

For the following exercises, write and solve an equation to answer each question.

23. The number of male fish in     24. A landscaper has 72 ft. of        25. A truck rental is $25 plus
      the tank is five more than         fencing to put around a               $.30/mi. Find out how
      three times the number of          rectangular garden. If the            many miles Ken traveled if
      females. If the total              length is 3 times the width,          his bill was $50.20.
      number of fish is 73, how          find the dimensions of the
      many of each sex are in the        garden.
      tank?

Complex Numbers

For the following exercises, use the quadratic equation to solve.

26.                                27.

For the following exercises, name the horizontal component and the vertical component.

28.                                29.

For the following exercises, perform the operations indicated.

30.                                31.                                   32.

33.                                34.                                   35.

36.                                37.                                   38.

39.

Quadratic Equations

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring.

40.                                41.                                   42.

43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     2 · Exercises 177

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the square-root property.

44.  45.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by completing the square.

46.  47.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the quadratic formula. If the solutions are not real,
state No real solution.

48.  49.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by the method of your choice.

50.  51.

Other Types of Equations
For the following exercises, solve the equations.

52.  53.                                             54.

55.  56.                                             57.

58.  59.

Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final answer in interval notation.

60.  61.                                             62.

63.  64.                                             65.

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Write your answer in interval notation.

66.  67.
178 2 · Exercises

For the following exercises, graph as described.

68. Graph the absolute value         69. Graph both straight lines
      function and graph the               (left-hand side being y1
      constant function. Observe           and right-hand side being
      the points of intersection           y2) on the same axes. Find
      and shade the x-axis                 the point of intersection
      representing the solution            and solve the inequality by
      set to the inequality. Show          observing where it is true
      your graph and write your            comparing the y-values of
      final answer in interval             the lines. See the interval
      notation.                            where the inequality is
                                           true.

Practice Test                        2. Find the x- and y-intercepts    3. Find the x- and y-intercepts
                                         for the following:                 of this equation, and sketch
1. Graph the following:                                                     the graph of the line using
                                                                            just the intercepts plotted.

4. Find the exact distance           5. Write the interval notation     6. Solve for x:
                                         for the set of numbers             9. Solve for x:
between               and                represented by

            Find the

coordinates of the midpoint

of the line segment joining

the two points.

7. Solve for :                       8. Solve for x:

10. The perimeter of a triangle      11. Solve for x. Write the         12. Solve:
      is 30 in. The longest side is        answer in simplest radical
      2 less than 3 times the              form.
      shortest side and the other
      side is 2 more than twice
      the shortest side. Find the
      length of each side.

13. Solve:                           14. Solve:

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line with the given information.

15. Passes through the points        16. Has an undefined slope         17. Passes through the point
                and                        and passes through the                     and is perpendicular
                                           point
                                                                              to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2 · Exercises 179

18. Add these complex  19. Simplify:                     20. Multiply:
      numbers:

21. Divide:            22. Solve this quadratic          23. Solve:
24. Solve:                   equation and write the two
                             complex roots in
                             form:

                       25. Solve:                        26. Solve:

27. Solve:             28. Solve:

For the following exercises, find the real solutions of each equation by factoring.

29.                    30.
180 2 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
              3 · Introduction 181

3  FUNCTIONS

Standard and Poor's Index with dividends reinvested (credit "bull": modification of work by Prayitno Hadinata; credit
"graph": modification of work by MeasuringWorth)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Functions and Function Notation
  3.2 Domain and Range
  3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs
  3.4 Composition of Functions
  3.5 Transformation of Functions
  3.6 Absolute Value Functions
  3.7 Inverse Functions

      Introduction to Functions

Toward the end of the twentieth century, the values of stocks of Internet and technology companies rose dramatically.
As a result, the Standard and Poor's stock market average rose as well. The graph above tracks the value of that initial
investment of just under $100 over the 40 years. It shows that an investment that was worth less than $500 until about
1995 skyrocketed up to about $1100 by the beginning of 2000. That five-year period became known as the "dot-com
bubble" because so many Internet startups were formed. As bubbles tend to do, though, the dot-com bubble eventually
burst. Many companies grew too fast and then suddenly went out of business. The result caused the sharp decline
represented on the graph beginning at the end of 2000.

Notice, as we consider this example, that there is a definite relationship between the year and stock market average. For
any year we choose, we can determine the corresponding value of the stock market average. In this chapter, we will
explore these kinds of relationships and their properties.

3.1 Functions and Function Notation

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Determine whether a relation represents a function.
           Find the value of a function.
           Determine whether a function is one-to-one.
           Use the vertical line test to identify functions.
           Graph the functions listed in the library of functions.

A jetliner changes altitude as its distance from the starting point of a flight increases. The weight of a growing child
182 3 · Functions

increases with time. In each case, one quantity depends on another. There is a relationship between the two quantities
that we can describe, analyze, and use to make predictions. In this section, we will analyze such relationships.

Determining Whether a Relation Represents a Function

A relation is a set of ordered pairs. The set of the first components of each ordered pair is called the domain and the set
of the second components of each ordered pair is called the range. Consider the following set of ordered pairs. The first
numbers in each pair are the first five natural numbers. The second number in each pair is twice that of the first.

The domain is      The range is

Note that each value in the domain is also known as an input value, or independent variable, and is often labeled with
the lowercase letter Each value in the range is also known as an output value, or dependent variable, and is often
labeled lowercase letter

A function is a relation that assigns a single value in the range to each value in the domain. In other words, no x-values

are repeated. For our example that relates the first five natural numbers to numbers double their values, this relation is

a function because each element in the domain,                     is paired with exactly one element in the range,

Now let's consider the set of ordered pairs that relates the terms "even" and "odd" to the first five natural numbers. It
would appear as

Notice that each element in the domain,           is not paired with exactly one element in the range,

                   For example, the term "odd" corresponds to three values from the range,  and the term

"even" corresponds to two values from the range,  This violates the definition of a function, so this relation is not

a function.

Figure 1 compares relations that are functions and not functions.

Figure 1 (a) This relationship is a function because each input is associated with a single output. Note that input and
both give output (b) This relationship is also a function. In this case, each input is associated with a single output. (c)
This relationship is not a function because input is associated with two different outputs.

  Function

  A function is a relation in which each possible input value leads to exactly one output value. We say "the output is a
  function of the input."
  The input values make up the domain, and the output values make up the range.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a relationship between two quantities, determine whether the relationship is a function.
   1. Identify the input values.
   2. Identify the output values.
   3. If each input value leads to only one output value, classify the relationship as a function. If any input value leads

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 183

        to two or more outputs, do not classify the relationship as a function.

  EXAMPLE 1
Determining If Menu Price Lists Are Functions
The coffee shop menu, shown below, consists of items and their prices.

 Is price a function of the item?
 Is the item a function of the price?

     Solution

 Let's begin by considering the input as the items on the menu. The output values are then the prices.

Each item on the menu has only one price, so the price is a function of the item.

 Two items on the menu have the same price. If we consider the prices to be the input values and the items to be the

output, then the same input value could have more than one output associated with it. See the image below.

Therefore, the item is a not a function of price.

  EXAMPLE 2
Determining If Class Grade Rules Are Functions
In a particular math class, the overall percent grade corresponds to a grade point average. Is grade point average a
function of the percent grade? Is the percent grade a function of the grade point average? Table 1 shows a possible rule
for assigning grade points.
184 3 · Functions

                   Percent grade  0-56 57-61 62-66 67-71 72-77 78-86 87-91 92-100

                   Grade point average 0.0  1.0  1.5  2.0                       2.5        3.0  3.5          4.0

                   Table 1

     Solution
For any percent grade earned, there is an associated grade point average, so the grade point average is a function of the
percent grade. In other words, if we input the percent grade, the output is a specific grade point average.

In the grading system given, there is a range of percent grades that correspond to the same grade point average. For
example, students who receive a grade point average of 3.0 could have a variety of percent grades ranging from 78 all
the way to 86. Thus, percent grade is not a function of grade point average.

TRY IT #1                   Table 21 lists the five greatest baseball players of all time in order of rank.

                                                      Player                         Rank

                                                      Babe Ruth                      1

                                                      Willie Mays                    2

                                                      Ty Cobb                        3

                                                      Walter Johnson 4

                                                      Hank Aaron                     5

                                                                              Table 2

                             Is the rank a function of the player name?  Is the player name a function of the rank?

Using Function Notation

Once we determine that a relationship is a function, we need to display and define the functional relationships so that
we can understand and use them, and sometimes also so that we can program them into computers. There are various
ways of representing functions. A standard function notation is one representation that facilitates working with
functions.

To represent "height is a function of age," we start by identifying the descriptive variables for height and for age. The

letters            and are often used to represent functions just as we use     and to represent numbers and

and to represent sets.

Remember, we can use any letter to name the function; the notation              shows us that depends on The value

must be put into the function to get a result. The parentheses indicate that age is input into the function; they do not

indicate multiplication.

We can also give an algebraic expression as the input to a function. For example                means "first add a and b, and

the result is the input for the function f." The operations must be performed in this order to obtain the correct result.

1 http://www.baseball-almanac.com/legendary/lisn100.shtml. Accessed 3/24/2014.
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 185

Function Notation

The notation              defines a function named This is read as is a function of The letter represents the

input value, or independent variable. The letter or      represents the output value, or dependent variable.

EXAMPLE 3

Using Function Notation for Days in a Month
Use function notation to represent a function whose input is the name of a month and output is the number of days in
that month. Assume that the domain does not include leap years.

Solution

The number of days in a month is a function of the name of the month, so if we name the function we write

              or          The name of the month is the input to a "rule" that associates a specific number (the

output) with each input.

                                                     Figure 2

For example,              because March has 31 days. The notation  reminds us that the number of days,

(the output), is dependent on the name of the month, (the input).

     Analysis
Note that the inputs to a function do not have to be numbers; function inputs can be names of people, labels of
geometric objects, or any other element that determines some kind of output. However, most of the functions we will
work with in this book will have numbers as inputs and outputs.

EXAMPLE 4

Interpreting Function Notation

A function         gives the number of police officers,  in a town in year What does  represent?

     Solution             we see that the input year is 2005. The value for the output, the number of police officers
When we read
                                 The statement                 tells us that in the year 2005 there were 300 police
       is 300. Remember,
officers in the town.

TRY IT #2 Use function notation to express the weight of a pig in pounds as a function of its age in days

Q&A           Instead of a notation such as              could we use the same symbol for the output as for the

              function, such as  meaning "y is a function of x?"

              Yes, this is often done, especially in applied subjects that use higher math, such as physics and

              engineering. However, in exploring math itself we like to maintain a distinction between a function such

              as which is a rule or procedure, and the output we get by applying to a particular input This is

              why we usually use notation such as                  and so on.

Representing Functions Using Tables

A common method of representing functions is in the form of a table. The table rows or columns display the
corresponding input and output values. In some cases, these values represent all we know about the relationship; other
times, the table provides a few select examples from a more complete relationship.
186 3 · Functions

Table 3 lists the input number of each month (January = 1, February = 2, and so on) and the output value of the number

of days in that month. This information represents all we know about the months and days for a given year (that is not a

leap year). Note that, in this table, we define a days-in-a-month function where  identifies months by an

integer rather than by name.

                   Month number, (input) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

                   Days in month, (output) 31 28 31 30 31 30 31 31 30 31 30 31

Table 3

Table 4 defines a function       Remember, this notation tells us that is the name of the function that takes the
input and gives the output

                                                        12345

                                                        86768

                                 Table 4

Table 5 displays the age of children in years and their corresponding heights. This table displays just some of the data
available for the heights and ages of children. We can see right away that this table does not represent a function
because the same input value, 5 years, has two different output values, 40 in. and 42 in.

                                 Age in years, (input)     5 5 6 7 8 9 10

                   Height in inches, (output) 40 42 44 47 50 52 54

                      Table 5

...

     HOW TO

Given a table of input and output values, determine whether the table represents a function.

 1. Identify the input and output values.
 2. Check to see if each input value is paired with only one output value. If so, the table represents a function.

  EXAMPLE 5

Identifying Tables that Represent Functions
Which table, Table 6, Table 7, or Table 8, represents a function (if any)?

                                                        Input Output

                                                        2  1

                                                        5  3

                                                        8  6

                                 Table 6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 187

                                          Input Output

                                          -3       5

                                          0        1

                                          4        5

                                          Table 7

                                          Input Output

                                          1        0

                                          5        2

                                          5        4

                                          Table 8

     Solution
Table 6 and Table 7 define functions. In both, each input value corresponds to exactly one output value. Table 8 does not
define a function because the input value of 5 corresponds to two different output values.

When a table represents a function, corresponding input and output values can also be specified using function
notation.

The function represented by Table 6 can be represented by writing

Similarly, the statements

represent the function in Table 7.
Table 8 cannot be expressed in a similar way because it does not represent a function.

TRY IT #3  Does Table 9 represent a function?

                           Input Output

                           1        10

                           2        100

                           3        1000

                           Table 9

Finding Input and Output Values of a Function

When we know an input value and want to determine the corresponding output value for a function, we evaluate the
function. Evaluating will always produce one result because each input value of a function corresponds to exactly one
output value.

When we know an output value and want to determine the input values that would produce that output value, we set
188 3 · Functions

the output equal to the function's formula and solve for the input. Solving can produce more than one solution because
different input values can produce the same output value.

Evaluation of Functions in Algebraic Forms

When we have a function in formula form, it is usually a simple matter to evaluate the function. For example, the

function                can be evaluated by squaring the input value, multiplying by 3, and then subtracting the

product from 5.

...

     HOW TO

Given the formula for a function, evaluate.

 1. Substitute the input variable in the formula with the value provided.
 2. Calculate the result.

EXAMPLE 6

Evaluating Functions at Specific Values

Evaluate                         at:

                                       Now evaluate

     Solution

Replace the in the function with each specified value.

 Because the input value is a number, 2, we can use simple algebra to simplify.

 In this case, the input value is a letter so we cannot simplify the answer any further.

With an input value of           we must use the distributive property.

 In this case, we apply the input values to the function more than once, and then perform algebraic operations on

the result. We already found that
and we know that
Now we combine the results and simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 189

    EXAMPLE 7

Evaluating Functions        evaluate
Given the function

     Solution  we substitute the value 4 for the input variable in the given function.
To evaluate

Therefore, for an input of 4, we have an output of 24.

    TRY IT #4 Given the function                        evaluate

  EXAMPLE 8                 solve for

Solving Functions
Given the function

     Solution

If                  either               or             (or both of them equal 0). We will set each factor equal to 0 and

solve for in each case.

This gives us two solutions. The output      when the input is either  or               We can also verify by graphing
as in Figure 3. The graph verifies that
                                                        and

                                                        Figure 3

    TRY IT #5 Given the function                        solve

Evaluating Functions Expressed in Formulas

Some functions are defined by mathematical rules or procedures expressed in equation form. If it is possible to express

the function output with a formula involving the input quantity, then we can define a function in algebraic form. For

example, the equation       expresses a functional relationship between and We can rewrite it to decide if
190 3 · Functions

       is a function of

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Given a function in equation form, write its algebraic formula.
          1. Solve the equation to isolate the output variable on one side of the equal sign, with the other side as an

               expression that involves only the input variable.
          2. Use all the usual algebraic methods for solving equations, such as adding or subtracting the same quantity to or

               from both sides, or multiplying or dividing both sides of the equation by the same quantity.

EXAMPLE 9

Finding an Equation of a Function    as a function          if possible.
Express the relationship

     Solution                                                                                 is a function of  which
To express the relationship in this form, we need to be able to write the relationship where
means writing it as

Therefore, as a function of is written as

     Analysis
It is important to note that not every relationship expressed by an equation can also be expressed as a function with a
formula.

EXAMPLE 10

Expressing the Equation of a Circle as a Function

Does the equation                represent a function with  as input and  as output? If so, express the relationship as a

function

     Solution      from both sides.
First we subtract

We now try to solve for in this equation.

We get two outputs corresponding to the same input, so this relationship cannot be represented as a single function

TRY IT #6 If                         express as a function of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 191

Q&A  Are there relationships expressed by an equation that do represent a function but which still
     cannot be represented by an algebraic formula?

     Yes, this can happen. For example, given the equation  if we want to express as a function of

     there is no simple algebraic formula involving only that equals However, each does determine a

     unique value for and there are mathematical procedures by which can be found to any desired

     accuracy. In this case, we say that the equation gives an implicit (implied) rule for as a function of

     even though the formula cannot be written explicitly.

Evaluating a Function Given in Tabular Form

As we saw above, we can represent functions in tables. Conversely, we can use information in tables to write functions,
and we can evaluate functions using the tables. For example, how well do our pets recall the fond memories we share
with them? There is an urban legend that a goldfish has a memory of 3 seconds, but this is just a myth. Goldfish can
remember up to 3 months, while the beta fish has a memory of up to 5 months. And while a puppy's memory span is no
longer than 30 seconds, the adult dog can remember for 5 minutes. This is meager compared to a cat, whose memory
span lasts for 16 hours.

The function that relates the type of pet to the duration of its memory span is more easily visualized with the use of a
table. See Table 10.2

     Pet        Memory span in hours

     Puppy      0.008

     Adult dog  0.083

     Cat        16

     Goldfish   2160

     Beta fish  3600

     Table 10

At times, evaluating a function in table form may be more useful than using equations.Here let us call the function
The domain of the function is the type of pet and the range is a real number representing the number of hours the pet's
memory span lasts. We can evaluate the function at the input value of "goldfish." We would write
Notice that, to evaluate the function in table form, we identify the input value and the corresponding output value from
the pertinent row of the table. The tabular form for function seems ideally suited to this function, more so than writing
it in paragraph or function form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a function represented by a table, identify specific output and input values.

 1. Find the given input in the row (or column) of input values.
 2. Identify the corresponding output value paired with that input value.
 3. Find the given output values in the row (or column) of output values, noting every time that output value

      appears.
 4. Identify the input value(s) corresponding to the given output value.

2 http://www.kgbanswers.com/how-long-is-a-dogs-memory-span/4221590. Accessed 3/24/2014.
192 3 · Functions

  EXAMPLE 11

Evaluating and Solving a Tabular Function
Using Table 11,

 Evaluate
 Solve

                                                     12345

                                                     86768

                                           Table 11

Solution

 Evaluating means determining the output value of the function for the input value of  The table output

value corresponding to           is 7, so

 Solving            means identifying the input values,  that produce an output value of 6. The table below shows

two solutions: and

                                                     12345

                                                     86768

When we input 2 into the function our output is 6. When we input 4 into the function our output is also 6.

       TRY IT #7 Using the table from Evaluating and Solving a Tabular Function above, evaluate

Finding Function Values from a Graph

Evaluating a function using a graph also requires finding the corresponding output value for a given input value, only in
this case, we find the output value by looking at the graph. Solving a function equation using a graph requires finding all
instances of the given output value on the graph and observing the corresponding input value(s).

  EXAMPLE 12

Reading Function Values from a Graph
Given the graph in Figure 4,

 Evaluate
 Solve

                                                     Figure 4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 193

     Solution      locate the point on the curve where      then read the y-coordinate of that point. The point has

 To evaluate   so         See Figure 5.

coordinates

                                                  Figure 5

 To solve          we find the output value       on the vertical axis. Moving horizontally along the line  we

locate two points of the curve with output value  and       These points represent the two solutions to

           or This means  and                     or when the input is or the output is See Figure 6.

                                                  Figure 6

TRY IT #8 Using Figure 4, solve

Determining Whether a Function is One-to-One

Some functions have a given output value that corresponds to two or more input values. For example, in the stock chart
shown in the figure at the beginning of this chapter, the stock price was $1000 on five different dates, meaning that
there were five different input values that all resulted in the same output value of $1000.

However, some functions have only one input value for each output value, as well as having only one output for each
input. We call these functions one-to-one functions. As an example, consider a school that uses only letter grades and
decimal equivalents, as listed in Table 12.

                          Letter grade Grade point average

                                         A                  4.0

                                         B                  3.0

                                         C                  2.0

                          Table 12
194 3 · Functions

                                 Letter grade Grade point average

                                 D                     1.0

                                                        Table 12

This grading system represents a one-to-one function, because each letter input yields one particular grade point
average output and each grade point average corresponds to one input letter.

To visualize this concept, let's look again at the two simple functions sketched in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b). The
function in part (a) shows a relationship that is not a one-to-one function because inputs and both give output The
function in part (b) shows a relationship that is a one-to-one function because each input is associated with a single
output.

One-to-One Function

A one-to-one function is a function in which each output value corresponds to exactly one input value.

EXAMPLE 13

Determining Whether a Relationship Is a One-to-One Function
Is the area of a circle a function of its radius? If yes, is the function one-to-one?

     Solution                                          so for any input, there is only one output, The area
A circle of radius has a unique area measure given by
is a function of radius

If the function is one-to-one, the output value, the area, must correspond to a unique input value, the radius. Any area

measure is given by the formula  Because areas and radii are positive numbers, there is exactly one solution:

So the area of a circle is a one-to-one function of the circle's radius.

TRY IT #9               Is a balance a function of the bank account number?
                        Is a bank account number a function of the balance?
                        Is a balance a one-to-one function of the bank account number?

TRY IT #10             Evaluate the following:

                        If each percent grade earned in a course translates to one letter grade, is the letter grade a

                       function of the percent grade?

                        If so, is the function one-to-one?

Using the Vertical Line Test

As we have seen in some examples above, we can represent a function using a graph. Graphs display a great many
input-output pairs in a small space. The visual information they provide often makes relationships easier to understand.
By convention, graphs are typically constructed with the input values along the horizontal axis and the output values
along the vertical axis.

The most common graphs name the input value and the output value and we say is a function of or

when the function is named The graph of the function is the set of all points               in the plane that satisfies the

equation           If the function is defined for only a few input values, then the graph of the function is only a few

points, where the x-coordinate of each point is an input value and the y-coordinate of each point is the corresponding

output value. For example, the black dots on the graph in Figure 7 tell us that             and  However, the set

of all points      satisfying    is a curve. The curve shown includes                  and  because the curve passes

through those points.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 195

                                                                              Figure 7
The vertical line test can be used to determine whether a graph represents a function. If we can draw any vertical line
that intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not define a function because a function has only one
output value for each input value. See Figure 8.

                                                         Figure 8

...

     HOW TO

Given a graph, use the vertical line test to determine if the graph represents a function.

 1. Inspect the graph to see if any vertical line drawn would intersect the curve more than once.
 2. If there is any such line, determine that the graph does not represent a function.

  EXAMPLE 14

Applying the Vertical Line Test
Which of the graphs in Figure 9 represent(s) a function

                                                         Figure 9
196 3 · Functions

            Solution
       If any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, the relation represented by the graph is not a function. Notice that
       any vertical line would pass through only one point of the two graphs shown in parts (a) and (b) of Figure 9. From this we
       can conclude that these two graphs represent functions. The third graph does not represent a function because, at most
      x-values, a vertical line would intersect the graph at more than one point, as shown in Figure 10.

                                                                                    Figure 10
              TRY IT #11 Does the graph in Figure 11 represent a function?

                                                                  Figure 11

    Using the Horizontal Line Test

       Once we have determined that a graph defines a function, an easy way to determine if it is a one-to-one function is to
       use the horizontal line test. Draw horizontal lines through the graph. If any horizontal line intersects the graph more
       than once, then the graph does not represent a one-to-one function.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Given a graph of a function, use the horizontal line test to determine if the graph represents a one-to-one
         function.
          1. Inspect the graph to see if any horizontal line drawn would intersect the curve more than once.
          2. If there is any such line, determine that the function is not one-to-one.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 197

  EXAMPLE 15
Applying the Horizontal Line Test
Consider the functions shown in Figure 9(a) and Figure 9(b). Are either of the functions one-to-one?

     Solution
The function in Figure 9(a) is not one-to-one. The horizontal line shown in Figure 12 intersects the graph of the function
at two points (and we can even find horizontal lines that intersect it at three points.)

                                                                             Figure 12
The function in Figure 9(b) is one-to-one. Any horizontal line will intersect a diagonal line at most once.

TRY IT #12 Is the graph shown in Figure 9 one-to-one?

Identifying Basic Toolkit Functions

In this text, we will be exploring functions--the shapes of their graphs, their unique characteristics, their algebraic

formulas, and how to solve problems with them. When learning to read, we start with the alphabet. When learning to do

arithmetic, we start with numbers. When working with functions, it is similarly helpful to have a base set of building-

block elements. We call these our "toolkit functions," which form a set of basic named functions for which we know the

graph, formula, and special properties. Some of these functions are programmed to individual buttons on many

calculators. For these definitions we will use as the input variable and  as the output variable.

We will see these toolkit functions, combinations of toolkit functions, their graphs, and their transformations frequently
throughout this book. It will be very helpful if we can recognize these toolkit functions and their features quickly by
name, formula, graph, and basic table properties. The graphs and sample table values are included with each function
shown in Table 13.

          Toolkit Functions

Name      Function                                                        Graph

Constant  where is a constant

Table 13
198 3 · Functions                                 Toolkit Functions  Graph
                                        Function
                              Name
                              Identity

Absolute value

Quadratic

Cubic

Reciprocal

            Table 13

Access for free at openstax.org
         Name                           Toolkit Functions          3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 199
Reciprocal squared            Function
                                                             Graph

Square root

Cube root

     Table 13

MEDIA

Access the following online resources for additional instruction and practice with functions.

Determine if a Relation is a Function (http://openstax.org/l/relationfunction)
Vertical Line Test (http://openstax.org/l/vertlinetest)
Introduction to Functions (http://openstax.org/l/introtofunction)
Vertical Line Test on Graph (http://openstax.org/l/vertlinegraph)
One-to-one Functions (http://openstax.org/l/onetoone)
Graphs as One-to-one Functions (http://openstax.org/l/graphonetoone)

        3.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is the difference     2. What is the difference      3. Why does the vertical line
    between a relation and a      between the input and the      test tell us whether the
    function?                     output of a function?          graph of a relation
                                                                 represents a function?
200 3 · Functions

4. How can you determine if a          5. Why does the horizontal line
    relation is a one-to-one               test tell us whether the
    function?                              graph of a function is one-
                                           to-one?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a function.

6.                                     7.

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents as a function of

8.                                     9.                               10.

11.                                    12.                              13.

14.                                    15.                              16.

17.                                    18.                              19.

20.                                    21.                              22.

23.                                    24.                              25.

26.

For the following exercises, evaluate

27.                                    28.                              29.

30.                                    31.                              32. Given the function
                                                                                                   evaluate

33. Given the function                 34. Given the function           35. Given the function
                             evaluate
                                            Evaluate                         Evaluate
36. Given the function                      Solve                            Solve

    Evaluate                           37. Given the function           38. Given the function
    Solve
                                           Evaluate                         Evaluate
                                           Solve                            Solve

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 201

39. Consider the relationship

      Write the relationship

     as a function

      Evaluate
      Solve

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine which graphs show relations that are functions.

40.                            41.  42.

43.                            44.  45.

46.                            47.  48.
202 3 · Functions

49.                              50.                             51.

52. Given the following graph,   53. Given the following graph,  54. Given the following graph,

    Evaluate                         Evaluate                        Evaluate
    Solve for                        Solve for                       Solve for

For the following exercises, determine if the given graph is a one-to-one function.

55.                              56.                             57.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.1 · Functions and Function Notation 203

58.                               59.

Numeric

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a function.

60.                               61.                                        62.

For the following exercises, determine if the relation represented in table form represents as a function of

63.                     64.                                             65.
               5 10 15                 5 10 15                                         5 10 10

     3 8 14                            38 8                                         3 8 14

For the following exercises, use the function represented in the table below.

                                  0 123 456 7 8 9

                                  74 28 1 53 56 3 36 45 14 47

                        Table 14

66. Evaluate            67. Solve

For the following exercises, evaluate the function at the values                    and

68.                     69.                                             70.

71.                     72.                                             73.

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, given functions       and

74.                     75.
204 3 · Functions

Technology

For the following exercises, graph         on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph.
                                                                                    78.
76.                                   77.

For the following exercises, graph         on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph.

79.                                   80.

81.

For the following exercises, graph         on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph.

82.                                   83.

84.

For the following exercises, graph         on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph.
85.                                                             86.

87.

Real-World Applications

88. The amount of garbage,            89. The number of cubic yards            90. Let  be the number of
      produced by a city with               of dirt, needed to cover
      population is given by                a garden with area                 ducks in a lake years after
                         is measured        square feet is given by
      in tons per week, and is                                                 1990. Explain the meaning
      measured in thousands of            A garden with area
      people.                                                                  of each statement:
                                            5000 ft2 requires 50 yd3 of
    The town of Tola has a                  dirt. Express this                 
                                            information in terms of the        
      population of 40,000 and              function
      produces 13 tons of
      garbage each week.                  Explain the meaning of
      Express this information in
      terms of the function                 the statement

    Explain the meaning of

      the statement

91. Let be the height                 92. Show that the function
      above ground, in feet, of a                                          is
      rocket seconds after
      launching. Explain the                not one-to-one.
      meaning of each
      statement:

   
   

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            3.2 · Domain and Range 205

3.2 Domain and Range

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the domain of a function defined by an equation.
           Graph piecewise-defined functions.

Horror and thriller movies are both popular and, very often, extremely profitable. When big-budget actors, shooting
locations, and special effects are included, however, studios count on even more viewership to be successful. Consider
five major thriller/horror entries from the early 2000s--I am Legend, Hannibal, The Ring, The Grudge, and The Conjuring.
Figure 1 shows the amount, in dollars, each of those movies grossed when they were released as well as the ticket sales
for horror movies in general by year. Notice that we can use the data to create a function of the amount each movie
earned or the total ticket sales for all horror movies by year. In creating various functions using the data, we can identify
different independent and dependent variables, and we can analyze the data and the functions to determine the domain
and range. In this section, we will investigate methods for determining the domain and range of functions such as these.

                                        Figure 1 Based on data compiled by www.the-numbers.com.3

Finding the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation

In Functions and Function Notation, we were introduced to the concepts of domain and range. In this section, we will
practice determining domains and ranges for specific functions. Keep in mind that, in determining domains and ranges,
we need to consider what is physically possible or meaningful in real-world examples, such as tickets sales and year in
the horror movie example above. We also need to consider what is mathematically permitted. For example, we cannot
include any input value that leads us to take an even root of a negative number if the domain and range consist of real
numbers. Or in a function expressed as a formula, we cannot include any input value in the domain that would lead us to
divide by 0.

We can visualize the domain as a "holding area" that contains "raw materials" for a "function machine" and the range
as another "holding area" for the machine's products. See Figure 2.

                                                         Figure 2

We can write the domain and range in interval notation, which uses values within brackets to describe a set of

numbers. In interval notation, we use a square bracket [ when the set includes the endpoint and a parenthesis ( to

indicate that the endpoint is either not included or the interval is unbounded. For example, if a person has $100 to

spend, they would need to express the interval that is more than 0 and less than or equal to 100 and write                         We

will discuss interval notation in greater detail later.

Let's turn our attention to finding the domain of a function whose equation is provided. Oftentimes, finding the domain

3 The Numbers: Where Data and the Movie Business Meet. "Box Office History for Horror Movies." http://www.the-numbers.com/market/
genre/Horror. Accessed 3/24/2014
206 3 · Functions

       of such functions involves remembering three different forms. First, if the function has no denominator or an odd root,
       consider whether the domain could be all real numbers. Second, if there is a denominator in the function's equation,
       exclude values in the domain that force the denominator to be zero. Third, if there is an even root, consider excluding
       values that would make the radicand negative.
       Before we begin, let us review the conventions of interval notation:

         · The smallest number from the interval is written first.
         · The largest number in the interval is written second, following a comma.
         · Parentheses, ( or ), are used to signify that an endpoint value is not included, called exclusive.
         · Brackets, [ or ], are used to indicate that an endpoint value is included, called inclusive.
       See Figure 3 for a summary of interval notation.

                                            Figure 3

EXAMPLE 1

Finding the Domain of a Function as a Set of Ordered Pairs

Find the domain of the following function:                  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            3.2 · Domain and Range 207

     Solution
First identify the input values. The input value is the first coordinate in an ordered pair. There are no restrictions, as the
ordered pairs are simply listed. The domain is the set of the first coordinates of the ordered pairs.

       TRY IT #1 Find the domain of the function:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a function written in equation form, find the domain.
   1. Identify the input values.
   2. Identify any restrictions on the input and exclude those values from the domain.
   3. Write the domain in interval form, if possible.

  EXAMPLE 2
Finding the Domain of a Function
Find the domain of the function

     Solution
The input value, shown by the variable in the equation, is squared and then the result is lowered by one. Any real
number may be squared and then be lowered by one, so there are no restrictions on the domain of this function. The
domain is the set of real numbers.

In interval form, the domain of is  

       TRY IT #2 Find the domain of the function:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a function written in an equation form that includes a fraction, find the domain.
   1. Identify the input values.
   2. Identify any restrictions on the input. If there is a denominator in the function's formula, set the denominator

        equal to zero and solve for . If the function's formula contains an even root, set the radicand greater than or
        equal to 0, and then solve.
   3. Write the domain in interval form, making sure to exclude any restricted values from the domain.

  EXAMPLE 3
Finding the Domain of a Function Involving a Denominator
Find the domain of the function

     Solution
When there is a denominator, we want to include only values of the input that do not force the denominator to be zero.
So, we will set the denominator equal to 0 and solve for
208 3 · Functions

Now, we will exclude 2 from the domain. The answers are all real numbers where  or  as shown in Figure 4.

We can use a symbol known as the union, to combine the two sets. In interval notation, we write the solution:

                   

                                                                              Figure 4

       TRY IT #3 Find the domain of the function:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a function written in equation form including an even root, find the domain.
   1. Identify the input values.
   2. Since there is an even root, exclude any real numbers that result in a negative number in the radicand. Set the

        radicand greater than or equal to zero and solve for
   3. The solution(s) are the domain of the function. If possible, write the answer in interval form.

  EXAMPLE 4
Finding the Domain of a Function with an Even Root
Find the domain of the function

     Solution
When there is an even root in the formula, we exclude any real numbers that result in a negative number in the
radicand.
Set the radicand greater than or equal to zero and solve for

Now, we will exclude any number greater than 7 from the domain. The answers are all real numbers less than or equal

to or 

TRY IT #4 Find the domain of the function

Q&A                Can there be functions in which the domain and range do not intersect at all?

                   Yes. For example, the function  has the set of all positive real numbers as its domain but the

                   set of all negative real numbers as its range. As a more extreme example, a function's inputs and outputs

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.2 · Domain and Range 209

     can be completely different categories (for example, names of weekdays as inputs and numbers as
     outputs, as on an attendance chart), in such cases the domain and range have no elements in common.

Using Notations to Specify Domain and Range

In the previous examples, we used inequalities and lists to describe the domain of functions. We can also use

inequalities, or other statements that might define sets of values or data, to describe the behavior of the variable in set-

builder notation. For example,  describes the behavior of in set-builder notation. The braces are

read as "the set of," and the vertical bar | is read as "such that," so we would read        as "the set of

x-values such that 10 is less than or equal to and is less than 30."

Figure 5 compares inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation.

                                Figure 5

To combine two intervals using inequality notation or set-builder notation, we use the word "or." As we saw in earlier

examples, we use the union symbol, to combine two unconnected intervals. For example, the union of the sets

and  is the set                 It is the set of all elements that belong to one or the other (or both) of the

original two sets. For sets with a finite number of elements like these, the elements do not have to be listed in ascending

order of numerical value. If the original two sets have some elements in common, those elements should be listed only

once in the union set. For sets of real numbers on intervals, another example of a union is

                                                                      

Set-Builder Notation and Interval Notation

Set-builder notation is a method of specifying a set of elements that satisfy a certain condition. It takes the form
                                 which is read as, "the set of all such that the statement about is true." For example,
210 3 · Functions

         Interval notation is a way of describing sets that include all real numbers between a lower limit that may or may not
         be included and an upper limit that may or may not be included. The endpoint values are listed between brackets or
         parentheses. A square bracket indicates inclusion in the set, and a parenthesis indicates exclusion from the set. For
         example,

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a line graph, describe the set of values using interval notation.

 1. Identify the intervals to be included in the set by determining where the heavy line overlays the real line.
 2. At the left end of each interval, use [ with each end value to be included in the set (solid dot) or ( for each

      excluded end value (open dot).
 3. At the right end of each interval, use ] with each end value to be included in the set (filled dot) or ) for each

      excluded end value (open dot).
 4. Use the union symbol to combine all intervals into one set.

  EXAMPLE 5

Describing Sets on the Real-Number Line
Describe the intervals of values shown in Figure 6 using inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation.

                                                                              Figure 6  is a real number greater than or equal to 1

     Solution
To describe the values, included in the intervals shown, we would say, "
and less than or equal to 3, or a real number greater than 5."

                                 Inequality

                                 Set-builder notation

                                 Interval notation                                      

Remember that, when writing or reading interval notation, using a square bracket means the boundary is included in the
set. Using a parenthesis means the boundary is not included in the set.

TRY IT #5  Given Figure 7, specify the graphed set in

            words  set-builder notation  interval notation

                                 Figure 7

Finding Domain and Range from Graphs

Another way to identify the domain and range of functions is by using graphs. Because the domain refers to the set of
possible input values, the domain of a graph consists of all the input values shown on the x-axis. The range is the set of
possible output values, which are shown on the y-axis. Keep in mind that if the graph continues beyond the portion of
the graph we can see, the domain and range may be greater than the visible values. See Figure 8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.2 · Domain and Range 211

                             Figure 8

We can observe that the graph extends horizontally from to the right without bound, so the domain is   The

vertical extent of the graph is all range values and below, so the range is   Note that the domain and range are

always written from smaller to larger values, or from left to right for domain, and from the bottom of the graph to the

top of the graph for range.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding Domain and Range from a Graph
Find the domain and range of the function whose graph is shown in Figure 9.

                             Figure 9

     Solution
We can observe that the horizontal extent of the graph is -3 to 1, so the domain of is

The vertical extent of the graph is 0 to -4, so the range is  See Figure 10.

                             Figure 10
212 3 · Functions

         EXAMPLE 7
       Finding Domain and Range from a Graph of Oil Production
       Find the domain and range of the function whose graph is shown in Figure 11.

          Figure 11 (credit: modification of work by the U.S. Energy Information Administration)4

Solution

The input quantity along the horizontal axis is "years," which we represent with the variable for time. The output

quantity is "thousands of barrels of oil per day," which we represent with the variable for barrels. The graph may

continue to the left and right beyond what is viewed, but based on the portion of the graph that is visible, we can

determine the domain as  and the range as approximately

In interval notation, the domain is [1973, 2008], and the range is about [180, 2010]. For the domain and the range, we
approximate the smallest and largest values since they do not fall exactly on the grid lines.

TRY IT #6 Given Figure 12, identify the domain and range using interval notation.

                         Figure 12

Q&A       Can a function's domain and range be the same?
          Yes. For example, the domain and range of the cube root function are both the set of all real numbers.

Finding Domains and Ranges of the Toolkit Functions

We will now return to our set of toolkit functions to determine the domain and range of each.

4 http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFPAK2&f=A.
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.2 · Domain and Range 213

Figure 13 For the constant function        the domain consists of all real numbers; there are no restrictions on the

input. The only output value is the constant so the range is the set that contains this single element. In interval

notation, this is written as    the interval that both begins and ends with

Figure 14 For the identity function        there is no restriction on Both the domain and range are the set of all
real numbers.

Figure 15 For the absolute value function  there is no restriction on             However, because absolute value is

defined as a distance from 0, the output can only be greater than or equal to 0.

Figure 16 For the quadratic function       the domain is all real numbers since the horizontal extent of the

graph is the whole real number line. Because the graph does not include any negative values for the range, the range is

only nonnegative real numbers.
214 3 · Functions

Figure 17 For the cubic function        the domain is all real numbers because the horizontal extent of the graph

is the whole real number line. The same applies to the vertical extent of the graph, so the domain and range include all

real numbers.

Figure 18 For the reciprocal function          we cannot divide by 0, so we must exclude 0 from the domain.

Further, 1 divided by any value can never be 0, so the range also will not include 0. In set-builder notation, we could also

write              the set of all real numbers that are not zero.

Figure 19 For the reciprocal squared function  we cannot divide by so we must exclude from the

domain. There is also no that can give an output of 0, so 0 is excluded from the range as well. Note that the output of
this function is always positive due to the square in the denominator, so the range includes only positive numbers.

Figure 20 For the square root function         we cannot take the square root of a negative real number, so the

domain must be 0 or greater. The range also excludes negative numbers because the square root of a positive number

is defined to be positive, even though the square of the negative number  also gives us

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.2 · Domain and Range 215

Figure 21 For the cube root function  the domain and range include all real numbers. Note that there is

no problem taking a cube root, or any odd-integer root, of a negative number, and the resulting output is negative (it is

an odd function).

...

     HOW TO

Given the formula for a function, determine the domain and range.

 1. Exclude from the domain any input values that result in division by zero.
 2. Exclude from the domain any input values that have nonreal (or undefined) number outputs.
 3. Use the valid input values to determine the range of the output values.
 4. Look at the function graph and table values to confirm the actual function behavior.

  EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Domain and Range Using Toolkit Functions
Find the domain and range of

     Solution
There are no restrictions on the domain, as any real number may be cubed and then subtracted from the result.

The domain is   and the range is also  

EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Domain and Range
Find the domain and range of

Solution

We cannot evaluate the function at because division by zero is undefined. The domain is                    

Because the function is never zero, we exclude 0 from the range. The range is   

  EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Domain and Range
Find the domain and range of

     Solution
We cannot take the square root of a negative number, so the value inside the radical must be nonnegative.

The domain of      is 
216 3 · Functions

We then find the range. We know that      and the function value increases as increases without any upper

limit. We conclude that the range of is 

     Analysis
Figure 22 represents the function

                                                       Figure 22

TRY IT #7 Find the domain and range of

Graphing Piecewise-Defined Functions

Sometimes, we come across a function that requires more than one formula in order to obtain the given output. For

example, in the toolkit functions, we introduced the absolute value function      With a domain of all real

numbers and a range of values greater than or equal to 0, absolute value can be defined as the magnitude, or modulus,

of a real number value regardless of sign. It is the distance from 0 on the number line. All of these definitions require the

output to be greater than or equal to 0.

If we input 0, or a positive value, the output is the same as the input.

If we input a negative value, the output is the opposite of the input.

Because this requires two different processes or pieces, the absolute value function is an example of a piecewise
function. A piecewise function is a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output over different
pieces of the domain.

We use piecewise functions to describe situations in which a rule or relationship changes as the input value crosses

certain "boundaries." For example, we often encounter situations in business for which the cost per piece of a certain

item is discounted once the number ordered exceeds a certain value. Tax brackets are another real-world example of

piecewise functions. For example, consider a simple tax system in which incomes up to $10,000 are taxed at 10%, and

any additional income is taxed at 20%. The tax on a total income would be     if  and

                                 if

Piecewise Function

A piecewise function is a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output. Each formula has its
own domain, and the domain of the function is the union of all these smaller domains. We notate this idea like this:

In piecewise notation, the absolute value function is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         3.2 · Domain and Range 217

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a piecewise function, write the formula and identify the domain for each interval.
 1. Identify the intervals for which different rules apply.
 2. Determine formulas that describe how to calculate an output from an input in each interval.
 3. Use braces and if-statements to write the function.

EXAMPLE 11

Writing a Piecewise Function
A museum charges $5 per person for a guided tour with a group of 1 to 9 people or a fixed $50 fee for a group of 10 or
more people. Write a function relating the number of people, to the cost,

     Solution                                                        For values of that are 10 or greater,
Two different formulas will be needed. For n-values under 10,

Analysis

The function is represented in Figure 23. The graph is a diagonal line from  to          and a constant after that. In

this example, the two formulas agree at the meeting point where      but not all piecewise functions have this

property.

                                                       Figure 23

  EXAMPLE 12                                                         in dollars for gigabytes of data transfer.

Working with a Piecewise Function
A cell phone company uses the function below to determine the cost,

Find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data and the cost of using 4 gigabytes of data.

     Solution                                          we first look to see which part of the domain our input falls in.
To find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data,
Because 1.5 is less than 2, we use the first formula.

To find the cost of using 4 gigabytes of data,  we see that our input of 4 is greater than 2, so we use the second
formula.
218 3 · Functions

Analysis

The function is represented in Figure 24. We can see where the function changes from a constant to a shifted and

stretched identity at            We plot the graphs for the different formulas on a common set of axes, making sure each

formula is applied on its proper domain.

                                                                             Figure 24

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a piecewise function, sketch a graph.
   1. Indicate on the x-axis the boundaries defined by the intervals on each piece of the domain.
   2. For each piece of the domain, graph on that interval using the corresponding equation pertaining to that piece.

        Do not graph two functions over one interval because it would violate the criteria of a function.

  EXAMPLE 13
Graphing a Piecewise Function
Sketch a graph of the function.

     Solution
Each of the component functions is from our library of toolkit functions, so we know their shapes. We can imagine
graphing each function and then limiting the graph to the indicated domain. At the endpoints of the domain, we draw
open circles to indicate where the endpoint is not included because of a less-than or greater-than inequality; we draw a
closed circle where the endpoint is included because of a less-than-or-equal-to or greater-than-or-equal-to inequality.
Figure 25 shows the three components of the piecewise function graphed on separate coordinate systems.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.2 · Domain and Range 219

          Figure 25 (a)                         (b)                      (c)

Now that we have sketched each piece individually, we combine them in the same coordinate plane. See Figure 26.

                                                Figure 26

Analysis

Note that the graph does pass the vertical line test even at        and  because the points  and  are not

part of the graph of the function, though  and                are.

TRY IT #8 Graph the following piecewise function.

Q&A       Can more than one formula from a piecewise function be applied to a value in the domain?
          No. Each value corresponds to one equation in a piecewise formula.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with domain and range.

Domain and Range of Square Root Functions (http://openstax.org/l/domainsqroot)
Determining Domain and Range (http://openstax.org/l/determinedomain)
Find Domain and Range Given the Graph (http://openstax.org/l/drgraph)
Find Domain and Range Given a Table (http://openstax.org/l/drtable)
Find Domain and Range Given Points on a Coordinate Plane (http://openstax.org/l/drcoordinate)
220 3 · Functions

        3.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Why does the domain differ    2. How do we determine the   3. Explain why the domain of
    for different functions?         domain of a function                          is different from
                                     defined by an equation?
                                                                  the domain of

4. When describing sets of       5. How do you graph a
    numbers using interval           piecewise function?
    notation, when do you use a
    parenthesis and when do
    you use a bracket?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the domain of each function using interval notation.

6.                               7.                           8.

9.                               10.                          11.

12.                              13.                          14.

15.                              16.                          17.

18.                              19.                          20.

21.                              22.                          23.

24.                              25.                          26. Find the domain of the

                                                                   function

                                                                                        by:

                                                                    using algebra.
                                                                    graphing the function

                                                                   in the radicand and
                                                                   determining intervals on
                                                                   the x-axis for which the
                                                                   radicand is nonnegative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   3.2 · Domain and Range 221

Graphical

For the following exercises, write the domain and range of each function using interval notation.

27.        28.  29.

30.        31.  32.

33.        34.  35.

36.        37.
222 3 · Functions

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the piecewise function. Write the domain in interval notation.

38.                                         39.                              40.

41.                                    42.                              43.

44.                                    45.

Numeric

For the following exercises, given each function evaluate                               and
                                                                             48.
46.                                         47.
                                                                                   and
For the following exercises, given each function evaluate                       51.

49.                                    50.

For the following exercises, write the domain for the piecewise function in interval notation.

52.                                               53.

54.

Technology

55. Graph             on the viewing window       56. Graph                  on the viewing window

                   and           Determine the             and               Determine the corresponding

     corresponding range for the viewing window.           range for the viewing window. Show the graphs.

     Show the graphs.

Extension

57. Suppose the range of a             58. Create a function in which   59. Create a function in which
                                             the range is all                 the domain is
     function is                 What        nonnegative real numbers.

     is the range of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 223

Real-World Applications

60. The height of a projectile              61. The cost in dollars of
      is a function of the time it                making items is given by
      is in the air. The height in                the function
      feet for seconds is given
      by the function                           The fixed cost is
                                   What is
      the domain of the                           determined when zero
      function? What does the                     items are produced. Find
      domain mean in the                          the fixed cost for this item.
      context of the problem?
                                                What is the cost of

                                                  making 25 items?

                                                Suppose the maximum

                                                  cost allowed is $1500. What
                                                  are the domain and range
                                                  of the cost function,

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the average rate of change of a function.
           Use a graph to determine where a function is increasing, decreasing, or constant.
           Use a graph to locate local maxima and local minima.
           Use a graph to locate the absolute maximum and absolute minimum.

Gasoline costs have experienced some wild fluctuations over the last several decades. Table 15 lists the average cost, in
dollars, of a gallon of gasoline for the years 2005-2012. The cost of gasoline can be considered as a function of year.

                                                2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                                                2.31 2.62 2.84 3.30 2.41 2.84 3.58 3.68

                                  Table 1

If we were interested only in how the gasoline prices changed between 2005 and 2012, we could compute that the cost
per gallon had increased from $2.31 to $3.68, an increase of $1.37. While this is interesting, it might be more useful to
look at how much the price changed per year. In this section, we will investigate changes such as these.

Finding the Average Rate of Change of a Function

The price change per year is a rate of change because it describes how an output quantity changes relative to the
change in the input quantity. We can see that the price of gasoline in Table 1 did not change by the same amount each
year, so the rate of change was not constant. If we use only the beginning and ending data, we would be finding the
average rate of change over the specified period of time. To find the average rate of change, we divide the change in
the output value by the change in the input value.

The Greek letter (delta) signifies the change in a quantity; we read the ratio as "delta-y over delta-x" or "the change in
  divided by the change in " Occasionally we write instead of which still represents the change in the function's

5 http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb0524. Accessed 3/5/2014.
224 3 · Functions

       output value resulting from a change to its input value. It does not mean we are changing the function into some other
       function.
       In our example, the gasoline price increased by $1.37 from 2005 to 2012. Over 7 years, the average rate of change was

       On average, the price of gas increased by about 19.6¢ each year.
       Other examples of rates of change include:

         · A population of rats increasing by 40 rats per week
         · A car traveling 68 miles per hour (distance traveled changes by 68 miles each hour as time passes)
         · A car driving 27 miles per gallon (distance traveled changes by 27 miles for each gallon)
         · The current through an electrical circuit increasing by 0.125 amperes for every volt of increased voltage
         · The amount of money in a college account decreasing by $4,000 per quarter
         Rate of Change
         A rate of change describes how an output quantity changes relative to the change in the input quantity. The units on
         a rate of change are "output units per input units."
         The average rate of change between two input values is the total change of the function values (output values)
         divided by the change in the input values.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Given the value of a function at different points, calculate the average rate of change of a function for the
         interval between two values and
          1. Calculate the difference
          2. Calculate the difference
          3. Find the ratio

         EXAMPLE 1
       Computing an Average Rate of Change
       Using the data in Table 1, find the average rate of change of the price of gasoline between 2007 and 2009.

            Solution
       In 2007, the price of gasoline was $2.84. In 2009, the cost was $2.41. The average rate of change is

            Analysis
       Note that a decrease is expressed by a negative change or "negative increase." A rate of change is negative when the
       output decreases as the input increases or when the output increases as the input decreases.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 225

       TRY IT #1 Using the data in Table 1, find the average rate of change between 2005 and 2010.

  EXAMPLE 2
Computing Average Rate of Change from a Graph
Given the function shown in Figure 1, find the average rate of change on the interval

                           Figure 1

    Solution

At  Figure 2 shows     At  the graph shows

                           Figure 2

The horizontal change  is shown by the red arrow, and the vertical change                  is shown by the turquoise

arrow. The average rate of change is shown by the slope of the orange line segment. The output changes by -3 while the

input changes by 3, giving an average rate of change of

    Analysis

Note that the order we choose is very important. If, for example, we use  we will not get the correct answer.

Decide which point will be 1 and which point will be 2, and keep the coordinates fixed as  and

  EXAMPLE 3

Computing Average Rate of Change from a Table
After picking up a friend who lives 10 miles away and leaving on a trip, Anna records her distance from home over time.
The values are shown in Table 2. Find her average speed over the first 6 hours.
226 3 · Functions

                                 t (hours)  012 3      4                5        6         7

                                 D(t) (miles) 10 55 90 153 214 240 292 300

                                 Table 2

     Solution
Here, the average speed is the average rate of change. She traveled 282 miles in 6 hours.

The average speed is 47 miles per hour.

     Analysis
Because the speed is not constant, the average speed depends on the interval chosen. For the interval [2,3], the average
speed is 63 miles per hour.

EXAMPLE 4

Computing Average Rate of Change for a Function Expressed as a Formula

Compute the average rate of change of                  on the interval

     Solution
We can start by computing the function values at each endpoint of the interval.

Now we compute the average rate of change.

TRY IT #2 Find the average rate of change of                            on the interval

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Average Rate of Change of a Force

The electrostatic force measured in newtons, between two charged particles can be related to the distance between

the particles in centimeters, by the formula           Find the average rate of change of force if the distance

between the particles is increased from 2 cm to 6 cm.

     Solution                                          on the interval
We are computing the average rate of change of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 227

The average rate of change is newton per centimeter.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding an Average Rate of Change as an Expression

Find the average rate of change of              on the interval      The answer will be an expression involving

in simplest form.

     Solution
We use the average rate of change formula.

This result tells us the average rate of change in terms of between  and any other point  For example, on the

interval   the average rate of change would be

TRY IT #3          Find the average rate of change of                on the interval      in simplest forms in
                   terms
                   of

Using a Graph to Determine Where a Function is Increasing, Decreasing, or
Constant

As part of exploring how functions change, we can identify intervals over which the function is changing in specific ways.
We say that a function is increasing on an interval if the function values increase as the input values increase within that
interval. Similarly, a function is decreasing on an interval if the function values decrease as the input values increase over
that interval. The average rate of change of an increasing function is positive, and the average rate of change of a
decreasing function is negative. Figure 3 shows examples of increasing and decreasing intervals on a function.
228 3 · Functions

Figure 3 The function  is increasing on    and is decreasing on

While some functions are increasing (or decreasing) over their entire domain, many others are not. A value of the input
where a function changes from increasing to decreasing (as we go from left to right, that is, as the input variable
increases) is the location of a local maximum. The function value at that point is the local maximum. If a function has
more than one, we say it has local maxima. Similarly, a value of the input where a function changes from decreasing to
increasing as the input variable increases is the location of a local minimum. The function value at that point is the local
minimum. The plural form is "local minima." Together, local maxima and minima are called local extrema, or local
extreme values, of the function. (The singular form is "extremum.") Often, the term local is replaced by the term relative.
In this text, we will use the term local.

Clearly, a function is neither increasing nor decreasing on an interval where it is constant. A function is also neither
increasing nor decreasing at extrema. Note that we have to speak of local extrema, because any given local extremum as
defined here is not necessarily the highest maximum or lowest minimum in the function's entire domain.

For the function whose graph is shown in Figure 4, the local maximum is 16, and it occurs at  The local minimum
is and it occurs at

                                                                              Figure 4
To locate the local maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe the graph to determine where the graph
attains its highest and lowest points, respectively, within an open interval. Like the summit of a roller coaster, the graph
of a function is higher at a local maximum than at nearby points on both sides. The graph will also be lower at a local
minimum than at neighboring points. Figure 5 illustrates these ideas for a local maximum.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 229

                                                         Figure 5 Definition of a local maximum
These observations lead us to a formal definition of local extrema.

Local Minima and Local Maxima

A function is an increasing function on an open interval if           for any two input values and in the
given interval where

A function is a decreasing function on an open interval if            for any two input values and in the given
interval where

A function has a local maximum at        if there exists an interval  with                       such that, for any in the
                                      has a local minimum at
interval            Likewise,                                         if there exists an interval  with

such that, for any in the interval

  EXAMPLE 7

Finding Increasing and Decreasing Intervals on a Graph
Given the function in Figure 6, identify the intervals on which the function appears to be increasing.

                                                Figure 6

Solution

We see that the function is not constant on any interval. The function is increasing where it slants upward as we move to

the right and decreasing where it slants downward as we move to the right. The function appears to be increasing from

to        and from  on.

In interval notation, we would say the function appears to be increasing on the interval (1,3) and the interval 

Analysis

Notice in this example that we used open intervals (intervals that do not include the endpoints), because the function is

neither increasing nor decreasing at  ,  , and  . These points are the local extrema (two minima and a
230 3 · Functions

maximum).

EXAMPLE 8

Finding Local Extrema from a Graph

Graph the function                    Then use the graph to estimate the local extrema of the function and to determine

the intervals on which the function is increasing.

Solution

Using technology, we find that the graph of the function looks like that in Figure 7. It appears there is a low point, or

local minimum, between           and    and a mirror-image high point, or local maximum, somewhere between

and

                                                                              Figure 7

     Analysis
Most graphing calculators and graphing utilities can estimate the location of maxima and minima. Figure 8 provides
screen images from two different technologies, showing the estimate for the local maximum and minimum.

                                                    Figure 8

Based on these estimates, the function is increasing on the interval             and   Notice that, while we

expect the extrema to be symmetric, the two different technologies agree only up to four decimals due to the differing

approximation algorithms used by each. (The exact location of the extrema is at       but determining this requires

calculus.)

TRY IT #4           Graph the function                                 to estimate the local extrema of the function.

                    Use these to determine the intervals on which the function is increasing and decreasing.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 231

  EXAMPLE 9
Finding Local Maxima and Minima from a Graph
For the function whose graph is shown in Figure 9, find all local maxima and minima.

                                      Figure 9

Solution

Observe the graph of The graph attains a local maximum at         because it is the highest point in an open interval
                                                           which is
around    The local maximum is the -coordinate at

The graph attains a local minimum at         because it is the lowest point in an open interval around  The local
minimum is the y-coordinate at        which is

Analyzing the Toolkit Functions for Increasing or Decreasing Intervals

We will now return to our toolkit functions and discuss their graphical behavior in Figure 10, Figure 11, and Figure 12.

                                      Figure 10
232 3 · Functions

                                                                                    Figure 11

                                                                                    Figure 12

     Use A Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum and Absolute Minimum

       There is a difference between locating the highest and lowest points on a graph in a region around an open interval
       (locally) and locating the highest and lowest points on the graph for the entire domain. The coordinates (output) at
       the highest and lowest points are called the absolute maximum and absolute minimum, respectively.
       To locate absolute maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe the graph to determine where the graph
       attains it highest and lowest points on the domain of the function. See Figure 13.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 233

                                                                             Figure 13         is one such function.
Not every function has an absolute maximum or minimum value. The toolkit function

Absolute Maxima and Minima

The absolute maximum of at  is               where             for all in the domain of
The absolute minimum of at                                     for all in the domain of
                            is               where

  EXAMPLE 10

Finding Absolute Maxima and Minima from a Graph
For the function shown in Figure 14, find all absolute maxima and minima.

                                                    Figure 14

    Solution

Observe the graph of The graph attains an absolute maximum in two locations,            and    because at these

locations, the graph attains its highest point on the domain of the function. The absolute maximum is the y-coordinate

at  and       which is

The graph attains an absolute minimum at     because it is the lowest point on the domain of the function's graph.
The absolute minimum is the y-coordinate at     which is

    MEDIA
    Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with rates of change.
234 3 · Functions

     Average Rate of Change (http://openstax.org/l/aroc)

        3.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can the average rate of       2. If a function is increasing    3. How are the absolute
    change of a function be                                            maximum and minimum
    constant?                         on  and decreasing on            similar to and different from
                                                                       the local extrema?
                                          then what can be said

                                      about the local extremum of

                                      on

4. How does the graph of the
    absolute value function
    compare to the graph of the
    quadratic function,
    in terms of increasing and
    decreasing intervals?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each function on the interval specified for real numbers
or in simplest form.

5.                     on        6.       on                       7.   on

8.                     on        9.           on                   10.      on

11.                on            12.      on                       13.  on

14.                on            15.      given

                                                          on

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 235

Graphical

For the following exercises, consider the graph of shown in Figure 15.

                                    Figure 15

16. Estimate the average rate  17. Estimate the average rate

     of change from  to             of change from  to

For the following exercises, use the graph of each function to estimate the intervals on which the function is increasing
or decreasing.

18.                            19.                                      20.

21.
236 3 · Functions

       For the following exercises, consider the graph shown in Figure 16.

22. Estimate the intervals                                 Figure 16
      where the function is
      increasing or decreasing.  23. Estimate the point(s) at
                                       which the graph of has a
                                       local maximum or a local
                                       minimum.

For the following exercises, consider the graph in Figure 17.

24. If the complete graph of                               Figure 17
      the function is shown,
      estimate the intervals     25. If the complete graph of
      where the function is            the function is shown,
      increasing or decreasing.        estimate the absolute
                                       maximum and absolute
                                       minimum.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      3.3 · Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 237

Numeric

26. Table 3 gives the annual          27. Table 4 gives the population of a town (in
      sales (in millions of dollars)        thousands) from 2000 to 2008. What was the
      of a product from 1998 to             average rate of change of population (a) between
      2006. What was the                    2002 and 2004, and (b) between 2002 and 2006?
      average rate of change of
      annual sales (a) between             Year     Population
      2001 and 2002, and (b)                        (thousands)
      between 2001 and 2004?

                                           2000      87

     Year         Sales                    2001      84
              (millions of

                dollars)

     1998         201                      2002      83

     1999         219                      2003      80

     2000         233                      2004      77

     2001         243                      2005      76

     2002         249                      2006      78

     2003         251                      2007      81

     2004         249                      2008      85

                                           Table 4

     2005         243

     2006         233

     Table 3

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each function on the interval specified.

28.           on                      29.            on          30.  on

31.               on                  32.        on              33.                          on

34.               on

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to estimate the local extrema of each function and to estimate the
intervals on which the function is increasing and decreasing.

35.                                   36.
238 3 · Functions

37.                                  38.

39.                                                    40.

Extension                                              42. Let             Find a

41. The graph of the function is shown in Figure 18.

                                                            number such that the

                                                            average rate of change of

                                                            the function on the

                                                            interval       is

                      Figure 18

     Based on the calculator screen shot, the point
                           is which of the following?

      a relative (local) maximum of the function
      the vertex of the function
      the absolute maximum of the function
      a zero of the function

43. Let            . Find the

     number such that the

     average rate of change of

     on the interval             is

Real-World Applications              45. A driver of a car stopped at      46. Near the surface of the
                                           a gas station to fill up their
44. At the start of a trip, the            gas tank. They looked at        moon, the distance that an
      odometer on a car read               their watch, and the time
      21,395. At the end of the            read exactly 3:40 p.m. At       object falls is a function of
      trip, 13.5 hours later, the          this time, they started
      odometer read 22,125.                pumping gas into the tank.      time. It is given by
      Assume the scale on the              At exactly 3:44, the tank
      odometer is in miles. What           was full and the driver                      where is
      is the average speed the             noticed that they had
      car traveled during this             pumped 10.7 gallons. What       in seconds and is in
      trip?                                is the average rate of flow
                                           of the gasoline into the gas    feet. If an object is dropped
                                           tank?
                                                                           from a certain height, find

                                                                           the average velocity of the

                                                                           object from  to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.4 · Composition of Functions 239

47. The graph in Figure 19 illustrates the decay of a
      radioactive substance over days.

              Figure 19

Use the graph to estimate the average decay rate

from      to

3.4 Composition of Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Combine functions using algebraic operations.
           Create a new function by composition of functions.
           Evaluate composite functions.
           Find the domain of a composite function.
           Decompose a composite function into its component functions.

Suppose we want to calculate how much it costs to heat a house on a particular day of the year. The cost to heat a house
will depend on the average daily temperature, and in turn, the average daily temperature depends on the particular day
of the year. Notice how we have just defined two relationships: The cost depends on the temperature, and the
temperature depends on the day.

Using descriptive variables, we can notate these two functions. The function  gives the cost of heating a house

for a given average daily temperature in degrees Celsius. The function        gives the average daily temperature on

day of the year. For any given day,                    means that the cost depends on the temperature, which in turns

depends on the day of the year. Thus, we can evaluate the cost function at the temperature  For example, we could

evaluate  to determine the average daily temperature on the 5th day of the year. Then, we could evaluate the cost

function at that temperature. We would write

By combining these two relationships into one function, we have performed function composition, which is the focus of
this section.

Combining Functions Using Algebraic Operations

Function composition is only one way to combine existing functions. Another way is to carry out the usual algebraic
operations on functions, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. We do this by performing the
operations with the function outputs, defining the result as the output of our new function.

Suppose we need to add two columns of numbers that represent a husband and wife's separate annual incomes over a
period of years, with the result being their total household income. We want to do this for every year, adding only that
240 3 · Functions

year's incomes and then collecting all the data in a new column. If  is the wife's income and  is the husband's

income in year and we want to represent the total income, then we can define a new function.

If this holds true for every year, then we can focus on the relation between the functions without reference to a year and
write

Just as for this sum of two functions, we can define difference, product, and ratio functions for any pair of functions that
have the same kinds of inputs (not necessarily numbers) and also the same kinds of outputs (which do have to be
numbers so that the usual operations of algebra can apply to them, and which also must have the same units or no units
when we add and subtract). In this way, we can think of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing functions.

For two functions  and           with real number outputs, we define new functions             and by the

relations

EXAMPLE 1

Performing Algebraic Operations on Functions

Find and simplify the functions      and        given                        and               Are they the same

function?

     Solution
Begin by writing the general form, and then substitute the given functions.

No, the functions are not the same.

Note: For          the condition     is necessary because when       the denominator is equal to 0, which makes

the function undefined.

TRY IT #1 Find and simplify the functions       and

                   Are they the same function?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.4 · Composition of Functions 241

Create a Function by Composition of Functions

Performing algebraic operations on functions combines them into a new function, but we can also create functions by
composing functions. When we wanted to compute a heating cost from a day of the year, we created a new function that
takes a day as input and yields a cost as output. The process of combining functions so that the output of one function
becomes the input of another is known as a composition of functions. The resulting function is known as a composite
function. We represent this combination by the following notation:

We read the left-hand side as composed with at and the right-hand side as of of The two sides of the
equation have the same mathematical meaning and are equal. The open circle symbol is called the composition
operator. We use this operator mainly when we wish to emphasize the relationship between the functions themselves
without referring to any particular input value. Composition is a binary operation that takes two functions and forms a
new function, much as addition or multiplication takes two numbers and gives a new number. However, it is important
not to confuse function composition with multiplication because, as we learned above, in most cases

It is also important to understand the order of operations in evaluating a composite function. We follow the usual

convention with parentheses by starting with the innermost parentheses first, and then working to the outside. In the

equation above, the function takes the input first and yields an output       Then the function takes  as an

input and yields an output

In general,      and  are different functions. In other words, in many cases    for all We will also

see that sometimes two functions can be composed only in one specific order.

For example, if             and       then

but

These expressions are not equal for all values of so the two functions are not equal. It is irrelevant that the
expressions happen to be equal for the single input value

Note that the range of the inside function (the first function to be evaluated) needs to be within the domain of the
outside function. Less formally, the composition has to make sense in terms of inputs and outputs.

  Composition of Functions

  When the output of one function is used as the input of another, we call the entire operation a composition of
  functions. For any input and functions and this action defines a composite function, which we write as
  such that

The domain of the composite function  is all such that is in the domain of and  is in the domain of

It is important to realize that the product of functions  is not the same as the function composition
because, in general,
242 3 · Functions

EXAMPLE 2

Determining whether Composition of Functions is Commutative

Using the functions provided, find           and      Determine whether the composition of the functions is

commutative.

Solution

Let's begin by substituting      into

Now we can substitute            into

We find that                     so the operation of function composition is not commutative.

EXAMPLE 3

Interpreting Composite Functions                                sit-ups, and  gives the number of sit-ups a person
The function gives the number of calories burned completing
can complete in minutes. Interpret

Solution

The inside expression in the composition is       Because the input to the s-function is time,  represents 3 minutes,

and is the number of sit-ups completed in 3 minutes.

Using as the input to the function gives us the number of calories burned during the number of sit-ups that can
be completed in 3 minutes, or simply the number of calories burned in 3 minutes (by doing sit-ups).

EXAMPLE 4

Investigating the Order of Function Composition

Suppose            gives miles that can be driven in hours and  gives the gallons of gas used in driving miles. Which of

these expressions is meaningful:       or

     Solution          is a function whose output is the number of miles driven corresponding to the number of hours
The function
driven.

The function       is a function whose output is the number of gallons used corresponding to the number of miles

driven. This means:

The expression takes miles as the input and a number of gallons as the output. The function     requires a

number of hours as the input. Trying to input a number of gallons does not make sense. The expression        is

meaningless.

The expression       takes hours as input and a number of miles driven as the output. The function requires a

number of miles as the input. Using    (miles driven) as an input value for   where gallons of gas depends on

miles driven, does make sense. The expression     makes sense, and will yield the number of gallons of gas used,

driving a certain number of miles,     in hours.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.4 · Composition of Functions 243

Q&A          Are there any situations where     and         would both be meaningful or useful expressions?

             Yes. For many pure mathematical functions, both compositions make sense, even though they usually
             produce different new functions. In real-world problems, functions whose inputs and outputs have the
             same units also may give compositions that are meaningful in either order.

TRY IT #2         The gravitational force on a planet a distance r from the sun is given by the function   The

                  acceleration of a planet subjected to any force is given by the function  Form a meaningful

                  composition of these two functions, and explain what it means.

Evaluating Composite Functions

Once we compose a new function from two existing functions, we need to be able to evaluate it for any input in its
domain. We will do this with specific numerical inputs for functions expressed as tables, graphs, and formulas and with
variables as inputs to functions expressed as formulas. In each case, we evaluate the inner function using the starting
input and then use the inner function's output as the input for the outer function.

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Tables

When working with functions given as tables, we read input and output values from the table entries and always work
from the inside to the outside. We evaluate the inside function first and then use the output of the inside function as the
input to the outside function.

EXAMPLE 5

Using a Table to Evaluate a Composite Function

Using Table 1, evaluate   and

                                                16          3

                                                28          5

                                                33          2

                                                41          7

                                                Table 1

Solution

To evaluate       we start from the inside with the input value 3. We then evaluate the inside expression  using
                                                                                                           is
the table that defines the function           We can then use that result as the input to the function so

replaced by 2 and we get  Then, using the table that defines the function we find that

To evaluate       we first evaluate the inside expression   using the first table:          Then, using the table for

 we can evaluate

Table 2 shows the composite functions  and      as tables.

                                     Table 2
244 3 · Functions

                                 32             8    3                        2

                                 Table 2

TRY IT #3 Using Table 1, evaluate               and

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Graphs

When we are given individual functions as graphs, the procedure for evaluating composite functions is similar to the
process we use for evaluating tables. We read the input and output values, but this time, from the and axes of the
graphs.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a composite function and graphs of its individual functions, evaluate it using the information provided
  by the graphs.

   1. Locate the given input to the inner function on the axis of its graph.
   2. Read off the output of the inner function from the axis of its graph.
   3. Locate the inner function output on the axis of the graph of the outer function.
   4. Read the output of the outer function from the axis of its graph. This is the output of the composite function.

  EXAMPLE 6

Using a Graph to Evaluate a Composite Function
Using Figure 1, evaluate

     Solution                                                       Figure 1
To evaluate        we start with the inside evaluation. See Figure 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        3.4 · Composition of Functions 245

                                            Figure 2

We evaluate using the graph of              finding the input of 1 on the axis and finding the output value of the graph

at that input. Here,  We use this value as the input to the function

We can then evaluate the composite function by looking to the graph of  finding the input of 3 on the axis and

reading the output value of the graph at this input. Here,  so

     Analysis
Figure 3 shows how we can mark the graphs with arrows to trace the path from the input value to the output value.

                                            Figure 3

TRY IT #4 Using Figure 1, evaluate

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Formulas

When evaluating a composite function where we have either created or been given formulas, the rule of working from
the inside out remains the same. The input value to the outer function will be the output of the inner function, which
may be a numerical value, a variable name, or a more complicated expression.

While we can compose the functions for each individual input value, it is sometimes helpful to find a single formula that

will calculate the result of a composition  To do this, we will extend our idea of function evaluation. Recall that,

when we evaluate a function like            we substitute the value inside the parentheses into the formula wherever
246 3 · Functions

       we see the input variable.

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Given a formula for a composite function, evaluate the function.
          1. Evaluate the inside function using the input value or variable provided.
          2. Use the resulting output as the input to the outside function.

EXAMPLE 7

Evaluating a Composition of Functions Expressed as Formulas with a Numerical Input

Given      and                      evaluate

     Solution                       we start by evaluating     at 1.
Because the inside expression is

Then       so we evaluate at an input of 5.

     Analysis                                        were called in this problem because we evaluated for specific
It makes no difference what the input variables and
numerical values.

      TRY IT #5 Given                   and                 evaluate

                                    

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function

As we discussed previously, the domain of a composite function such as                 is dependent on the domain of and the

domain of It is important to know when we can apply a composite function and when we cannot, that is, to know the

domain of a function such as      Let us assume we know the domains of the functions and separately. If we write

the composite function for an input as        we can see right away that must be a member of the domain of in

order for the expression to be meaningful, because otherwise we cannot complete the inner function evaluation.

However, we also see that        must be a member of the domain of otherwise the second function evaluation in

       cannot be completed, and the expression is still undefined. Thus the domain of  consists of only those

inputs in the domain of that produce outputs from belonging to the domain of Note that the domain of

composed with is the set of all such that is in the domain of and                      is in the domain of

Domain of a Composite Function

The domain of a composite function           is the set of those inputs in the domain of for which          is in the
domain of

           ...                          determine its domain.

              HOW TO

Given a function composition

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.4 · Composition of Functions 247

1. Find the domain of

2. Find the domain of

3. Find those inputs in the domain of for which          is in the domain of That is, exclude those inputs from

the domain of for which     is not in the domain of The resulting set is the domain of

  EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function
Find the domain of

Solution

The domain of       consists of all real numbers except  since that input value would cause us to divide by 0.

Likewise, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1. So we need to exclude from the domain of  that

value of for which

So the domain of    is the set of all real numbers except and This means that

We can write this in interval notation as

                                                                    

  EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function Involving Radicals
Find the domain of

     Solution                                                                   Now we check the domain

Because we cannot take the square root of a negative number, the domain of is 

of the composite function

For                                         since the radicand of a square root must be positive. Since square roots
are positive,
                       or,                 which gives a domain of  .

Analysis

This example shows that knowledge of the range of functions (specifically the inner function) can also be helpful in

finding the domain of a composite function. It also shows that the domain of  can contain values that are not in the

domain of though they must be in the domain of

TRY IT #6 Find the domain of
248 3 · Functions

Decomposing a Composite Function into its Component Functions

In some cases, it is necessary to decompose a complicated function. In other words, we can write it as a composition of
two simpler functions. There may be more than one way to decompose a composite function, so we may choose the
decomposition that appears to be most expedient.

EXAMPLE 10

Decomposing a Function

Write              as the composition of two functions.

Solution

We are looking for two functions, and so                 To do this, we look for a function inside a function in the

formula for        As one possibility, we might notice that the expression  is the inside of the square root. We could

then decompose the function as

We can check our answer by recomposing the functions.

TRY IT #7 Write                           as the composition of two functions.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with composite functions.

Composite Functions (http://openstax.org/l/compfunction)
Composite Function Notation Application (http://openstax.org/l/compfuncnot)
Composite Functions Using Graphs (http://openstax.org/l/compfuncgraph)
Decompose Functions (http://openstax.org/l/decompfunction)
Composite Function Values (http://openstax.org/l/compfuncvalue)

        3.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How does one find the         2. What is the composition of  3. If the order is reversed
    domain of the quotient of        two functions,                 when composing two
    two functions,                                                  functions, can the result
                                                                    ever be the same as the
                                                                    answer in the original order
                                                                    of the composition? If yes,
                                                                    give an example. If no,
                                                                    explain why not.

4. How do you find the domain
    for the composition of two
    functions,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.4 · Composition of Functions 249

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine the domain for each function in interval notation.

5. Given                   and                 find            6. Given                     and       find
                       and
                                                                               and

7. Given                        and            find            8. Given        and                    find

                       and                                                     and

9. Given             and                  find                 10. Given       and                    find

                       and

11. For the following exercise, find the indicated

     function given                  and

                                
     

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find           and       Simplify your answers.

12.                                       13.                                  14.

15.                                  16.                                  17.

For the following exercises, use each set of functions to find            Simplify your answers.

18.                                  19.                                  20. Given            and
                                                                                following:  find the
                 and                      and

                                                                               
                                                                                the domain of

                                                                               in interval notation

                                                                               
                                                                                the domain of
                                                                               

21. Given                       and  22. Given the functions                   23. Given functions

                 find the                                                      and                    state

     following:                           find the following:                  the domain of each of the

                                                                               following functions using
      the domain of
                                                                               interval notation:
                   in interval
     notation                                                                  
                                                                                       
250 3 · Functions

24. Given functions              25. For          and

     and                 state                    write the

     the domain of each of the        domain of           in

     following functions using        interval notation.

     interval notation.

     
             

For the following exercises, find functions  and  so the given function can be expressed as

26.                              27.                          28.

29.                              30.                          31.

32.                              33.                          34.

35.                              36.                          37.

38.                              39.                          40.

41.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the graphs of shown in Figure 4, and shown in Figure 5, to evaluate the expressions.

                                                  Figure 4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.4 · Composition of Functions 251

                                            Figure 5

42.  43.                                                        44.

45.  46.                                                        47.

48.  49.

For the following exercises, use graphs of  shown in Figure 6,  shown in Figure 7, and  shown in Figure 8,
to evaluate the expressions.

                                            Figure 6
                                            Figure 7
252 3 · Functions

                                                          Figure 8

50.                              51.                                   52.

53.                              54.                                   55.

56.                              57.

Numeric                                                   shown in Table 3 to evaluate each expression.

For the following exercises, use the function values for

                                      07                            9

                                      16                            5

                                      25                            6

                                      38                            2

                                      44                            1

                                      50                            8

                                      62                            7

                                      71                            3

                                      89                            4

                                      93                            0

                                      Table 3

58.                              59.                                   60.

61.                              62.                                   63.

64.                              65.

Access for free at openstax.org
For the following exercises, use the function values for                                                                3.4 · Composition of Functions 253

                                                                   shown in Table 4 to evaluate the expressions.

                                                               11

                                                               9

                                                               7   0

                                                     0         5   1

                                                     1         3   0

                                                     2         1

                                                     3

                                                Table 4

66.                               67.                                 68.

69.                               70.                                 71.

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find       and
                                                                                 74.
72.                               73.

75.

For the following exercises, use the functions                     and               to evaluate or find the composite
function as indicated.                                                          78.

76.                               77.

79.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use                and

80. Find           and            81. Find                and         82. What is the domain of

            Compare the

     two answers.
254 3 · Functions

83. What is the domain of               84. Let

For the following exercises, let              Find            for any
85. True or False:                            Is       the same result

                                             function

                                             as the answer to part (a)

                                             for any function? Explain.

                                                                         and
                                        86. True or False:

For the following exercises, find the composition when                        for all  and

87.                                     88.                                   89.

Real-World Applications

90. The function        gives the       91. The function         gives the    92. A store offers customers a

     number of items that will               pain level on a scale of 0 to             30% discount on the price

     be demanded when the                    10 experienced by a patient               of selected items. Then,

     price is The production                 with milligrams of a pain-                the store takes off an

     cost          is the cost of            reducing drug in her                      additional 15% at the cash

     producing items. To                     system. The milligrams of                 register. Write a price

     determine the cost of                   the drug in the patient's                 function  that

     production when the price               system after minutes is                   computes the final price of

     is $6, you would do which               modeled by          Which of              the item in terms of the

     of the following?                       the following would you do                original price (Hint: Use

      Evaluate                               in order to determine                     function composition to
      Evaluate
      Solve                                  when the patient will be at               find your answer.)
      Solve
                                             a pain level of 4?

                                              Evaluate
                                              Evaluate
                                              Solve
                                              Solve

93. A rain drop hitting a lake          94. A forest fire leaves behind       95. Use the function you found
      makes a circular ripple. If             an area of grass burned in            in the previous exercise to
      the radius, in inches, grows            an expanding circular                 find the total area burned
      as a function of time in                pattern. If the radius of the         after 5 minutes.
      minutes according to                    circle of burning grass is
                                              increasing with time
                              find the        according to the formula
      area of the ripple as a                                    express the
      function of time. Find the              area burned as a function
      area of the ripple at                   of time, (minutes).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.5 · Transformation of Functions 255

96. The radius in inches, of a spherical balloon is  97. The number of bacteria in a refrigerated food
                                                           product is given by
related to the volume, by    Air is                                          where is the temperature of the
                                                           food. When the food is removed from the
pumped into the balloon, so the volume after               refrigerator, the temperature is given by
seconds is given by                                                               where is the time in hours.

 Find the composite function                             Find the composite function
 Find the exact time when the radius reaches 10          Find the time (round to two decimal places)

inches.                                                    when the bacteria count reaches 6752.

3.5 Transformation of Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Graph functions using vertical and horizontal shifts.
           Graph functions using reflections about the x-axis and the y-axis.
           Determine whether a function is even, odd, or neither from its graph.
           Graph functions using compressions and stretches.
           Combine transformations.

                             Figure 1 (credit: "Misko"/Flickr)

We all know that a flat mirror enables us to see an accurate image of ourselves and whatever is behind us. When we tilt
the mirror, the images we see may shift horizontally or vertically. But what happens when we bend a flexible mirror? Like
a carnival funhouse mirror, it presents us with a distorted image of ourselves, stretched or compressed horizontally or
vertically. In a similar way, we can distort or transform mathematical functions to better adapt them to describing
objects or processes in the real world. In this section, we will take a look at several kinds of transformations.

Graphing Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts

Often when given a problem, we try to model the scenario using mathematics in the form of words, tables, graphs, and
equations. One method we can employ is to adapt the basic graphs of the toolkit functions to build new models for a
given scenario. There are systematic ways to alter functions to construct appropriate models for the problems we are
trying to solve.

Identifying Vertical Shifts

One simple kind of transformation involves shifting the entire graph of a function up, down, right, or left. The simplest

shift is a vertical shift, moving the graph up or down, because this transformation involves adding a positive or negative

constant to the function. In other words, we add the same constant to the output value of the function regardless of the

input. For a function        the function            is shifted vertically units. See Figure 2 for an example.
256 3 · Functions

                   Figure 2 Vertical shift by  of the cube root function

To help you visualize the concept of a vertical shift, consider that  Therefore,  is equivalent to

Every unit of is replaced by  so the y-value increases or decreases depending on the value of The result is a

shift upward or downward.

Vertical Shift

Given a function   a new function                           where is a constant, is a vertical shift of the function
                                           is positive, the graph will shift up. If is negative, the graph will shift
All the output values change by units. If

down.

  EXAMPLE 1

Adding a Constant to a Function
To regulate temperature in a green building, airflow vents near the roof open and close throughout the day. Figure 3
shows the area of open vents (in square feet) throughout the day in hours after midnight, During the summer, the
facilities manager decides to try to better regulate temperature by increasing the amount of open vents by 20 square
feet throughout the day and night. Sketch a graph of this new function.

                                                                              Figure 3
     Solution
We can sketch a graph of this new function by adding 20 to each of the output values of the original function. This will
have the effect of shifting the graph vertically up, as shown in Figure 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.5 · Transformation of Functions 257

                                                        Figure 4

Notice that in Figure 4, for each input value, the output value has increased by 20, so if we call the new function   we

could write

This notation tells us that, for any value of  can be found by evaluating the function at the same input and then

adding 20 to the result. This defines as a transformation of the function in this case a vertical shift up 20 units.

Notice that, with a vertical shift, the input values stay the same and only the output values change. See Table 1.

                                               0 8 10 17 19 24

                                               0 0 220 220 0 0

                                               20 20 240 240 20 20

               Table 1

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a vertical shift.

 1. Identify the output row or column.
 2. Determine the magnitude of the shift.
 3. Add the shift to the value in each output cell. Add a positive value for up or a negative value for down.

EXAMPLE 2

Shifting a Tabular Function Vertically

A function     is given in Table 2. Create a table for the function

                                                        246 8

                                                        1 3 7 11

                                               Table 2

     Solution  tells us that we can find the output values of by subtracting 3 from the output values of
The formula
258 3 · Functions

       For example:

Subtracting 3 from each          value, we can complete a table of values for        as shown in Table 3.

                                                    2 46 8

                                                    1 3 7 11

                                                    -2 0 4 8

                                           Table 3

     Analysis
As with the earlier vertical shift, notice the input values stay the same and only the output values change.

TRY IT #1            The function                   gives the height of a ball (in meters) thrown upward from the

                     ground after seconds. Suppose the ball was instead thrown from the top of a 10-m building.

                     Relate this new height function to        and then find a formula for

Identifying Horizontal Shifts

We just saw that the vertical shift is a change to the output, or outside, of the function. We will now look at how changes
to input, on the inside of the function, change its graph and meaning. A shift to the input results in a movement of the
graph of the function left or right in what is known as a horizontal shift, shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Horizontal shift of the function           Note that  means                 , which shifts the graph to the left,
that is, towards negative values of

For example, if                  then      is a new function. Each input is reduced by 2 prior to squaring the

function. The result is that the graph is shifted 2 units to the right, because we would need to increase the prior input by

2 units to yield the same output value as given in

Horizontal Shift

Given a function a new function                     where is a constant, is a horizontal shift of the function If

is positive, the graph will shift right. If is negative, the graph will shift left.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.5 · Transformation of Functions 259

EXAMPLE 3

Adding a Constant to an Input
Returning to our building airflow example from Figure 3, suppose that in autumn the facilities manager decides that the
original venting plan starts too late, and wants to begin the entire venting program 2 hours earlier. Sketch a graph of the
new function.

     Solution  to be the original program and  to be the revised program.
We can set

In the new graph, at each time, the airflow is the same as the original function was 2 hours later. For example, in the

original function the airflow starts to change at 8 a.m., whereas for the function the airflow starts to change at 6

a.m. The comparable function values are        See Figure 6. Notice also that the vents first opened to               at

10 a.m. under the original plan, while under the new plan the vents reach    at

8 a.m., so

In both cases, we see that, because      starts 2 hours sooner,   That means that the same output values are
reached when

                                               Figure 6

     Analysis  has the effect of shifting the graph to the left.
Note that

Horizontal changes or "inside changes" affect the domain of a function (the input) instead of the range and often seem

counterintuitive. The new function   uses the same outputs as     but matches those outputs to inputs 2 hours

earlier than those of  Said another way, we must add 2 hours to the input of to find the corresponding output for

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a horizontal shift.

 1. Identify the input row or column.
 2. Determine the magnitude of the shift.
 3. Add the shift to the value in each input cell.
260 3 · Functions

EXAMPLE 4

Shifting a Tabular Function Horizontally

A function         is given in Table 4. Create a table for the function

                                                            246 8

                                                            1 3 7 11

                                          Table 4

Solution

The formula                      tells us that the output values of are the same as the output value of when the input

value is 3 less than the original value. For example, we know that       To get the same output from the function

we will need an input value that is 3 larger. We input a value that is 3 larger for  because the function takes 3 away

before evaluating the function

We continue with the other values to create Table 5.

                                                            5 7 9 11

                                                            246 8

                                                            1 3 7 11

                                                            1 3 7 11

                                          Table 5

The result is that the function  has been shifted to the right by 3. Notice the output values for  remain the same

as the output values for         but the corresponding input values, have shifted to the right by 3. Specifically, 2 shifted

to 5, 4 shifted to 7, 6 shifted to 9, and 8 shifted to 11.

     Analysis
Figure 7 represents both of the functions. We can see the horizontal shift in each point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          3.5 · Transformation of Functions 261

                                                    Figure 7

  EXAMPLE 5                                                               Relate this new function  to     and then

Identifying a Horizontal Shift of a Toolkit Function
Figure 8 represents a transformation of the toolkit function
find a formula for

                                                    Figure 8

Solution

Notice that the graph is identical in shape to the            function, but the x-values are shifted to the right 2 units. The

vertex used to be at (0,0), but now the vertex is at (2,0). The graph is the basic quadratic function shifted 2 units to the

right, so

Notice how we must input the value  to get the output value               the x-values must be 2 units larger because of

the shift to the right by 2 units. We can then use the definition of the  function to write a formula for  by

evaluating

     Analysis
To determine whether the shift is or , consider a single reference point on the graph. For a quadratic, looking at
262 3 · Functions

the vertex point is convenient. In the original function,  In our shifted function,                       To obtain the output

value of 0 from the function we need to decide whether a plus or a minus sign will work to satisfy

                                 For this to work, we will need to subtract 2 units from our input values.

EXAMPLE 6

Interpreting Horizontal versus Vertical Shifts

The function       gives the number of gallons of gas required to drive miles. Interpret                    and

     Solution                                                                                               miles, plus another
               can be interpreted as adding 10 to the output, gallons. This is the gas required to drive

10 gallons of gas. The graph would indicate a vertical shift.

               can be interpreted as adding 10 to the input, miles. So this is the number of gallons of gas required to drive
10 miles more than miles. The graph would indicate a horizontal shift.

TRY IT #2          Given the function             graph the original function  and the transformation

                                         on the same axes. Is this a horizontal or a vertical shift? Which way is the graph

                   shifted and by how many units?

Combining Vertical and Horizontal Shifts

Now that we have two transformations, we can combine them. Vertical shifts are outside changes that affect the output
(y-) values and shift the function up or down. Horizontal shifts are inside changes that affect the input (x-) values and
shift the function left or right. Combining the two types of shifts will cause the graph of a function to shift up or down
and left or right.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a function and both a vertical and a horizontal shift, sketch the graph.

   1. Identify the vertical and horizontal shifts from the formula.
   2. The vertical shift results from a constant added to the output. Move the graph up for a positive constant and

        down for a negative constant.
   3. The horizontal shift results from a constant added to the input. Move the graph left for a positive constant and

        right for a negative constant.
   4. Apply the shifts to the graph in either order.

EXAMPLE 7

Graphing Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts

Given              sketch a graph of

Solution

The function is our toolkit absolute value function. We know that this graph has a V shape, with the point at the origin.

The graph of has transformed in two ways:                  is a change on the inside of the function, giving a horizontal

shift left by 1, and the subtraction by 3 in               is a change to the outside of the function, giving a vertical shift

down by 3. The transformation of the graph is illustrated in Figure 9.

Let us follow one point of the graph of

· The point        is transformed first by shifting left 1 unit:
· The point          is transformed next by shifting down 3 units:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 3.5 · Transformation of Functions 263

                              Figure 9

Figure 10 shows the graph of

                              Figure 10

TRY IT #3 Given               sketch a graph of

  EXAMPLE 8

Identifying Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts
Write a formula for the graph shown in Figure 11, which is a transformation of the toolkit square root function.
264 3 · Functions

                                                                             Figure 11
     Solution
The graph of the toolkit function starts at the origin, so this graph has been shifted 1 to the right and up 2. In function
notation, we could write that as

Using the formula for the square root function, we can write

     Analysis                                                                                               and
Note that this transformation has changed the domain and range of the function. This new graph has domain

range 

TRY IT #4          Write a formula for a transformation of the toolkit reciprocal function  that shifts the
                   function's graph one unit to the right and one unit up.

Graphing Functions Using Reflections about the Axes

Another transformation that can be applied to a function is a reflection over the x- or y-axis. A vertical reflection reflects
a graph vertically across the x-axis, while a horizontal reflection reflects a graph horizontally across the y-axis. The
reflections are shown in Figure 12.

                                           Figure 12 Vertical and horizontal reflections of a function.
Notice that the vertical reflection produces a new graph that is a mirror image of the base or original graph about the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.5 · Transformation of Functions 265

x-axis. The horizontal reflection produces a new graph that is a mirror image of the base or original graph about the
y-axis.

Reflections

Given a function      a new function                is a vertical reflection of the function          sometimes called a
                                                    is a horizontal reflection of the function           sometimes called
reflection about (or over, or through) the x-axis.

Given a function      a new function

a reflection about the y-axis.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a function, reflect the graph both vertically and horizontally.

 1. Multiply all outputs by -1 for a vertical reflection. The new graph is a reflection of the original graph about the
      x-axis.

 2. Multiply all inputs by -1 for a horizontal reflection. The new graph is a reflection of the original graph about the
      y-axis.

EXAMPLE 9

Reflecting a Graph Horizontally and Vertically

Reflect the graph of            (a) vertically and (b) horizontally.

     Solution



Reflecting the graph vertically means that each output value will be reflected over the horizontal t-axis as shown in
Figure 13.

                                           Figure 13 Vertical reflection of the square root function
Because each output value is the opposite of the original output value, we can write

Notice that this is an outside change, or vertical shift, that affects the output  values, so the negative sign belongs
outside of the function.
266 3 · Functions

    

       Reflecting horizontally means that each input value will be reflected over the vertical axis as shown in Figure 14.

                                         Figure 14 Horizontal reflection of the square root function
Because each input value is the opposite of the original input value, we can write

Notice that this is an inside change or horizontal change that affects the input values, so the negative sign is on the
inside of the function.

Note that these transformations can affect the domain and range of the functions. While the original square root

function has domain  and range  the vertical reflection gives the         function the range          and

the horizontal reflection gives the  function the domain 

  TRY IT #5 Reflect the graph of              (a) vertically and (b) horizontally.

EXAMPLE 10

Reflecting a Tabular Function Horizontally and Vertically

A function  is given as Table 6. Create a table for the functions below.

            

                                              246 8

                                              1 3 7 11

                                     Table 6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.5 · Transformation of Functions 267

     Solution

          the negative sign outside the function indicates a vertical reflection, so the x-values stay the same and each
For

output value will be the opposite of the original output value. See Table 7.

                                                       246 8

                                                       -1 -3 -7 -11

                                              Table 7

          the negative sign inside the function indicates a horizontal reflection, so each input value will be the
For

opposite of the original input value and the  values stay the same as the            values. See Table 8.

                                                       -2 -4 -6 -8

                                                       1 3 7 11

                                              Table 8

     TRY IT #6  A function  is given as Table 9. Create a table for the functions below.

                                

                                                 -2 0 2 4

                                                  5 10 15 20

                                   Table 9

EXAMPLE 11

Applying a Learning Model Equation

A common model for learning has an equation similar to                        where  is the percentage of mastery that can
                                                                                         shown in Figure 15. Sketch a
be achieved after practice sessions. This is a transformation of the function

graph of
268 3 · Functions

                                                                             Figure 15

     Solution
This equation combines three transformations into one equation.

  · A horizontal reflection:
  · A vertical reflection:
  · A vertical shift:

We can sketch a graph by applying these transformations one at a time to the original function. Let us follow two points
through each of the three transformations. We will choose the points (0, 1) and (1, 2).

 1. First, we apply a horizontal reflection: (0, 1) (-1, 2).
 2. Then, we apply a vertical reflection: (0, -1) (-1, -2)
 3. Finally, we apply a vertical shift: (0, 0) (-1, -1)).

This means that the original points, (0,1) and (1,2) become (0,0) and (-1,-1) after we apply the transformations.

In Figure 16, the first graph results from a horizontal reflection. The second results from a vertical reflection. The third
results from a vertical shift up 1 unit.

                                                                             Figure 16  with corresponding range

     Analysis
As a model for learning, this function would be limited to a domain of

TRY IT #7 Given the toolkit function  graph                                             and  Take note of any

                   surprising behavior for these functions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.5 · Transformation of Functions 269

Determining Even and Odd Functions

Some functions exhibit symmetry so that reflections result in the original graph. For example, horizontally reflecting the

toolkit functions       or  will result in the original graph. We say that these types of graphs are

symmetric about the y-axis. A function whose graph is symmetric about the y-axis is called an even function.

If the graphs of        or  were reflected over both axes, the result would be the original graph, as shown
in Figure 17.

Figure 17 (a) The cubic toolkit function (b) Horizontal reflection of the cubic toolkit function (c) Horizontal and vertical
reflections reproduce the original cubic function.

We say that these graphs are symmetric about the origin. A function with a graph that is symmetric about the origin is
called an odd function.

Note: A function can be neither even nor odd if it does not exhibit either symmetry. For example,  is neither
even nor odd. Also, the only function that is both even and odd is the constant function

Even and Odd Functions

A function is called an even function if for every input

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the      axis.
A function is called an odd function if for every input

The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin.

...

     HOW TO

Given the formula for a function, determine if the function is even, odd, or neither.

1. Determine whether the function satisfies                  If it does, it is even.

2. Determine whether the function satisfies                      If it does, it is odd.

3. If the function does not satisfy either rule, it is neither even nor odd.

EXAMPLE 12

Determining whether a Function Is Even, Odd, or Neither

Is the function             even, odd, or neither?
270 3 · Functions

     Solution
Without looking at a graph, we can determine whether the function is even or odd by finding formulas for the reflections
and determining if they return us to the original function. Let's begin with the rule for even functions.

This does not return us to the original function, so this function is not even. We can now test the rule for odd functions.

Because              this is an odd function.

Analysis

Consider the graph of in Figure 18. Notice that the graph is symmetric about the origin. For every point  on the

graph, the corresponding point   is also on the graph. For example, (1, 3) is on the graph of and the

corresponding point              is also on the graph.

                                                        Figure 18

TRY IT #8 Is the function                               even, odd, or neither?

Graphing Functions Using Stretches and Compressions

Adding a constant to the inputs or outputs of a function changed the position of a graph with respect to the axes, but it
did not affect the shape of a graph. We now explore the effects of multiplying the inputs or outputs by some quantity.

We can transform the inside (input values) of a function or we can transform the outside (output values) of a function.
Each change has a specific effect that can be seen graphically.

Vertical Stretches and Compressions

When we multiply a function by a positive constant, we get a function whose graph is stretched or compressed vertically
in relation to the graph of the original function. If the constant is greater than 1, we get a vertical stretch; if the
constant is between 0 and 1, we get a vertical compression. Figure 19 shows a function multiplied by constant factors 2
and 0.5 and the resulting vertical stretch and compression.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.5 · Transformation of Functions 271

                                 Figure 19 Vertical stretch and compression

Vertical Stretches and Compressions

Given a function    a new function                 where is a constant, is a vertical stretch or vertical

compression of the function

· If        then the graph will be stretched.
· If              then the graph will be compressed.
· If
            then there will be combination of a vertical stretch or compression with a vertical reflection.

       ...

            HOW TO

Given a function, graph its vertical stretch.

1. Identify the value of

2. Multiply all range values by

3. If       the graph is stretched by a factor of

If                the graph is compressed by a factor of

If          the graph is either stretched or compressed and also reflected about the x-axis.

EXAMPLE 13

Graphing a Vertical Stretch

A function  models the population of fruit flies. The graph is shown in Figure 20.
272 3 · Functions

                                              Figure 20

A scientist is comparing this population to another population,  whose growth follows the same pattern, but is twice
as large. Sketch a graph of this population.

     Solution
Because the population is always twice as large, the new population's output values are always twice the original
function's output values. Graphically, this is shown in Figure 21.

If we choose four reference points, (0, 1), (3, 3), (6, 2) and (7, 0) we will multiply all of the outputs by 2.

The following shows where the new points for the new graph will be located.

                                              Figure 21

Symbolically, the relationship is written as

This means that for any input the value of the function is twice the value of the function Notice that the effect on
the graph is a vertical stretching of the graph, where every point doubles its distance from the horizontal axis. The input
values, stay the same while the output values are twice as large as before.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3.5 · Transformation of Functions 273

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a tabular function and assuming that the transformation is a vertical stretch or compression, create a
table for a vertical compression.
 1. Determine the value of
 2. Multiply all of the output values by

  EXAMPLE 14

Finding a Vertical Compression of a Tabular Function
A function is given as Table 10. Create a table for the function

                                              246 8

                                                 1 3 7 11
                                    Table 10

     Solution          tells us that the output values of  are half of the output values of  with the same inputs. For
The formula                     Then
example, we know that

We do the same for the other values to produce Table 11.

                                    Table 11

     Analysis                       has been compressed vertically by  Each output value is divided in half, so the
The result is that the function
graph is half the original height.

TRY IT #9  A function is given as Table 12. Create a table for the function
                                                           2 4 68
                                                           12 16 20 0

                                             Table 12

  EXAMPLE 15                                                           Relate this new function  to  and

Recognizing a Vertical Stretch
The graph in Figure 22 is a transformation of the toolkit function
then find a formula for
274 3 · Functions

                                 Figure 22

Solution

When trying to determine a vertical stretch or shift, it is helpful to look for a point on the graph that is relatively clear. In

this graph, it appears that      With the basic cubic function at the same input,  Based on that, it

appears that the outputs of are the outputs of the function because                From this we can fairly safely

conclude that

We can write a formula for by using the definition of the function

TRY IT #10         Write the formula for the function that we get when we stretch the identity toolkit function by a
                   factor of 3, and then shift it down by 2 units.

Horizontal Stretches and Compressions

Now we consider changes to the inside of a function. When we multiply a function's input by a positive constant, we get
a function whose graph is stretched or compressed horizontally in relation to the graph of the original function. If the
constant is between 0 and 1, we get a horizontal stretch; if the constant is greater than 1, we get a horizontal
compression of the function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       3.5 · Transformation of Functions 275

                                               Figure 23

Given a function           the form    results in a horizontal stretch or compression. Consider the function

      Observe Figure 23. The graph of          is a horizontal stretch of the graph of the function  by a

factor of 2. The graph of    is a horizontal compression of the graph of the function  by a factor of .

Horizontal Stretches and Compressions

Given a function   a new function              where is a constant, is a horizontal stretch or horizontal

compression of the function

· If    then the graph will be compressed by
· If          then the graph will be stretched by
· If
        then there will be combination of a horizontal stretch or compression with a horizontal reflection.

      ...

           HOW TO

Given a description of a function, sketch a horizontal compression or stretch.

1. Write a formula to represent the function.

2. Set             where             for a compression or  for a stretch.

  EXAMPLE 16

Graphing a Horizontal Compression
Suppose a scientist is comparing a population of fruit flies to a population that progresses through its lifespan twice as
fast as the original population. In other words, this new population, will progress in 1 hour the same amount as the
original population does in 2 hours, and in 2 hours, it will progress as much as the original population does in 4 hours.
Sketch a graph of this population.

     Solution
Symbolically, we could write
276 3 · Functions

       See Figure 24 for a graphical comparison of the original population and the compressed population.

                                Figure 24 (a) Original population graph (b) Compressed population graph

     Analysis
Note that the effect on the graph is a horizontal compression where all input values are half of their original distance
from the vertical axis.

EXAMPLE 17

Finding a Horizontal Stretch for a Tabular Function

A function   is given as Table 13. Create a table for the function

                                                     246 8

                                                     1 3 7 11

                                 Table 13

Solution

The formula                      tells us that the output values for are the same as the output values for the function at

an input half the size. Notice that we do not have enough information to determine because

             and we do not have a value for          in our table. Our input values to will need to be twice as

large to get inputs for that we can evaluate. For example, we can determine

We do the same for the other values to produce Table 14.
                                                                               4 8 12 16

                                                                 Table 14

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.5 · Transformation of Functions 277

                                                                               1 3 7 11
                                                                 Table 14
Figure 25 shows the graphs of both of these sets of points.

                                                                             Figure 25   has been stretched horizontally by a

     Analysis
Because each input value has been doubled, the result is that the function
factor of 2.

EXAMPLE 18

Recognizing a Horizontal Compression on a Graph

Relate the function   to  in Figure 26.

                                                 Figure 26

Solution

The graph of          looks like the graph of  horizontally compressed. Because          ends at  and   ends at

we can see that the values have been compressed by because                               We might also notice that

                 and      Either way, we can describe this relationship as                        This is a horizontal
compression by

Analysis

Notice that the coefficient needed for a horizontal stretch or compression is the reciprocal of the stretch or compression.

So to stretch the graph horizontally by a scale factor of 4, we need a coefficient of in our function:  This means

that the input values must be four times larger to produce the same result, requiring the input to be larger, causing the
horizontal stretching.
278 3 · Functions

TRY IT #11 Write a formula for the toolkit square root function horizontally stretched by a factor of 3.

Performing a Sequence of Transformations

When combining transformations, it is very important to consider the order of the transformations. For example,
vertically shifting by 3 and then vertically stretching by 2 does not create the same graph as vertically stretching by 2 and
then vertically shifting by 3, because when we shift first, both the original function and the shift get stretched, while only
the original function gets stretched when we stretch first.

When we see an expression such as  which transformation should we start with? The answer here follows

nicely from the order of operations. Given the output value of  we first multiply by 2, causing the vertical stretch,

and then add 3, causing the vertical shift. In other words, multiplication before addition.

Horizontal transformations are a little trickier to think about. When we write               for example, we have to

think about how the inputs to the function relate to the inputs to the function Suppose we know             What

input to would produce that output? In other words, what value of will allow                     We would need

                   To solve for we would first subtract 3, resulting in a horizontal shift, and then divide by 2, causing a

horizontal compression.

This format ends up being very difficult to work with, because it is usually much easier to horizontally stretch a graph
before shifting. We can work around this by factoring inside the function.

Let's work through an example.

We can factor out a 2.

Now we can more clearly observe a horizontal shift to the left 2 units and a horizontal compression. Factoring in this way
allows us to horizontally stretch first and then shift horizontally.

Combining Transformations

When combining vertical transformations written in the form     first vertically stretch by and then vertically
shift by

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form                   first horizontally shift by and then
horizontally stretch by

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form                   first horizontally stretch by and then
horizontally shift by

Horizontal and vertical transformations are independent. It does not matter whether horizontal or vertical
transformations are performed first.

EXAMPLE 19

Finding a Triple Transformation of a Tabular Function

Given Table 15 for the function    create a table of values for the function

                                             6 12 18 24

                                             10 14 15 17

                                   Table 15

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.5 · Transformation of Functions 279

Solution

There are three steps to this transformation, and we will work from the inside out. Starting with the horizontal

transformations,  is a horizontal compression by which means we multiply each value by See Table 16.

                                                     2468

                                                                              10 14 15 17

                                                               Table 16
Looking now to the vertical transformations, we start with the vertical stretch, which will multiply the output values by 2.
We apply this to the previous transformation. See Table 17.

                                                                                2468

                                                                               20 28 30 34
                                                              Table 17
Finally, we can apply the vertical shift, which will add 1 to all the output values. See Table 18.

                                                                                        2468

                                                     21 29 31 35

                  Table 18

EXAMPLE 20

Finding a Triple Transformation of a Graph

Use the graph of  in Figure 27 to sketch a graph of

                                                                             Figure 27

     Solution
To simplify, let's start by factoring out the inside of the function.
280 3 · Functions

       By factoring the inside, we can first horizontally stretch by 2, as indicated by the on the inside of the function.
       Remember that twice the size of 0 is still 0, so the point (0,2) remains at (0,2) while the point (2,0) will stretch to (4,0). See
       Figure 28.

                                 Figure 28

Next, we horizontally shift left by 2 units, as indicated by  See Figure 29.

                                                                             Figure 29  on the outside of the function. See

Last, we vertically shift down by 3 to complete our sketch, as indicated by the
Figure 30.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.5 · Transformation of Functions 281

                                        Figure 30

    MEDIA
    Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with transformation of functions.
    Function Transformations (http://openstax.org/l/functrans)

        3.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. When examining the               2. When examining the               3. When examining the
    formula of a function that is       formula of a function that is       formula of a function that is
    the result of multiple              the result of multiple              the result of multiple
    transformations, how can            transformations, how can            transformations, how can
    you tell a horizontal shift         you tell a horizontal stretch       you tell a horizontal
    from a vertical shift?              from a vertical stretch?            compression from a vertical
                                                                            compression?

4. When examining the               5. How can you determine
    formula of a function that is       whether a function is odd or
    the result of multiple              even from the formula of
    transformations, how can            the function?
    you tell a reflection with
    respect to the x-axis from a
    reflection with respect to the
    y-axis?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function obtained when the graph is shifted as described.

6.         is shifted up 1          7.  is shifted down 3               8.          is shifted down 4

    unit and to the left 2 units.       units and to the right 1 unit.      units and to the right 3

                                                                            units.
282 3 · Functions

9.                 is shifted up 2

     units and to the left 4 units.

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of the function is a transformation of the graph of the original
function

10.                                  11.                  12.

13.                                  14.                  15.

16.                                  17.                  18.

19.

For the following exercises, determine the interval(s) on which the function is increasing and decreasing.

20.                                  21.                  22.

23.

Graphical                                      shown in Figure 31 to sketch a graph of each transformation of

For the following exercises, use the graph of

                                               Figure 31

24.                                  25.                  26.

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the function as a transformation of the graph of one of the toolkit
functions.

27.                                  28.                  29.

30.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.5 · Transformation of Functions 283

Numeric

31. Tabular representations for the  32. Tabular representations for the functions

     functions     and are given          and are given below. Write  and           as

     below. Write  and   as               transformations of

     transformations of

                                          -2 -1 0 1 2

                -2 -1 0 1 2

                                          -1 -3 4 2 1

                -2 -1 -3 1 2

         -1 0 1 2 3                       -3 -2 -1 0 1
         -2 -1 -3 1 2                     -1 -3 4 2 1

                -2 -1 0 1 2               -2 -1 0 1 2
                -1 0 -2 2 3               -2 -4 3 1 0

For the following exercises, write an equation for each graphed function by using transformations of the graphs of one
of the toolkit functions.

33.                                  34.                              35.
284 3 · Functions

36.                                   37.  38.

39.                                   40.

For the following exercises, use the graphs of transformations of the square root function to find a formula for each of
the functions.

41.                              42.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       3.5 · Transformation of Functions 285

For the following exercises, use the graphs of the transformed toolkit functions to write a formula for each of the
resulting functions.

43.       44.       45.

46.

For the following exercises, determine whether the function is odd, even, or neither.

47.  48.       49.

50.  51.       52.

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of each function is a transformation of the graph of the original
function

53.  54.       55.

56.  57.       58.

59.  60.       61.

62.
286 3 · Functions

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function that results when the graph of a given toolkit function is
transformed as described.

63. The graph of                 is  64. The graph of               is  65. The graph of      is

     reflected over the -axis             reflected over the -axis           vertically compressed by a
                                                                             factor of then shifted to
     and horizontally                     and horizontally stretched
                                                                             the left 2 units and down 3
     compressed by a factor of            by a factor of 2.                  units.

     .

66. The graph of                 is  67. The graph of        is         68. The graph of      is

     vertically stretched by a            vertically compressed by a         horizontally stretched by a

     factor of 8, then shifted to         factor of then shifted to          factor of 3, then shifted to

     the right 4 units and up 2           the right 5 units and up 1         the left 4 units and down 3
                                          unit.
     units.                                                                  units.

For the following exercises, describe how the formula is a transformation of a toolkit function. Then sketch a graph of
the transformation.

69.                                  70.                                71.

72.                                  73.                                74.

75.                                  76.                                77.

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 32 to sketch the given transformations.

                                                       Figure 32

78.                                  79.                                80.

81.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             3.6 · Absolute Value Functions 287

3.6 Absolute Value Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Graph an absolute value function.
           Solve an absolute value equation.

Figure 1 Distances in deep space can be measured in all directions. As such, it is useful to consider distance in terms of
absolute values. (credit: "s58y"/Flickr)

Until the 1920s, the so-called spiral nebulae were believed to be clouds of dust and gas in our own galaxy, some tens of
thousands of light years away. Then, astronomer Edwin Hubble proved that these objects are galaxies in their own right,
at distances of millions of light years. Today, astronomers can detect galaxies that are billions of light years away.
Distances in the universe can be measured in all directions. As such, it is useful to consider distance as an absolute value
function. In this section, we will continue our investigation of absolute value functions.

Understanding Absolute Value

Recall that in its basic form  the absolute value function is one of our toolkit functions. The absolute value

function is commonly thought of as providing the distance the number is from zero on a number line. Algebraically, for

whatever the input value is, the output is the value without regard to sign. Knowing this, we can use absolute value

functions to solve some kinds of real-world problems.

Absolute Value Function

The absolute value function can be defined as a piecewise function

EXAMPLE 1

Using Absolute Value to Determine Resistance

Electrical parts, such as resistors and capacitors, come with specified values of their operating parameters: resistance,

capacitance, etc. However, due to imprecision in manufacturing, the actual values of these parameters vary somewhat

from piece to piece, even when they are supposed to be the same. The best that manufacturers can do is to try to

guarantee that the variations will stay within a specified range, often  or

Suppose we have a resistor rated at 680 ohms,  Use the absolute value function to express the range of possible
values of the actual resistance.

     Solution
We can find that 5% of 680 ohms is 34 ohms. The absolute value of the difference between the actual and nominal
resistance should not exceed the stated variability, so, with the resistance in ohms,
288 3 · Functions

TRY IT #1          Students who score within 20 points of 80 will pass a test. Write this as a distance from 80 using
                   absolute value notation.

Graphing an Absolute Value Function

The most significant feature of the absolute value graph is the corner point at which the graph changes direction. This
point is shown at the origin in Figure 2.

                             Figure 2

Figure 3 shows the graph of  The graph of  has been shifted right 3 units, vertically stretched by a

factor of 2, and shifted up 4 units. This means that the corner point is located at     for this transformed function.

                                                                              Figure 3
  EXAMPLE 2
Writing an Equation for an Absolute Value Function Given a Graph
Write an equation for the function graphed in Figure 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.6 · Absolute Value Functions 289

                                                                              Figure 4
     Solution
The basic absolute value function changes direction at the origin, so this graph has been shifted to the right 3 units and
down 2 units from the basic toolkit function. See Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5
We also notice that the graph appears vertically stretched, because the width of the final graph on a horizontal line is not
equal to 2 times the vertical distance from the corner to this line, as it would be for an unstretched absolute value
function. Instead, the width is equal to 1 times the vertical distance as shown in Figure 6.
290 3 · Functions

                                                         Figure 6

From this information we can write the equation

     Analysis
Note that these equations are algebraically equivalent--the stretch for an absolute value function can be written
interchangeably as a vertical or horizontal stretch or compression. Note also that if the vertical stretch factor is negative,
there is also a reflection about the x-axis.

Q&A                If we couldn't observe the stretch of the function from the graphs, could we algebraically
                   determine it?

                   Yes. If we are unable to determine the stretch based on the width of the graph, we can solve for the
                   stretch factor by putting in a known pair of values for and

                   Now substituting in the point (1, 2)

TRY IT #2          Write the equation for the absolute value function that is horizontally shifted left 2 units, is
                   vertically flipped, and vertically shifted up 3 units.

Q&A                Do the graphs of absolute value functions always intersect the vertical axis? The horizontal axis?

                   Yes, they always intersect the vertical axis. The graph of an absolute value function will intersect the
                   vertical axis when the input is zero.

                   No, they do not always intersect the horizontal axis. The graph may or may not intersect the horizontal
                   axis, depending on how the graph has been shifted and reflected. It is possible for the absolute value
                   function to intersect the horizontal axis at zero, one, or two points (see Figure 7).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              3.6 · Absolute Value Functions 291

Figure 7 (a) The absolute value function does not intersect the horizontal axis. (b) The absolute value function
intersects the horizontal axis at one point. (c) The absolute value function intersects the horizontal axis at two points.

Solving an Absolute Value Equation

In Other Type of Equations, we touched on the concepts of absolute value equations. Now that we understand a little

more about their graphs, we can take another look at these types of equations. Now that we can graph an absolute

value function, we will learn how to solve an absolute value equation. To solve an equation such as      we

notice that the absolute value will be equal to 8 if the quantity inside the absolute value is 8 or -8. This leads to two

different equations we can solve independently.

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is useful. For example, we may need to identify
numbers or points on a line that are at a specified distance from a given reference point.

An absolute value equation is an equation in which the unknown variable appears in absolute value bars. For example,

Solutions to Absolute Value Equations

For real numbers and        , an equation of the form  with   will have solutions when               or
                                  has no solution.
If      the equation

    ...

         HOW TO

Given the formula for an absolute value function, find the horizontal intercepts of its graph.

1. Isolate the absolute value term.

2. Use            to write  or         assuming

3. Solve for

EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Zeros of an Absolute Value Function

For the function                find the values of such that
292 3 · Functions

            Solution

The function outputs 0 when      or  See Figure 8.

                                     Figure 8

TRY IT #3 For the function           find the values of such that

Q&A                   Should we always expect two answers when solving
                      No. We may find one, two, or even no answers. For example, there is no solution to

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with absolute value.

Graphing Absolute Value Functions (http://openstax.org/l/graphabsvalue)
Graphing Absolute Value Functions 2 (http://openstax.org/l/graphabsvalue2)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.6 · Absolute Value Functions 293

        3.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How do you solve an             2. How can you tell whether an   3. When solving an absolute
    absolute value equation?           absolute value function has      value function, the isolated
                                       two x-intercepts without         absolute value term is equal
                                       graphing the function?           to a negative number. What
                                                                        does that tell you about the
                                                                        graph of the absolute value
                                                                        function?

4. How can you use the graph
    of an absolute value
    function to determine the
    x-values for which the
    function values are
    negative?

Algebraic                          6. Describe all numbers that     7. Describe the situation in
                                       are at a distance of from        which the distance that
5. Describe all numbers that                                            point is from 10 is at least
    are at a distance of 4 from        the number -4. Express this      15 units. Express this set of
    the number 8. Express this         set of numbers using             numbers using absolute
    set of numbers using               absolute value notation.         value notation.
    absolute value notation.

8. Find all function values
    such that the distance from
           to the value 8 is less
    than 0.03 units. Express this
    set of numbers using
    absolute value notation.

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts of the graphs of each function.

9.                                 10.                              11.

12.                                13.                              14.

15.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function. Plot at least five points by hand for each graph.

16.                                17.                              18.
294 3 · Functions

For the following exercises, graph the given functions by hand.

19.                                  20.                                        21.

22.                                  23.                                        24.

25.                                  26.                                        27.

28.                                  29.                                        30.

31.

Technology

32. Use a graphing utility to        33. Use a graphing utility to
                                           graph
     graph                       on                                         on
                                           the viewing window
     the viewing window                                Identify the
                                           corresponding range.
     Identify the corresponding            Show the graph.

     range. Show the graph.

For the following exercises, graph each function using a graphing utility. Specify the viewing window.

34.                                                      35.

Extensions                                               37. If possible, find all values of such that there are
                                                               no -intercepts for
For the following exercises, solve the inequality.
36. If possible, find all values of such that there are

      no intercepts for

Real-World Applications              39. The true proportion of                 40. Students who score within
                                           people who give a                          18 points of the number 82
38. Cities A and B are on the              favorable rating to                        will pass a particular test.
      same east-west line.                 Congress is 8% with a                      Write this statement using
      Assume that city A is                margin of error of 1.5%.                   absolute value notation
      located at the origin. If the        Describe this statement                    and use the variable for
      distance from city A to city         using an absolute value                    the score.
      B is at least 100 miles and          equation.
      represents the distance
      from city B to city A,
      express this using absolute
      value notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      3.7 · Inverse Functions 295

41. A machinist must produce      42. The tolerance for a ball
      a bearing that is within          bearing is 0.01. If the true
      0.01 inches of the correct        diameter of the bearing is
      diameter of 5.0 inches.           to be 2.0 inches and the
      Using as the diameter of          measured value of the
      the bearing, write this           diameter is inches,
      statement using absolute          express the tolerance using
      value notation.                   absolute value notation.

3.7 Inverse Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Verify inverse functions.
           Determine the domain and range of an inverse function, and restrict the domain of a function to make it one-to-
           one.
           Find or evaluate the inverse of a function.
           Use the graph of a one-to-one function to graph its inverse function on the same axes.

A reversible heat pump is a climate-control system that is an air conditioner and a heater in a single device. Operated in
one direction, it pumps heat out of a house to provide cooling. Operating in reverse, it pumps heat into the building
from the outside, even in cool weather, to provide heating. As a heater, a heat pump is several times more efficient than
conventional electrical resistance heating.

If some physical machines can run in two directions, we might ask whether some of the function "machines" we have
been studying can also run backwards. Figure 1 provides a visual representation of this question. In this section, we will
consider the reverse nature of functions.

                                             Figure 1 Can a function "machine" operate in reverse?

Verifying That Two Functions Are Inverse Functions

Betty is traveling to Milan for a fashion show and wants to know what the temperature will be. She is not familiar with
the Celsius scale. To get an idea of how temperature measurements are related, Betty wants to convert 75 degrees
Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius using the formula

and substitutes 75 for to calculate

Knowing that a comfortable 75 degrees Fahrenheit is about 24 degrees Celsius, Betty gets the week's weather forecast
from Figure 2 for Milan, and wants to convert all of the temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit.
296 3 · Functions

                                                                              Figure 2

At first, Betty considers using the formula she has already found to complete the conversions. After all, she knows her
algebra, and can easily solve the equation for after substituting a value for For example, to convert 26 degrees
Celsius, she could write

After considering this option for a moment, however, she realizes that solving the equation for each of the temperatures
will be awfully tedious. She realizes that since evaluation is easier than solving, it would be much more convenient to
have a different formula, one that takes the Celsius temperature and outputs the Fahrenheit temperature.

The formula for which Betty is searching corresponds to the idea of an inverse function, which is a function for which
the input of the original function becomes the output of the inverse function and the output of the original function
becomes the input of the inverse function.

Given a function       we represent its inverse as         read as inverse of The raised               is part of the notation.

It is not an exponent; it does not imply a power of        . In other words,  does not mean            because  is the

reciprocal of and not the inverse.

The "exponent-like" notation comes from an analogy between function composition and multiplication: just as

(1 is the identity element for multiplication) for any nonzero number so      equals the identity function, that is,

This holds for all in the domain of Informally, this means that inverse functions "undo" each other. However, just as
zero does not have a reciprocal, some functions do not have inverses.

Given a function       we can verify whether some other function              is the inverse of  by checking whether either

                   or            is true. We can test whichever equation is more convenient to work with because they are

logically equivalent (that is, if one is true, then so is the other.)

For example,           and       are inverse functions.

and

A few coordinate pairs from the graph of the function      are (-2, -8), (0, 0), and (2, 8). A few coordinate pairs from

the graph of the function        are (-8, -2), (0, 0), and (8, 2). If we interchange the input and output of each coordinate

pair of a function, the interchanged coordinate pairs would appear on the graph of the inverse function.

Inverse Function

For any one-to-one function         a function                 is an inverse function of  if               This can also be
                                                           It also follows that               for all  in the domain of
written as                       for all in the domain of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  3.7 · Inverse Functions 297

    if is the inverse of

    The notation is read inverse." Like any other function, we can use any variable name as the input for             so

    we will often write   which we read as inverse of Keep in mind that

    and not all functions have inverses.

    EXAMPLE 1

Identifying an Inverse Function for a Given Input-Output Pair

If for a particular one-to-one function       and            what are the corresponding input and output values for

the inverse function?

     Solution
The inverse function reverses the input and output quantities, so if

Alternatively, if we want to name the inverse function then           and

     Analysis
Notice that if we show the coordinate pairs in a table form, the input and output are clearly reversed. See Table 1.

                                              Table 1

    TRY IT #1            Given that           what are the corresponding input and output values of the original
                         function

    ...

         HOW TO

    Given two functions   and             test whether the functions are inverses of each other.

    1. Determine whether                  or

    2. If either statement is true, then both are true, and    and         If either statement is false, then both

    are false, and        and

    EXAMPLE 2

Testing Inverse Relationships Algebraically

If             and                   is
298 3 · Functions

            Solution

       so
       This is enough to answer yes to the question, but we can also verify the other formula.

     Analysis
Notice the inverse operations are in reverse order of the operations from the original function.

    TRY IT #2 If                       and                    is

    EXAMPLE 3

Determining Inverse Relationships for Power Functions

If            (the cube function) and          is

    Solution

No, the functions are not inverses.                                   that is, the one-third is an exponent, not a
     Analysis

The correct inverse to the cube is, of course, the cube root
multiplier.

    TRY IT #3 If                                                  is

Finding Domain and Range of Inverse Functions

The outputs of the function are the inputs to      so the range of    is also the domain of       Likewise, because the
                                                   is the range of
inputs to are the outputs of     the domain of                        We can visualize the situation as in Figure 3.

                                 Figure 3 Domain and range of a function and its inverse

When a function has no inverse function, it is possible to create a new function where that new function on a limited

domain does have an inverse function. For example, the inverse of     is                          because a square

"undoes" a square root; but the square is only the inverse of the square root on the domain  since that is the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        3.7 · Inverse Functions 299

range of

We can look at this problem from the other side, starting with the square (toolkit quadratic) function  If we

want to construct an inverse to this function, we run into a problem, because for every given output of the quadratic

function, there are two corresponding inputs (except when the input is 0). For example, the output 9 from the quadratic

function corresponds to the inputs 3 and -3. But an output from a function is an input to its inverse; if this inverse input

corresponds to more than one inverse output (input of the original function), then the "inverse" is not a function at all!

To put it differently, the quadratic function is not a one-to-one function; it fails the horizontal line test, so it does not have

an inverse function. In order for a function to have an inverse, it must be a one-to-one function.

In many cases, if a function is not one-to-one, we can still restrict the function to a part of its domain on which it is one-

to-one. For example, we can make a restricted version of the square function  with its domain limited to

     which is a one-to-one function (it passes the horizontal line test) and which has an inverse (the square-root

function).

If                 on  then the inverse function is

    · The domain of = range of = 
    · The domain of = range of = 

    Q&A     Is it possible for a function to have more than one inverse?

            No. If two supposedly different functions, say, and both meet the definition of being inverses of

            another function then you can prove that  We have just seen that some functions only have

            inverses if we restrict the domain of the original function. In these cases, there may be more than one way

            to restrict the domain, leading to different inverses. However, on any one domain, the original function

            still has only one unique inverse.

    Domain and Range of Inverse Functions

    The range of a function  is the domain of the inverse function

    The domain of  is the range of

               ...

                  HOW TO

    Given a function, find the domain and range of its inverse.

     1. If the function is one-to-one, write the range of the original function as the domain of the inverse, and write the
          domain of the original function as the range of the inverse.

     2. If the domain of the original function needs to be restricted to make it one-to-one, then this restricted domain
          becomes the range of the inverse function.

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Inverses of Toolkit Functions
Identify which of the toolkit functions besides the quadratic function are not one-to-one, and find a restricted domain on
which each function is one-to-one, if any. The toolkit functions are reviewed in Table 2. We restrict the domain in such a
fashion that the function assumes all y-values exactly once.
300 3 · Functions

                   Constant      Identity  Quadratic  Cubic                         Reciprocal

                   Reciprocal squared Cube root Square root Absolute value

                       Table 2

     Solution
The constant function is not one-to-one, and there is no domain (except a single point) on which it could be one-to-one,
so the constant function has no inverse.

The absolute value function can be restricted to the domain  where it is equal to the identity function.

The reciprocal-squared function can be restricted to the domain 

     Analysis
We can see that these functions (if unrestricted) are not one-to-one by looking at their graphs, shown in Figure 4. They
both would fail the horizontal line test. However, if a function is restricted to a certain domain so that it passes the
horizontal line test, then in that restricted domain, it can have an inverse.

                                 Figure 4 (a) Absolute value (b) Reciprocal square

TRY IT #4          The domain of function is  and the range of function is          Find the domain and

                   range of the inverse function.

Finding and Evaluating Inverse Functions

Once we have a one-to-one function, we can evaluate its inverse at specific inverse function inputs or construct a
complete representation of the inverse function in many cases.

Inverting Tabular Functions

Suppose we want to find the inverse of a function represented in table form. Remember that the domain of a function is
the range of the inverse and the range of the function is the domain of the inverse. So we need to interchange the
domain and range.

Each row (or column) of inputs becomes the row (or column) of outputs for the inverse function. Similarly, each row (or
column) of outputs becomes the row (or column) of inputs for the inverse function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       3.7 · Inverse Functions 301

  EXAMPLE 5

Interpreting the Inverse of a Tabular Function
A function is given in Table 3, showing distance in miles that a car has traveled in minutes. Find and interpret

                                                     30 50 70 90

                                                     20 40 60 70

                                            Table 3

Solution

The inverse function takes an output of and returns an input for So in the expression                  70 is an output value

of the original function, representing 70 miles. The inverse will return the corresponding input of the original function

90 minutes, so             The interpretation of this is that, to drive 70 miles, it took 90 minutes.

Alternatively, recall that the definition of the inverse was that if   then            By this definition, if we are

given           then we are looking for a value so that               In this case, we are looking for a so that

            which is when

TRY IT #5       Using Table 4, find and interpret                     and 

                                                     30 50 60         70 90

                                                     20 40 50 60 70

                           Table 4

Evaluating the Inverse of a Function, Given a Graph of the Original Function

We saw in Functions and Function Notation that the domain of a function can be read by observing the horizontal extent
of its graph. We find the domain of the inverse function by observing the vertical extent of the graph of the original
function, because this corresponds to the horizontal extent of the inverse function. Similarly, we find the range of the
inverse function by observing the horizontal extent of the graph of the original function, as this is the vertical extent of
the inverse function. If we want to evaluate an inverse function, we find its input within its domain, which is all or part of
the vertical axis of the original function's graph.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the graph of a function, evaluate its inverse at specific points.

   1. Find the desired input on the y-axis of the given graph.
   2. Read the inverse function's output from the x-axis of the given graph.

EXAMPLE 6

Evaluating a Function and Its Inverse from a Graph at Specific Points

A function      is given in Figure 5. Find  and
302 3 · Functions

                                                 Figure 5

     Solution      we find 3 on the x-axis and find the corresponding output value on the y-axis. The point      tells us
To evaluate
that

To evaluate        recall that by definition     means the value of x for which  By looking for the output
                                                 on the graph, which means
value 3 on the vertical axis, we find the point                                  so by definition,               See

Figure 6.

                                                 Figure 6

TRY IT #6 Using the graph in Figure 6,  find                  and  estimate

Finding Inverses of Functions Represented by Formulas

Sometimes we will need to know an inverse function for all elements of its domain, not just a few. If the original function
is given as a formula--for example, as a function of we can often find the inverse function by solving to obtain as
a function of

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a function represented by a formula, find the inverse.

 1. Make sure is a one-to-one function.
 2. Solve for
 3. Interchange and

  EXAMPLE 7

Inverting the Fahrenheit-to-Celsius Function
Find a formula for the inverse function that gives Fahrenheit temperature as a function of Celsius temperature.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       3.7 · Inverse Functions 303

    Solution

By solving in general, we have uncovered the inverse function. If

then

In this case, we introduced a function to represent the conversion because the input and output variables are

descriptive, and writing  could get confusing.

      TRY IT #7 Solve for in terms of given

  EXAMPLE 8

Solving to Find an Inverse Function
Find the inverse of the function

     Solution

So            or

     Analysis                                                          are equal at two points but are not the
The domain and range of exclude the values 3 and 4, respectively. and
same function, as we can see by creating Table 5.

                                                   125

                                                   325

                                          Table 5

  EXAMPLE 9

Solving to Find an Inverse with Radicals
Find the inverse of the function
304 3 · Functions

            Solution

So                       Notice that the range of is          so this means that the domain of the inverse function

The domain of is

is also 

Analysis

The formula we found for         looks like it would be valid for all real However, itself must have an inverse

(namely, ) so we have to restrict the domain of to  in order to make a one-to-one function. This domain

of is exactly the range of

TRY IT #8               What is the inverse of the function          State the domains of both the function and
                        the inverse function.

Finding Inverse Functions and Their Graphs

Now that we can find the inverse of a function, we will explore the graphs of functions and their inverses. Let us return to

the quadratic function           restricted to the domain  on which this function is one-to-one, and graph it as in

Figure 7.

                                 Figure 7 Quadratic function with domain restricted to [0, ).

Restricting the domain to  makes the function one-to-one (it will obviously pass the horizontal line test), so it has

an inverse on this restricted domain.

We already know that the inverse of the toolkit quadratic function is the square root function, that is,
What happens if we graph both and on the same set of axes, using the axis for the input to both

We notice a distinct relationship: The graph of     is the graph of  reflected about the diagonal line    which
we will call the identity line, shown in Figure 8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.7 · Inverse Functions 305

                                 Figure 8 Square and square-root functions on the non-negative domain

This relationship will be observed for all one-to-one functions, because it is a result of the function and its inverse
swapping inputs and outputs. This is equivalent to interchanging the roles of the vertical and horizontal axes.

EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Inverse of a Function Using Reflection about the Identity Line

Given the graph of  in Figure 9, sketch a graph of

                                                                              Figure 9

     Solution
This is a one-to-one function, so we will be able to sketch an inverse. Note that the graph shown has an apparent domain

of  and range of   so the inverse will have a domain of   and range of 

If we reflect this graph over the line  the point   reflects to  and the point  reflects to

Sketching the inverse on the same axes as the original graph gives Figure 10.
306 3 · Functions

                   Figure 10 The function and its inverse, showing reflection about the identity line

TRY IT #9 Draw graphs of the functions and from Example 8.

Q&A                Is there any function that is equal to its own inverse?

                   Yes. If       then  and we can think of several functions that have this property. The

                   identity function does, and so does the reciprocal function, because

                   Any function        where is a constant, is also equal to its own inverse.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with inverse functions.

Inverse Functions (http://openstax.org/l/inversefunction)
One-to-one Functions (http://openstax.org/l/onetoone)
Inverse Function Values Using Graph (http://openstax.org/l/inversfuncgraph)
Restricting the Domain and Finding the Inverse (http://openstax.org/l/restrictdomain)

        3.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe why the horizontal     2. Why do we restrict the         3. Can a function be its own
    line test is an effective way      domain of the function            inverse? Explain.
    to determine whether a                            to find the
    function is one-to-one?            function's inverse?

4. Are one-to-one functions        5. How do you find the inverse
    either always increasing or        of a function algebraically?
    always decreasing? Why or
    why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       3.7 · Inverse Functions 307

Algebraic                                   is its own

6. Show that the function
    inverse for all real numbers

For the following exercises, find           for each function.

7.                                     8.                             9.

10.                                    11.                            12.

For the following exercises, find a domain on which each function is one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain
in interval notation. Then find the inverse of restricted to that domain.

13.                                    14.                            15.

16. Given   and

      Find  and

      What does the answer tell us about the
     relationship between         and

For the following exercises, use function composition to verify that  and are inverse functions.
                                                                                and
17.         and                                                 18.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether each function is one-to-one.

19.                                    20.                            21.

22.

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph represents a one-to-one function.

23.                                    24.
308 3 · Functions

       For the following exercises, use the graph of shown in Figure 11.

                                              Figure 11

25. Find                           26. Solve                              27. Find
28. Solve

For the following exercises, use the graph of the one-to-one function shown in Figure 12.

                                              Figure 12

29. Sketch the graph of            30. Find                               31. If the complete graph of
                                                                                is shown, find the domain
                                                                                of

32. If the complete graph of
      is shown, find the range of

Numeric

For the following exercises, evaluate or solve, assuming that the function is one-to-one.

33. If     find                    34. If     find                        35. If           find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          3.7 · Inverse Functions 309

36. If      find

For the following exercises, use the values listed in Table 6 to evaluate or solve.

                                              0123456789

                                              8074265391

                                     Table 6

37. Find                             38. Solve                         39. Find

40. Solve                            41. Use the tabular representation
                                           of in Table 7 to create a table
                                           for

                                                        3 6 9 13 14

                                                        1 4 7 12 16

                                           Table 7

Technology

For the following exercises, find the inverse function. Then, graph the function and its inverse.

42.                                  43.                               44. Find the inverse function of

                                                                                           Use a

                                                                            graphing utility to find its
                                                                            domain and range. Write
                                                                            the domain and range in
                                                                            interval notation.

Real-World Applications              46. The circumference of a        47. A car travels at a constant

45. To convert from degrees               circle is a function of its       speed of 50 miles per hour.
      Celsius to degrees
      Fahrenheit, we use the              radius given by                   The distance the car travels
      formula
      Find the inverse function, if       Express the radius of a           in miles is a function of
      it exists, and explain its
      meaning.                            circle as a function of its       time, in hours given by

                                          circumference. Call this                    Find the inverse

                                          function  Find                    function by expressing the

                                          and interpret its meaning.        time of travel in terms of

                                                                            the distance traveled. Call

                                                                            this function  Find

                                                                                     and interpret its

                                                                            meaning.
310 3 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

absolute maximum the greatest value of a function over an interval

absolute minimum the lowest value of a function over an interval

average rate of change the difference in the output values of a function found for two values of the input divided by

the difference between the inputs

composite function the new function formed by function composition, when the output of one function is used as the

input of another

decreasing function a function is decreasing in some open interval if           for any two input values and in

the given interval where

dependent variable an output variable

domain the set of all possible input values for a relation

even function a function whose graph is unchanged by horizontal reflection,                   and is symmetric about

the axis

function a relation in which each input value yields a unique output value

horizontal compression a transformation that compresses a function's graph horizontally, by multiplying the input by

a constant

horizontal line test a method of testing whether a function is one-to-one by determining whether any horizontal line

    intersects the graph more than once
horizontal reflection a transformation that reflects a function's graph across the y-axis by multiplying the input by

horizontal shift a transformation that shifts a function's graph left or right by adding a positive or negative constant

to the input

horizontal stretch a transformation that stretches a function's graph horizontally by multiplying the input by a

constant

increasing function a function is increasing in some open interval if           for any two input values and in

the given interval where

independent variable an input variable

input each object or value in a domain that relates to another object or value by a relationship known as a function

interval notation a method of describing a set that includes all numbers between a lower limit and an upper limit; the

lower and upper values are listed between brackets or parentheses, a square bracket indicating inclusion in the set,

and a parenthesis indicating exclusion

inverse function for any one-to-one function  the inverse is a function         such that                    for all

in the domain of this also implies that                     for all in the domain of

local extrema collectively, all of a function's local maxima and minima

local maximum a value of the input where a function changes from increasing to decreasing as the input value

increases.

local minimum a value of the input where a function changes from decreasing to increasing as the input value

increases.

odd function a function whose graph is unchanged by combined horizontal and vertical reflection,

and is symmetric about the origin

one-to-one function a function for which each value of the output is associated with a unique input value

output each object or value in the range that is produced when an input value is entered into a function

piecewise function a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output

range the set of output values that result from the input values in a relation

rate of change the change of an output quantity relative to the change of the input quantity

relation a set of ordered pairs

set-builder notation a method of describing a set by a rule that all of its members obey; it takes the form

vertical compression a function transformation that compresses the function's graph vertically by multiplying the
    output by a constant

vertical line test a method of testing whether a graph represents a function by determining whether a vertical line
    intersects the graph no more than once

vertical reflection a transformation that reflects a function's graph across the x-axis by multiplying the output by
vertical shift a transformation that shifts a function's graph up or down by adding a positive or negative constant to

    the output
vertical stretch a transformation that stretches a function's graph vertically by multiplying the output by a constant

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3 · Chapter Review 311

Key Equations                  where is a constant

         Constant function
          Identity function
     Absolute value function
         Quadratic function

            Cubic function
        Reciprocal function
  Reciprocal squared function
       Square root function
         Cube root function

Average rate of change

Composite function

        Vertical shift               (up for        )
      Horizontal shift
    Vertical reflection              (right for        )
  Horizontal reflection
      Vertical stretch               (           )
  Vertical compression
    Horizontal stretch               (           )
Horizontal compression.

Key Concepts

3.1 Functions and Function Notation

· A relation is a set of ordered pairs. A function is a specific type of relation in which each domain value, or input,

leads to exactly one range value, or output. See Example 1 and Example 2.

· Function notation is a shorthand method for relating the input to the output in the form  See Example 3

and Example 4.

· In tabular form, a function can be represented by rows or columns that relate to input and output values. See
312 3 · Chapter Review

      Example 5.
  · To evaluate a function, we determine an output value for a corresponding input value. Algebraic forms of a function

      can be evaluated by replacing the input variable with a given value. See Example 6 and Example 7.
  · To solve for a specific function value, we determine the input values that yield the specific output value. See

      Example 8.
  · An algebraic form of a function can be written from an equation. See Example 9 and Example 10.
  · Input and output values of a function can be identified from a table. See Example 11.
  · Relating input values to output values on a graph is another way to evaluate a function. See Example 12.
  · A function is one-to-one if each output value corresponds to only one input value. See Example 13.
  · A graph represents a function if any vertical line drawn on the graph intersects the graph at no more than one

      point. See Example 14.
  · The graph of a one-to-one function passes the horizontal line test. See Example 15.

3.2 Domain and Range

  · The domain of a function includes all real input values that would not cause us to attempt an undefined
      mathematical operation, such as dividing by zero or taking the square root of a negative number.

  · The domain of a function can be determined by listing the input values of a set of ordered pairs. See Example 1.
  · The domain of a function can also be determined by identifying the input values of a function written as an

      equation. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4.
  · Interval values represented on a number line can be described using inequality notation, set-builder notation, and

      interval notation. See Example 5.
  · For many functions, the domain and range can be determined from a graph. See Example 6 and Example 7.
  · An understanding of toolkit functions can be used to find the domain and range of related functions. See Example 8,

      Example 9, and Example 10.
  · A piecewise function is described by more than one formula. See Example 11 and Example 12.
  · A piecewise function can be graphed using each algebraic formula on its assigned subdomain. See Example 13.

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs

  · A rate of change relates a change in an output quantity to a change in an input quantity. The average rate of change
      is determined using only the beginning and ending data. See Example 1.

  · Identifying points that mark the interval on a graph can be used to find the average rate of change. See Example 2.
  · Comparing pairs of input and output values in a table can also be used to find the average rate of change. See

      Example 3.
  · An average rate of change can also be computed by determining the function values at the endpoints of an interval

      described by a formula. See Example 4 and Example 5.
  · The average rate of change can sometimes be determined as an expression. See Example 6.
  · A function is increasing where its rate of change is positive and decreasing where its rate of change is negative. See

      Example 7.
  · A local maximum is where a function changes from increasing to decreasing and has an output value larger (more

      positive or less negative) than output values at neighboring input values.
  · A local minimum is where the function changes from decreasing to increasing (as the input increases) and has an

      output value smaller (more negative or less positive) than output values at neighboring input values.
  · Minima and maxima are also called extrema.
  · We can find local extrema from a graph. See Example 8 and Example 9.
  · The highest and lowest points on a graph indicate the maxima and minima. See Example 10.

3.4 Composition of Functions

  · We can perform algebraic operations on functions. See Example 1.
  · When functions are combined, the output of the first (inner) function becomes the input of the second (outer)

      function.
  · The function produced by combining two functions is a composite function. See Example 2 and Example 3.
  · The order of function composition must be considered when interpreting the meaning of composite functions. See

      Example 4.
  · A composite function can be evaluated by evaluating the inner function using the given input value and then

      evaluating the outer function taking as its input the output of the inner function.
  · A composite function can be evaluated from a table. See Example 5.
  · A composite function can be evaluated from a graph. See Example 6.
  · A composite function can be evaluated from a formula. See Example 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3 · Chapter Review 313

· The domain of a composite function consists of those inputs in the domain of the inner function that correspond to
    outputs of the inner function that are in the domain of the outer function. See Example 8 and Example 9.

· Just as functions can be combined to form a composite function, composite functions can be decomposed into
    simpler functions.

· Functions can often be decomposed in more than one way. See Example 10.

3.5 Transformation of Functions

· A function can be shifted vertically by adding a constant to the output. See Example 1 and Example 2.
· A function can be shifted horizontally by adding a constant to the input. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5.
· Relating the shift to the context of a problem makes it possible to compare and interpret vertical and horizontal

    shifts. See Example 6.
· Vertical and horizontal shifts are often combined. See Example 7 and Example 8.
· A vertical reflection reflects a graph about the axis. A graph can be reflected vertically by multiplying the output

    by -1.
· A horizontal reflection reflects a graph about the axis. A graph can be reflected horizontally by multiplying the

    input by -1.
· A graph can be reflected both vertically and horizontally. The order in which the reflections are applied does not

    affect the final graph. See Example 9.
· A function presented in tabular form can also be reflected by multiplying the values in the input and output rows or

    columns accordingly. See Example 10.
· A function presented as an equation can be reflected by applying transformations one at a time. See Example 11.
· Even functions are symmetric about the axis, whereas odd functions are symmetric about the origin.
· Even functions satisfy the condition
· Odd functions satisfy the condition
· A function can be odd, even, or neither. See Example 12.
· A function can be compressed or stretched vertically by multiplying the output by a constant. See Example 13,

    Example 14, and Example 15.
· A function can be compressed or stretched horizontally by multiplying the input by a constant. See Example 16,

    Example 17, and Example 18.
· The order in which different transformations are applied does affect the final function. Both vertical and horizontal

    transformations must be applied in the order given. However, a vertical transformation may be combined with a
    horizontal transformation in any order. See Example 19 and Example 20.

3.6 Absolute Value Functions

· Applied problems, such as ranges of possible values, can also be solved using the absolute value function. See
    Example 1.

· The graph of the absolute value function resembles a letter V. It has a corner point at which the graph changes
    direction. See Example 2.

· In an absolute value equation, an unknown variable is the input of an absolute value function.
· If the absolute value of an expression is set equal to a positive number, expect two solutions for the unknown

    variable. See Example 3.

3.7 Inverse Functions

· If  is the inverse of  then                           See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3.

· Only some of the toolkit functions have an inverse. See Example 4.

· For a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one (pass the horizontal line test).

· A function that is not one-to-one over its entire domain may be one-to-one on part of its domain.

· For a tabular function, exchange the input and output rows to obtain the inverse. See Example 5.

· The inverse of a function can be determined at specific points on its graph. See Example 6.

· To find the inverse of a formula, solve the equation  for as a function of Then exchange the labels

and See Example 7, Example 8, and Example 9.

· The graph of an inverse function is the reflection of the graph of the original function across the line  See

Example 10.
314 3 · Exercises

Exercises

Review Exercises

Functions and Function Notation

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation is a function.

1.                               2.         3.                                for the

                                                                            independent variable and

                                                                            the dependent variable

4. Is the graph in Figure 1 a
    function?

    Figure 1

For the following exercises, evaluate

5.                               6.

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are one-to-one.

7.                               8.

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine if the relation whose graph is provided is a function.

9.                                     10.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   3 · Exercises 315

11.

For the following exercises, graph the functions.

12.     13.

For the following exercises, use Figure 2 to approximate the values.

                                                   Figure 2

14.                                15.                                16. If  then solve for
17. If  then solve for

For the following exercises, use the function                to find the values in simplest form.

18.     19.

Domain and Range
For the following exercises, find the domain of each function, expressing answers using interval notation.

20.     21.                                                           22.
316 3 · Exercises

23. Graph this piecewise
      function:

Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of the functions from

24.                              25.         26.

For the following exercises, use the graphs to determine the intervals on which the functions are increasing, decreasing,
or constant.

27.                                     28.

29.                                     30. Find the local minimum of

                                             the function graphed in

                                             Exercise 3.27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3 · Exercises 317

31. Find the local extrema for     32. For the graph in Figure 3,   33. Find the absolute maximum of the
      the function graphed in                                             function graphed in Figure 3.
      Exercise 3.28.                    the domain of the function

                                        is          The range is

                                                    Find the

                                        absolute minimum of the

                                        function on this interval.

                                                                                  Figure 3

Composition of Functions

For the following exercises, find           and     for each pair of functions.
                                                                             36.
34.                                35.

37.                                38.

For the following exercises, find      and the domain for           for each pair of functions.
39.                                40.                                41.

42.

For the following exercises, express each function  as a composition of two functions and where

43.                                44.

Transformation of Functions

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the given function.

45.                                46.                              47.

48.                                49.                              50.

51.                                52.
318 3 · Exercises

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the function if the graph of the function is shown in Figure 4.

                                      Figure 4

53.                              54.

For the following exercises, write the equation for the standard function represented by each of the graphs below.

55.                              56.

For the following exercises, determine whether each function below is even, odd, or neither.

57.                              58.            59.

For the following exercises, analyze the graph and determine whether the graphed function is even, odd, or neither.

60.                              61.                 62.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       3 · Exercises 319

Absolute Value Functions

For the following exercises, write an equation for the transformation of

63.                                64.                            65.

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function.

66.                                67.                            68.

Inverse Functions                        for each function.
For the following exercises, find  70.
69.

For the following exercise, find a domain on which the function is one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain in
interval notation. Then find the inverse of restricted to that domain.

71.                                72. Given                 and

                                         Find  and

                                         What does the answer

                                        tell us about the
                                        relationship between
                                        and

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether each function is one-to-one.

73.                                74.                            75. If  find

76. If  find

Practice Test

For the following exercises, determine whether each of the following relations is a function.

1.                                 2.
320 3 · Exercises

For the following exercises, evaluate the function                   at the given input.

3.                                       4.                             5. Show that the function
                                                                                                              is

                                                                             not one-to-one.

6. Write the domain of the               7. Given              find  8. Graph the function
                                             form.  in simplest
     function                        in

     interval notation.

9. Find the average rate of
    change of the function
                                 by

     finding             in simplest

     form.

For the following exercises, use the functions                                      to find the composite functions.

10.                                      11.                         12. Express
                                                                                                        as a

                                                                           composition of two
                                                                           functions, and where

For the following exercises, graph the functions by translating, stretching, and/or compressing a toolkit function.

13.                                      14.

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are even, odd, or neither.

15.                                      16.                         17.

18. Graph the absolute value
      function

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function.

19.                                      20.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3 · Exercises 321

For the following exercises, use the graph of shown in Figure 1.

21. On what intervals is the                               Figure 1  23. Approximate the local
      function increasing?                                                 minimum of the function.
                                22. On what intervals is the               Express the answer as an
                                      function decreasing?                 ordered pair.

24. Approximate the local
      maximum of the function.
      Express the answer as an
      ordered pair.

For the following exercises, use the graph of the piecewise function shown in Figure 2.

                                          Figure 2

25. Find                        26. Find                             27. Write an equation for the
                                                                           piecewise function.

For the following exercises, use the values listed in Table 1.
                                                             01234 5 6 7 8
                                                             1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17

                                               Table 1
322 3 · Exercises                29. Solve the equation  30. Is the graph increasing or
                                                               decreasing on its domain?
28. Find
                                                         33. Given
31. Is the function represented  32. Find                      find
      by the graph one-to-one?

Access for free at openstax.org
                     4 · Introduction 323

4  LINEAR FUNCTIONS

A bamboo forest in China (credit: "JFXie"/Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Linear Functions
  4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions
  4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data

      Introduction to Linear Functions

Imagine placing a plant in the ground one day and finding that it has doubled its height just a few days later. Although it
may seem incredible, this can happen with certain types of bamboo species. These members of the grass family are the
fastest-growing plants in the world. One species of bamboo has been observed to grow nearly 1.5 inches every hour. 1
In a twenty-four hour period, this bamboo plant grows about 36 inches, or an incredible 3 feet! A constant rate of
change, such as the growth cycle of this bamboo plant, is a linear function.

Recall from Functions and Function Notation that a function is a relation that assigns to every element in the domain
exactly one element in the range. Linear functions are a specific type of function that can be used to model many real-
world applications, such as plant growth over time. In this chapter, we will explore linear functions, their graphs, and
how to relate them to data.

4.1 Linear Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Represent a linear function.
           Determine whether a linear function is increasing, decreasing, or constant.
           Interpret slope as a rate of change.
           Write and interpret an equation for a linear function.
           Graph linear functions.
           Determine whether lines are parallel or perpendicular.
           Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given line.

1 http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/records-3000/fastest-growing-plant/
324 4 · Linear Functions

                                           Figure 1 Shanghai MagLev Train (credit: "kanegen"/Flickr)

Just as with the growth of a bamboo plant, there are many situations that involve constant change over time. Consider,
for example, the first commercial maglev train in the world, the Shanghai MagLev Train (Figure 1). It carries passengers
comfortably for a 30-kilometer trip from the airport to the subway station in only eight minutes2 .

Suppose a maglev train travels a long distance, and maintains a constant speed of 83 meters per second for a period of
time once it is 250 meters from the station. How can we analyze the train's distance from the station as a function of
time? In this section, we will investigate a kind of function that is useful for this purpose, and use it to investigate real-
world situations such as the train's distance from the station at a given point in time.

Representing Linear Functions

The function describing the train's motion is a linear function, which is defined as a function with a constant rate of
change. This is a polynomial of degree 1. There are several ways to represent a linear function, including word form,
function notation, tabular form, and graphical form. We will describe the train's motion as a function using each method.

Representing a Linear Function in Word Form

Let's begin by describing the linear function in words. For the train problem we just considered, the following word
sentence may be used to describe the function relationship.

  · The train's distance from the station is a function of the time during which the train moves at a constant speed plus
      its original distance from the station when it began moving at constant speed.

The speed is the rate of change. Recall that a rate of change is a measure of how quickly the dependent variable changes
with respect to the independent variable. The rate of change for this example is constant, which means that it is the
same for each input value. As the time (input) increases by 1 second, the corresponding distance (output) increases by
83 meters. The train began moving at this constant speed at a distance of 250 meters from the station.

Representing a Linear Function in Function Notation

Another approach to representing linear functions is by using function notation. One example of function notation is an
equation written in the slope-intercept form of a line, where is the input value, is the rate of change, and is the
initial value of the dependent variable.

In the example of the train, we might use the notation  where the total distance is a function of the time The

rate, is 83 meters per second. The initial value of the dependent variable is the original distance from the station,

250 meters. We can write a generalized equation to represent the motion of the train.

Representing a Linear Function in Tabular Form

A third method of representing a linear function is through the use of a table. The relationship between the distance
from the station and the time is represented in Figure 2. From the table, we can see that the distance changes by 83
meters for every 1 second increase in time.

2 http://www.chinahighlights.com/shanghai/transportation/maglev-train.htm
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     4.1 · Linear Functions 325

Q&A          Figure 2 Tabular representation of the function showing selected input and output values
              Can the input in the previous example be any real number?

              No. The input represents time so while nonnegative rational and irrational numbers are possible, negative
              real numbers are not possible for this example. The input consists of non-negative real numbers.

Representing a Linear Function in Graphical Form

Another way to represent linear functions is visually, using a graph. We can use the function relationship from above,
                          to draw a graph as represented in Figure 3. Notice the graph is a line. When we plot a linear function,

the graph is always a line.

The rate of change, which is constant, determines the slant, or slope of the line. The point at which the input value is zero

is the vertical intercept, or y-intercept, of the line. We can see from the graph that the y-intercept in the train example we

just saw is      and represents the distance of the train from the station when it began moving at a constant speed.

Figure 3 The graph of  . Graphs of linear functions are lines because the rate of change is constant.

Notice that the graph of the train example is restricted, but this is not always the case. Consider the graph of the line
                     Ask yourself what numbers can be input to the function. In other words, what is the domain of the

function? The domain is comprised of all real numbers because any number may be doubled, and then have one added
to the product.

Linear Function

A linear function is a function whose graph is a line. Linear functions can be written in the slope-intercept form of a
line

where is the initial or starting value of the function (when input,  ), and is the constant rate of change, or
slope of the function. The y-intercept is at

EXAMPLE 1

Using a Linear Function to Find the Pressure on a Diver

The pressure, in pounds per square inch (PSI) on the diver in Figure 4 depends upon her depth below the water

surface, in feet. This relationship may be modeled by the equation,  Restate this function in

words.
326 4 · Linear Functions

                                                          Figure 4 (credit: Ilse Reijs and Jan-Noud Hutten)
            Solution
       To restate the function in words, we need to describe each part of the equation. The pressure as a function of depth
       equals four hundred thirty-four thousandths times depth plus fourteen and six hundred ninety-six thousandths.
            Analysis
       The initial value, 14.696, is the pressure in PSI on the diver at a depth of 0 feet, which is the surface of the water. The rate
       of change, or slope, is 0.434 PSI per foot. This tells us that the pressure on the diver increases 0.434 PSI for each foot her
       depth increases.

     Determining Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant

       The linear functions we used in the two previous examples increased over time, but not every linear function does. A
       linear function may be increasing, decreasing, or constant. For an increasing function, as with the train example, the
       output values increase as the input values increase. The graph of an increasing function has a positive slope. A line with
       a positive slope slants upward from left to right as in Figure 5(a). For a decreasing function, the slope is negative. The
       output values decrease as the input values increase. A line with a negative slope slants downward from left to right as in
       Figure 5(b). If the function is constant, the output values are the same for all input values so the slope is zero. A line with
       a slope of zero is horizontal as in Figure 5(c).

                                                                                     Figure 5
         Increasing and Decreasing Functions
         The slope determines if the function is an increasing linear function, a decreasing linear function, or a constant

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       4.1 · Linear Functions 327

function.

                is an increasing function if
                is a decreasing function if
                is a constant function if

EXAMPLE 2

Deciding Whether a Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant

Studies from the early 2010s indicated that teens sent about 60 texts a day, while more recent data indicates much
higher messaging rates among all users, particularly considering the various apps with which people can
communicate.3 . For each of the following scenarios, find the linear function that describes the relationship between the
input value and the output value. Then, determine whether the graph of the function is increasing, decreasing, or
constant.

 The total number of texts a teen sends is considered a function of time in days. The input is the number of days,

and output is the total number of texts sent.

 A person has a limit of 500 texts per month in their data plan. The input is the number of days, and output is the

total number of texts remaining for the month.

 A person has an unlimited number of texts in their data plan for a cost of $50 per month. The input is the number

of days, and output is the total cost of texting each month.
     Solution

Analyze each function.

 The function can be represented as           where is the number of days. The slope, 60, is positive so the

function is increasing. This makes sense because the total number of texts increases with each day.

 The function can be represented as           where is the number of days. In this case, the slope is

negative so the function is decreasing. This makes sense because the number of texts remaining decreases each day

and this function represents the number of texts remaining in the data plan after days.

 The cost function can be represented as      because the number of days does not affect the total cost. The

slope is 0 so the function is constant.

Interpreting Slope as a Rate of Change

In the examples we have seen so far, the slope was provided to us. However, we often need to calculate the slope given

input and output values. Recall that given two values for the input, and and two corresponding values for the

output, and --which can be represented by a set of points,        and  --we can calculate the slope

Note that in function notation we can obtain two corresponding values for the output and for the function

           and  so we could equivalently write

Figure 6 indicates how the slope of the line between the points,  and  is calculated. Recall that the slope

measures steepness, or slant. The greater the absolute value of the slope, the steeper the slant is.

3 http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-501465_162-57400228-501465/teens-are-sending-60-texts-a-day-study-says/
328 4 · Linear Functions

Figure 6 The slope of a function is calculated by the change in divided by the change in It does not matter which

coordinate is used as the         and which is the  as long as each calculation is started with the elements from

the same coordinate pair.

    Q&A Are the units for slope always

               Yes. Think of the units as the change of output value for each unit of change in input value. An example of
               slope could be miles per hour or dollars per day. Notice the units appear as a ratio of units for the output
               per units for the input.

    Calculate Slope
    The slope, or rate of change, of a function can be calculated according to the following:

    where and are input values, and are output values.

               ...

                  HOW TO

    Given two points from a linear function, calculate and interpret the slope.
     1. Determine the units for output and input values.
     2. Calculate the change of output values and change of input values.
     3. Interpret the slope as the change in output values per unit of the input value.

    EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Slope of a Linear Function

If  is a linear function, and          and  are points on the line, find the slope. Is this function increasing or

decreasing?

     Solution                     and       To find the rate of change, we divide the change in output by the change in
The coordinate pairs are
input.

We could also write the slope as        The function is increasing because

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Linear Functions 329

     Analysis
As noted earlier, the order in which we write the points does not matter when we compute the slope of the line as long
as the first output value, or y-coordinate, used corresponds with the first input value, or x-coordinate, used. Note that if
we had reversed them, we would have obtained the same slope.

TRY IT #1  If  is a linear function, and       and  are points on the line, find the slope. Is this

           function increasing or decreasing?

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Population Change from a Linear Function
The population of a city increased from 23,400 to 27,800 between 2008 and 2012. Find the change of population per year
if we assume the change was constant from 2008 to 2012.

     Solution
The rate of change relates the change in population to the change in time. The population increased by

                                    people over the four-year time interval. To find the rate of change, divide the change in the
number of people by the number of years.

So the population increased by 1,100 people per year.

     Analysis
Because we are told that the population increased, we would expect the slope to be positive. This positive slope we
calculated is therefore reasonable.

TRY IT #2  The population of a small town increased from 1,442 to 1,868 between 2009 and 2012. Find the
           change of population per year if we assume the change was constant from 2009 to 2012.

Writing and Interpreting an Equation for a Linear Function

Recall from Equations and Inequalities that we wrote equations in both the slope-intercept form and the point-slope
form. Now we can choose which method to use to write equations for linear functions based on the information we are
given. That information may be provided in the form of a graph, a point and a slope, two points, and so on. Look at the
graph of the function in Figure 7.

                                          Figure 7
330 4 · Linear Functions

       We are not given the slope of the line, but we can choose any two points on the line to find the slope. Let's choose
       and

Now we can substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form.
If we want to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form, we would find

If we want to find the slope-intercept form without first writing the point-slope form, we could have recognized that the

line crosses the y-axis when the output value is 7. Therefore,  We now have the initial value and the slope so

we can substitute and into the slope-intercept form of a line.

So the function is               and the linear equation would be

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the graph of a linear function, write an equation to represent the function.

 1. Identify two points on the line.
 2. Use the two points to calculate the slope.
 3. Determine where the line crosses the y-axis to identify the y-intercept by visual inspection.
 4. Substitute the slope and y-intercept into the slope-intercept form of a line equation.

EXAMPLE 5

Writing an Equation for a Linear Function                 shown in Figure 8.
Write an equation for a linear function given a graph of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.1 · Linear Functions 331

                                               Figure 8

Solution

Identify two points on the line, such as  and  Use the points to calculate the slope.

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form.

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form.

     Analysis                                                                                    which is the
This makes sense because we can see from Figure 9 that the line crosses the y-axis at the point
y-intercept, so
332 4 · Linear Functions

                                                    Figure 9

EXAMPLE 6

Writing an Equation for a Linear Cost Function

Suppose Ben starts a company in which he incurs a fixed cost of $1,250 per month for the overhead, which includes his

office rent. His production costs are $37.50 per item. Write a linear function where      is the cost for items

produced in a given month.

Solution

The fixed cost is present every month, $1,250. The costs that can vary include the cost to produce each item, which is

$37.50. The variable cost, called the marginal cost, is represented by  The cost Ben incurs is the sum of these two

costs, represented by

     Analysis
If Ben produces 100 items in a month, his monthly cost is found by substituting 100 for

So his monthly cost would be $5,000.

EXAMPLE 7

Writing an Equation for a Linear Function Given Two Points

If is a linear function, with         and           find an equation for the function in slope-intercept form.

     Solution
We can write the given points using coordinates.

We can then use the points to calculate the slope.

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    4.1 · Linear Functions 333

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form.

      TRY IT #3 If  is a linear function, with  and                                 write an equation for the function in

           slope-intercept form.

Modeling Real-World Problems with Linear Functions

In the real world, problems are not always explicitly stated in terms of a function or represented with a graph.
Fortunately, we can analyze the problem by first representing it as a linear function and then interpreting the
components of the function. As long as we know, or can figure out, the initial value and the rate of change of a linear
function, we can solve many different kinds of real-world problems.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a linear function and the initial value and rate of change, evaluate

 1. Determine the initial value and the rate of change (slope).
 2. Substitute the values into
 3. Evaluate the function at

EXAMPLE 8

Using a Linear Function to Determine the Number of Songs in a Music Collection
Marcus currently has 200 songs in his music collection. Every month, he adds 15 new songs. Write a formula for the
number of songs, in his collection as a function of time, the number of months. How many songs will he own at the
end of one year?

     Solution                                                                       which means that
The initial value for this function is 200 because he currently owns 200 songs, so

The number of songs increases by 15 songs per month, so the rate of change is 15 songs per month. Therefore we know

that       We can substitute the initial value and the rate of change into the slope-intercept form of a line.

                                                                             Figure 10

We can write the formula

With this formula, we can then predict how many songs Marcus will have at the end of one year (12 months). In other
words, we can evaluate the function at
334 4 · Linear Functions

Marcus will have 380 songs in 12 months.

     Analysis
Notice that N is an increasing linear function. As the input (the number of months) increases, the output (number of
songs) increases as well.

EXAMPLE 9

Using a Linear Function to Calculate Salary Based on Commission

Working as an insurance salesperson, Ilya earns a base salary plus a commission on each new policy. Therefore, Ilya's

weekly income depends on the number of new policies, he sells during the week. Last week he sold 3 new policies,

and earned $760 for the week. The week before, he sold 5 new policies and earned $920. Find an equation for      and

interpret the meaning of the components of the equation.

Solution

The given information gives us two input-output pairs:       and     We start by finding the rate of change.

Keeping track of units can help us interpret this quantity. Income increased by $160 when the number of policies
increased by 2, so the rate of change is $80 per policy. Therefore, Ilya earns a commission of $80 for each policy sold
during the week.
We can then solve for the initial value.

                                                                   

The value of is the starting value for the function and represents Ilya's income when   or when no new policies

are sold. We can interpret this as Ilya's base salary for the week, which does not depend upon the number of policies

sold.

We can now write the final equation.

Our final interpretation is that Ilya's base salary is $520 per week and he earns an additional $80 commission for each
policy sold.

  EXAMPLE 10

Using Tabular Form to Write an Equation for a Linear Function
Table 1 relates the number of rats in a population to time, in weeks. Use the table to write a linear equation.

                                 number of weeks, w       0       2  4               6

                                 number of rats, P(w) 1000 1080 1160 1240

                                 Table 1

     Solution
We can see from the table that the initial value for the number of rats is 1000, so

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.1 · Linear Functions 335

Rather than solving for we can tell from looking at the table that the population increases by 80 for every 2 weeks that
pass. This means that the rate of change is 80 rats per 2 weeks, which can be simplified to 40 rats per week.

If we did not notice the rate of change from the table we could still solve for the slope using any two points from the

table. For example, using  and

Q&A  Is the initial value always provided in a table of values like Table 1?

     No. Sometimes the initial value is provided in a table of values, but sometimes it is not. If you see an input

     of 0, then the initial value would be the corresponding output. If the initial value is not provided because

     there is no value of input on the table equal to 0, find the slope, substitute one coordinate pair and the

     slope into                          and solve for

TRY IT #4    A new plant food was introduced to a young tree to test its effect on the height of the tree. Table 2

             shows the height of the tree, in feet, months since the measurements began. Write a linear

             function,     where is the number of months since the start of the experiment.

                                         x              0          2       4         8  12

                                         H(x) 12.5 13.5 14.5 16.5 18.5

                                         Table 2

Graphing Linear Functions

Now that we've seen and interpreted graphs of linear functions, let's take a look at how to create the graphs. There are
three basic methods of graphing linear functions. The first is by plotting points and then drawing a line through the
points. The second is by using the y-intercept and slope. And the third method is by using transformations of the identity
function

Graphing a Function by Plotting Points

To find points of a function, we can choose input values, evaluate the function at these input values, and calculate output

values. The input values and corresponding output values form coordinate pairs. We then plot the coordinate pairs on a

grid. In general, we should evaluate the function at a minimum of two inputs in order to find at least two points on the

graph. For example, given the function,  we might use the input values 1 and 2. Evaluating the function for an

input value of 1 yields an output value of 2, which is represented by the point      Evaluating the function for an input

value of 2 yields an output value of 4, which is represented by the point        Choosing three points is often advisable

because if all three points do not fall on the same line, we know we made an error.

...

     HOW TO

Given a linear function, graph by plotting points.

 1. Choose a minimum of two input values.
 2. Evaluate the function at each input value.
 3. Use the resulting output values to identify coordinate pairs.
 4. Plot the coordinate pairs on a grid.
 5. Draw a line through the points.
336 4 · Linear Functions

EXAMPLE 11

Graphing by Plotting Points

Graph                     by plotting points.

     Solution
Begin by choosing input values. This function includes a fraction with a denominator of 3, so let's choose multiples of 3
as input values. We will choose 0, 3, and 6.

Evaluate the function at each input value, and use the output value to identify coordinate pairs.

Plot the coordinate pairs and draw a line through the points. Figure 11 represents the graph of the function

                                          Figure 11 The graph of the linear function

     Analysis
The graph of the function is a line as expected for a linear function. In addition, the graph has a downward slant, which
indicates a negative slope. This is also expected from the negative, constant rate of change in the equation for the
function.

TRY IT #5 Graph                                by plotting points.

Graphing a Function Using y-intercept and Slope

Another way to graph linear functions is by using specific characteristics of the function rather than plotting points. The
first characteristic is its y-intercept, which is the point at which the input value is zero. To find the y-intercept, we can set

        in the equation.

The other characteristic of the linear function is its slope.

Let's consider the following function.

The slope is Because the slope is positive, we know the graph will slant upward from left to right. The y-intercept is

the point on the graph when      The graph crosses the y-axis at            Now we know the slope and the y-intercept.

We can begin graphing by plotting the point    We know that the slope is the change in the y-coordinate over the

change in the x-coordinate. This is commonly referred to as rise over run,         From our example, we have

which means that the rise is 1 and the run is 2. So starting from our y-intercept  we can rise 1 and then run 2, or

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Linear Functions 337

run 2 and then rise 1. We repeat until we have a few points, and then we draw a line through the points as shown in
Figure 12.

                                               Figure 12

Graphical Interpretation of a Linear Function

In the equation

· is the y-intercept of the graph and indicates the point             at which the graph crosses the y-axis.

· is the slope of the line and indicates the vertical displacement (rise) and horizontal displacement (run)

between each successive pair of points. Recall the formula for the slope:

Q&A         Do all linear functions have y-intercepts?

            Yes. All linear functions cross the y-axis and therefore have y-intercepts. (Note: A vertical line is parallel to
            the y-axis does not have a y-intercept, but it is not a function.)

       ...

            HOW TO

Given the equation for a linear function, graph the function using the y-intercept and slope.

 1. Evaluate the function at an input value of zero to find the y-intercept.
 2. Identify the slope as the rate of change of the input value.
 3. Plot the point represented by the y-intercept.
 4. Use to determine at least two more points on the line.
 5. Sketch the line that passes through the points.

EXAMPLE 12

Graphing by Using the y-intercept and Slope

Graph                     using the y-intercept and slope.

     Solution             to find the y-intercept. The output value when    is 5, so the graph will cross the y-axis
Evaluate the function at
at

According to the equation for the function, the slope of the line is  This tells us that for each vertical decrease in the

"rise" of units, the "run" increases by 3 units in the horizontal direction. We can now graph the function by first

plotting the y-intercept on the graph in Figure 13. From the initial value  we move down 2 units and to the right 3

units. We can extend the line to the left and right by repeating, and then drawing a line through the points.
338 4 · Linear Functions

    Figure 13 Graph of                              and shows how to calculate the rise over run for the slope.

     Analysis
The graph slants downward from left to right, which means it has a negative slope as expected.

    TRY IT #6 Find a point on the graph we drew in Example 12 that has a negative x-value.

Graphing a Function Using Transformations

Another option for graphing is to use a transformation of the identity function  A function may be transformed

by a shift up, down, left, or right. A function may also be transformed using a reflection, stretch, or compression.

Vertical Stretch or Compression

In the equation                  the is acting as the vertical stretch or compression of the identity function. When is

negative, there is also a vertical reflection of the graph. Notice in Figure 14 that multiplying the equation of         by

    stretches the graph of by a factor of units if  and compresses the graph of by a factor of units if

    This means the larger the absolute value of the steeper the slope.

                 Figure 14 Vertical stretches and compressions and reflections on the function

Vertical Shift

In                        the acts as the vertical shift, moving the graph up and down without affecting the slope of the line.

Notice in Figure 15 that adding a value of to the equation of  shifts the graph of a total of units up if is

positive and units down if is negative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.1 · Linear Functions 339

                                  Figure 15 This graph illustrates vertical shifts of the function
Using vertical stretches or compressions along with vertical shifts is another way to look at identifying different types of
linear functions. Although this may not be the easiest way to graph this type of function, it is still important to practice
each method.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the equation of a linear function, use transformations to graph the linear function in the form

   1. Graph
   2. Vertically stretch or compress the graph by a factor
   3. Shift the graph up or down units.

EXAMPLE 13

Graphing by Using Transformations

Graph       using transformations.

Solution

The equation for the function shows that  so the identity function is vertically compressed by The equation for

the function also shows that  so the identity function is vertically shifted down 3 units. First, graph the identity

function, and show the vertical compression as in Figure 16.

                                          Figure 16 The function,  compressed by a factor of .
Then show the vertical shift as in Figure 17.
340 4 · Linear Functions

                          Figure 17 The function  shifted down 3 units.

TRY IT #7 Graph                            using transformations.

Q&A  In Example 15, could we have sketched the graph by reversing the order of the transformations?

     No. The order of the transformations follows the order of operations. When the function is evaluated at a
     given input, the corresponding output is calculated by following the order of operations. This is why we
     performed the compression first. For example, following the order: Let the input be 2.

Writing the Equation for a Function from the Graph of a Line

Earlier, we wrote the equation for a linear function from a graph. Now we can extend what we know about graphing

linear functions to analyze graphs a little more closely. Begin by taking a look at Figure 18. We can see right away that

the graph crosses the y-axis at the point  so this is the y-intercept.

                                                                             Figure 18
Then we can calculate the slope by finding the rise and run. We can choose any two points, but let's look at the point

           To get from this point to the y-intercept, we must move up 4 units (rise) and to the right 2 units (run). So the
slope must be

Substituting the slope and y-intercept into the slope-intercept form of a line gives

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.1 · Linear Functions 341

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a graph of linear function, find the equation to describe the function.

 1. Identify the y-intercept of an equation.
 2. Choose two points to determine the slope.
 3. Substitute the y-intercept and slope into the slope-intercept form of a line.

EXAMPLE 14

Matching Linear Functions to Their Graphs
Match each equation of the linear functions with one of the lines in Figure 19.

                                                                

                                                   Figure 19

     Solution
Analyze the information for each function.

 This function has a slope of 2 and a y-intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward from

left to right. We can use two points to find the slope, or we can compare it with the other functions listed. Function

has the same slope, but a different y-intercept. Lines I and III have the same slant because they have the same slope.

Line III does not pass through  so must be represented by line I.

 This function also has a slope of 2, but a y-intercept of      It must pass through the point  and slant

upward from left to right. It must be represented by line III.

 This function has a slope of -2 and a y-intercept of 3. This is the only function listed with a negative slope, so it

must be represented by line IV because it slants downward from left to right.

 This function has a slope of and a y-intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward from
left to right. Lines I and II pass through         but the slope of is less than the slope of so the line for must be

flatter. This function is represented by Line II.

Now we can re-label the lines as in Figure 20.
342 4 · Linear Functions

                                           Figure 20

Finding the x-intercept of a Line

So far we have been finding the y-intercepts of a function: the point at which the graph of the function crosses the y-axis.
Recall that a function may also have an x-intercept, which is the x-coordinate of the point where the graph of the
function crosses the x-axis. In other words, it is the input value when the output value is zero.

To find the x-intercept, set a function    equal to zero and solve for the value of For example, consider the function
shown.

Set the function equal to 0 and solve for

The graph of the function crosses the x-axis at the point

Q&A Do all linear functions have x-intercepts?

No. However, linear functions of the form                  where  is a nonzero real number are the only examples
                                                                   is a horizontal line 5 units above the x-axis. This
of linear functions with no x-intercept. For example,

function has no x-intercepts, as shown in Figure 21.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    4.1 · Linear Functions 343

  x-intercept                                        Figure 21
  The x-intercept of the function is value of when  It can be solved by the equation

  EXAMPLE 15
Finding an x-intercept
Find the x-intercept of

     Solution
Set the function equal to zero to solve for

The graph crosses the x-axis at the point                                          as we expected.

     Analysis
A graph of the function is shown in Figure 22. We can see that the x-intercept is
344 4 · Linear Functions

                                                      Figure 22

TRY IT #8 Find the x-intercept of

Describing Horizontal and Vertical Lines

There are two special cases of lines on a graph--horizontal and vertical lines. A horizontal line indicates a constant

output, or y-value. In Figure 23, we see that the output has a value of 2 for every input value. The change in outputs

between any two points, therefore, is 0. In the slope formula, the numerator is 0, so the slope is 0. If we use         in the

equation                  the equation simplifies to  In other words, the value of the function is a constant. This

graph represents the function

                                        Figure 23 A horizontal line representing the function
A vertical line indicates a constant input, or x-value. We can see that the input value for every point on the line is 2, but
the output value varies. Because this input value is mapped to more than one output value, a vertical line does not
represent a function. Notice that between any two points, the change in the input values is zero. In the slope formula,
the denominator will be zero, so the slope of a vertical line is undefined.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            4.1 · Linear Functions 345

Figure 24 Example of how a line has a vertical slope. 0 in the denominator of the slope.

A vertical line, such as the one in Figure 25, has an x-intercept, but no y-intercept unless it's the line  This graph
represents the line

Figure 25 The vertical line,                          which does not represent a function

Horizontal and Vertical Lines

Lines can be horizontal or vertical.
A horizontal line is a line defined by an equation in the form
A vertical line is a line defined by an equation in the form

  EXAMPLE 16

Writing the Equation of a Horizontal Line
Write the equation of the line graphed in Figure 26.
346 4 · Linear Functions

     Solution                                                 Figure 26
For any x-value, the y-value is  so the equation is

  EXAMPLE 17

Writing the Equation of a Vertical Line
Write the equation of the line graphed in Figure 27.

                                                      Figure 27

     Solution             so the equation is
The constant x-value is

Determining Whether Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular

The two lines in Figure 28 are parallel lines: they will never intersect. They have exactly the same steepness, which means
their slopes are identical. The only difference between the two lines is the y-intercept. If we shifted one line vertically
toward the other, they would become coincident.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       4.1 · Linear Functions 347

                                                                    Figure 28 Parallel lines
We can determine from their equations whether two lines are parallel by comparing their slopes. If the slopes are the
same and the y-intercepts are different, the lines are parallel. If the slopes are different, the lines are not parallel.

Unlike parallel lines, perpendicular lines do intersect. Their intersection forms a right, or 90-degree, angle. The two lines
in Figure 29 are perpendicular.

                          Figure 29 Perpendicular lines

Perpendicular lines do not have the same slope. The slopes of perpendicular lines are different from one another in a

specific way. The slope of one line is the negative reciprocal of the slope of the other line. The product of a number and

its reciprocal is So, if  are negative reciprocals of one another, they can be multiplied together to yield

To find the reciprocal of a number, divide 1 by the number. So the reciprocal of 8 is  and the reciprocal of is 8. To
find the negative reciprocal, first find the reciprocal and then change the sign.

As with parallel lines, we can determine whether two lines are perpendicular by comparing their slopes, assuming that
the lines are neither horizontal nor vertical. The slope of each line below is the negative reciprocal of the other so the
lines are perpendicular.
348 4 · Linear Functions

The product of the slopes is -1.

Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Two lines are parallel lines if they do not intersect. The slopes of the lines are the same.

If and only if            and         we say the lines coincide. Coincident lines are the same line.

Two lines are perpendicular lines if they intersect to form a right angle.

  EXAMPLE 18

Identifying Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Given the functions below, identify the functions whose graphs are a pair of parallel lines and a pair of perpendicular
lines.

Solution

Parallel lines have the same slope. Because the functions    and                              each have a slope of 2, they

represent parallel lines. Perpendicular lines have negative reciprocal slopes. Because -2 and are negative reciprocals,

the functions                    and         represent perpendicular lines.

     Analysis
A graph of the lines is shown in Figure 30.

                                                  Figure 30

The graph shows that the lines               and           are parallel, and the lines                and

                are perpendicular.

Writing the Equation of a Line Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line

If we know the equation of a line, we can use what we know about slope to write the equation of a line that is either

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       4.1 · Linear Functions 349

parallel or perpendicular to the given line.

Writing Equations of Parallel Lines

Suppose for example, we are given the equation shown.

We know that the slope of the line formed by the function is 3. We also know that the y-intercept is   Any other line

with a slope of 3 will be parallel to    So the lines formed by all of the following functions will be parallel to

Suppose then we want to write the equation of a line that is parallel to and passes through the point               This type of

problem is often described as a point-slope problem because we have a point and a slope. In our example, we know that

the slope is 3. We need to determine which value of will give the correct line. We can begin with the point-slope form of

an equation for a line, and then rewrite it in the slope-intercept form.

So          is parallel to                 and passes through the point

    ...

         HOW TO

Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph passes, write the equation of a line
parallel to the given line that passes through the given point.

 1. Find the slope of the function.
 2. Substitute the given values into either the general point-slope equation or the slope-intercept equation for a line.
 3. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 19

Finding a Line Parallel to a Given Line    that passes through the point
Find a line parallel to the graph of

     Solution                                                                                         and           into
The slope of the given line is 3. If we choose the slope-intercept form, we can substitute
the slope-intercept form to find the y-intercept.

The line parallel to  that passes through  is

     Analysis
We can confirm that the two lines are parallel by graphing them. Figure 31 shows that the two lines will never intersect.
350 4 · Linear Functions

                                               Figure 31

Writing Equations of Perpendicular Lines

We can use a very similar process to write the equation for a line perpendicular to a given line. Instead of using the same
slope, however, we use the negative reciprocal of the given slope. Suppose we are given the function shown.

The slope of the line is 2, and its negative reciprocal is Any function with a slope of  will be perpendicular to
So the lines formed by all of the following functions will be perpendicular to

As before, we can narrow down our choices for a particular perpendicular line if we know that it passes through a given

point. Suppose then we want to write the equation of a line that is perpendicular to     and passes through the point

    We already know that the slope is Now we can use the point to find the y-intercept by substituting the given

values into the slope-intercept form of a line and solving for

The equation for the function with a slope of and a y-intercept of 2 is

So                        is perpendicular to  and passes through the point              Be aware that perpendicular

lines may not look obviously perpendicular on a graphing calculator unless we use the square zoom feature.

    Q&A  A horizontal line has a slope of zero and a vertical line has an undefined slope. These two lines are
         perpendicular, but the product of their slopes is not -1. Doesn't this fact contradict the definition of
         perpendicular lines?

         No. For two perpendicular linear functions, the product of their slopes is -1. However, a vertical line is not
         a function so the definition is not contradicted.

    ...

         HOW TO

Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph passes, write the equation of a line

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.1 · Linear Functions 351

perpendicular to the given line.

 1. Find the slope of the function.
 2. Determine the negative reciprocal of the slope.
 3. Substitute the new slope and the values for and from the coordinate pair provided into
 4. Solve for
 5. Write the equation of the line.

EXAMPLE 20

Finding the Equation of a Perpendicular Line          that passes through the point
Find the equation of a line perpendicular to

Solution

The original line has slope  so the slope of the perpendicular line will be its negative reciprocal, or  Using this

slope and the given point, we can find the equation of the line.

The line perpendicular to    that passes through  is

     Analysis
A graph of the two lines is shown in Figure 32.

                                                                             Figure 32

Note that that if we graph perpendicular lines on a graphing calculator using standard zoom, the lines may not appear
to be perpendicular. Adjusting the window will make it possible to zoom in further to see the intersection more closely.

TRY IT #9 Given the function                  write an equation for the line passing through             that is

               parallel to     perpendicular to

    ...

         HOW TO

Given two points on a line and a third point, write the equation of the perpendicular line that passes through
the point.

 1. Determine the slope of the line passing through the points.
 2. Find the negative reciprocal of the slope.
352 4 · Linear Functions

3. Use the slope-intercept form or point-slope form to write the equation by substituting the known values.
4. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 21

Finding the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line Passing through a Point

A line passes through the points  and       Find the equation of a perpendicular line that passes through the

point

     Solution
From the two points of the given line, we can calculate the slope of that line.

Find the negative reciprocal of the slope.

We can then solve for the y-intercept of the line passing through the point

The equation for the line that is perpendicular to the line passing through the two given points and also passes through

point  is

TRY IT #10                A line passes through the points,  and                 Find the equation of a perpendicular line
                          that passes through the point,

MEDIA

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with linear functions.

Linear Functions (http://openstax.org/l/linearfunctions)
Finding Input of Function from the Output and Graph (http://openstax.org/l/findinginput)
Graphing Functions using Tables (http://openstax.org/l/graphwithtable)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           4.1 · Linear Functions 353

        4.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Terry is skiing down a steep   2. Jessica is walking home           3. A boat is 100 miles away
    hill. Terry's elevation,          from a friend's house. After         from the marina, sailing
    in feet after seconds is          2 minutes she is 1.4 miles           directly toward it at 10 miles
    given by                          from home. Twelve minutes            per hour. Write an equation
    Write a complete sentence         after leaving, she is 0.9 miles      for the distance of the boat
    describing Terry's starting       from home. What is her rate          from the marina after t
    elevation and how it is           in miles per hour?                   hours.
    changing over time.

4. If the graphs of two linear    5. If a horizontal line has the
    functions are perpendicular,
    describe the relationship          equation  and a
    between the slopes and the
    y-intercepts.                      vertical line has the

                                       equation  what is the

                                       point of intersection?

                                       Explain why what you found

                                       is the point of intersection.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation of the curve can be written as a linear function.

6.                                7.                                   8.

9.                                10.                                  11.

12.                               13.

For the following exercises, determine whether each function is increasing or decreasing.

14.                               15.                                  16.

17.                               18.                                  19.

20.                               21.                                  22.

23.

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes through the two given points.

24.  and                          25.  and                             26.  and

27.  and                          28.  and
354 4 · Linear Functions

For the following exercises, given each set of information, find a linear equation satisfying the conditions, if possible.

29.                       and         30.  and                          31. Passes through  and

32. Passes through               and 33. Passes through             and 34. Passes through  and

35. x intercept at             and y  36. x intercept at  and y
      intercept at                          intercept at

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or
neither.

37.                                   38.                               39.

40.

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts of each equation.

41.                                   42.                               43.

44.                                   45.                               46.

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of each pair of lines given below to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2.
Is each pair of lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither?

47. Line 1: Passes through            48. Line 1: Passes through        49. Line 1: Passes through
              and                                          and                        and

     Line 2: Passes through                Line 2: Passes through            Line 2: Passes through
                 and                                   and                           and

50. Line 1: Passes through            51. Line 1: Passes through
              and                                   and

      Line 2: Passes through                Line 2: Passes through
                   and                                and

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line described.

52. Write an equation for a line      53. Write an equation for a line  54. Write an equation for a line
      parallel to                           parallel to                       perpendicular to
      and passing through the               and passing through the                                and passing
      point                                 point                             through the point

55. Write an equation for a line
      perpendicular to
                         and passing
      through the point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.1 · Linear Functions 355

Graphical

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line graphed.

56.        57.

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line graphed.

58.        59.                                                        60.

61.        62.                                                        63.
356 4 · Linear Functions

       For the following exercises, match the given linear equation with its graph in Figure 33.

                                                       Figure 33

64.                              65.                                 66.

67.                              68.                                 69.

For the following exercises, sketch a line with the given features.

70. An x-intercept of            71. An x-intercept    and 72. A y-intercept of                   and
      and y-intercept of               y-intercept of
                                                                          slope

73. A y-intercept of      and 74. Passing through the points 75. Passing through the points
      slope
                                      and                                        and

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each equation.

76.                              77.                                 78.

79.                              80.                                 81.

82.                              83.                                 84.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      4.1 · Linear Functions 357

For the following exercises, write the equation of the line shown in the graph.

85.                     86.                                                      87.

88.

Numeric

For the following exercises, which of the tables could represent a linear function? For each that could be linear, find a
linear equation that models the data.

89.                     90.                                                      91.

         0 5 10 15           0 5 10 15                                                0 5 10 15

         5 -10 -25 -40       5 30 105 230                                             -5 20 45 70

92.                     93.                 94.

         5 10 20 25          02  4  6                                                 2 4 8 10

         13 28 58 73         6 -19 -44 -69                                            13 23 43 53

95.                     96.

         2468                02 6   8

         -4 16 36 56         6 31 106 231
358 4 · Linear Functions

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator or graphing technology to complete the task.

97. If is a linear function,          98. Graph the function  on a        99. Graph the function             on a
                          , and             domain of                           domain of
                          , find an
                                      Enter the function in a graphing
      equation for the function.      utility. For the viewing window,
                                      set the minimum value of to
                                      be and the maximum
                                      value of to be .

100. Table 3 shows the input,         101. Table 4 shows the input, and        102. Graph the linear function
        and output, for a linear              output, for a linear function              on a domain of
        function                                                                                     for the function
                                            Fill in the missing values of the
     Fill in the missing values of                                                     whose slope is and
                                           table.
        the table.                                                                    y-intercept is Label
                                            Write the linear function
     Write the linear function                                                         the points for the input
                                           p 0.5 0.8 12                   b            values of and
        round to 3 decimal places.

w -10 5.5 67.5 b                           q 400 700 a 1,000,000

k 30 -26 a -44                             Table 4

Table 3

103. Graph the linear function        104. Graph the linear function

on a domain of                        where

            for the                   on the same set of axes

function whose slope is 75            on a domain of                 for

and y-intercept is                    the following values of

Label the points for the              and

input values of                  and  
                                      
                                      
                                      

Extensions                            106. Find the value of y if a       107. Find the equation of the
                                              linear function goes                line that passes through
105. Find the value of if a                   through the following               the following points:
        linear function goes                  points and has the
        through the following                 following slope:                             and
        points and has the
        following slope:

108. Find the equation of the         109. Find the equation of the       110. Find the equation of the
        line that passes through              line that passes through            line parallel to the line
        the following points:                 the following points:
                                                                                  through the point
                 and                                  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    4.1 · Linear Functions 359

111. Find the equation of the
        line perpendicular to the
        line
        through the point

For the following exercises, use the functions

112. Find the point of                   113. Where is  greater
        intersection of the lines
        and                              than           Where is

                                         greater than

Real-World Applications

114. At noon, a barista notices          115. A gym membership with           116. A clothing business finds
        that they have $20 in her                two personal training                there is a linear
        tip jar. If they maks an                 sessions costs $125, while           relationship between the
        average of $0.50 from                    gym membership with                  number of shirts, it can
        each customer, how much                  five personal training               sell and the price, it can
        will the barista have in the             sessions costs $260. What            charge per shirt. In
        tip jar if they serve more               is cost per session?                 particular, historical data
        customers during the                                                          shows that 1,000 shirts
        shift?                                                                        can be sold at a price of
                                                                                            while 3,000 shirts can
                                                                                      be sold at a price of $22.
                                                                                      Find a linear equation in
                                                                                      the form
                                                                                      that gives the price they
                                                                                      can charge for shirts.

117. A phone company                     118. A farmer finds there is a       119. A city's population in the
        charges for service                      linear relationship                  year 1960 was 287,500. In
        according to the formula:                between the number of                1989 the population was
                                  where          bean stalks, she plants              275,900. Compute the rate
          is the number of                       and the yield, each                  of growth of the
        minutes talked, and                      plant produces. When she             population and make a
        is the monthly charge, in                plants 30 stalks, each               statement about the
        dollars. Find and interpret              plant yields 30 oz of                population rate of change
        the rate of change and                   beans. When she plants               in people per year.
        initial value.                           34 stalks, each plant
                                                 produces 28 oz of beans.
                                                 Find a linear relationships
                                                 in the form
                                                 that gives the yield when
                                                   stalks are planted.
360 4 · Linear Functions

120. A town's population has       121. Suppose that average                   122. When temperature is 0
                                           annual income (in dollars)                  degrees Celsius, the
been growing linearly. In                  for the years 1990                          Fahrenheit temperature is
                                           through 1999 is given by                    32. When the Celsius
2003, the population was                   the linear function:                        temperature is 100, the
                                                                            ,          corresponding Fahrenheit
45,000, and the                            where is the number of                      temperature is 212.
                                           years after 1990. Which of                  Express the Fahrenheit
population has been                        the following interprets                    temperature as a linear
                                           the slope in the context of                 function of the Celsius
growing by 1,700 people                    the problem?                                temperature,

each year. Write an                     As of 1990, average                         Find the rate of

equation,                 for the          annual income was                           change of Fahrenheit
                                           $23,286.                                    temperature for each unit
population years after                                                                 change temperature of
                                        In the ten-year period                         Celsius.
2003.
                                           from 1990-1999, average                  Find and interpret
                                           annual income increased
                                           by a total of $1,054.                    Find and interpret

                                        Each year in the

                                           decade of the 1990s,
                                           average annual income
                                           increased by $1,054.

                                        Average annual

                                           income rose to a level of
                                           $23,286 by the end of
                                           1999.

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Build linear models from verbal descriptions.
           Model a set of data with a linear function.

                                                       Figure 1 (credit: EEK Photography/Flickr)
Elan is a college student who plans to spend a summer in Seattle. Elan has saved $3,500 for their trip and anticipates
spending $400 each week on rent, food, and activities. How can we write a linear model to represent this situation? What
would be the x-intercept, and what can Elan learn from it? To answer these and related questions, we can create a model
using a linear function. Models such as this one can be extremely useful for analyzing relationships and making

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 361

predictions based on those relationships. In this section, we will explore examples of linear function models.

Building Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions

When building linear models to solve problems involving quantities with a constant rate of change, we typically follow
the same problem strategies that we would use for any type of function. Let's briefly review them:

 1. Identify changing quantities, and then define descriptive variables to represent those quantities. When appropriate,
      sketch a picture or define a coordinate system.

 2. Carefully read the problem to identify important information. Look for information that provides values for the
      variables or values for parts of the functional model, such as slope and initial value.

 3. Carefully read the problem to determine what we are trying to find, identify, solve, or interpret.
 4. Identify a solution pathway from the provided information to what we are trying to find. Often this will involve

      checking and tracking units, building a table, or even finding a formula for the function being used to model the
      problem.
 5. When needed, write a formula for the function.
 6. Solve or evaluate the function using the formula.
 7. Reflect on whether your answer is reasonable for the given situation and whether it makes sense mathematically.
 8. Clearly convey your result using appropriate units, and answer in full sentences when necessary.

Now let's take a look at the student in Seattle. In Elan's situation, there are two changing quantities: time and money.
The amount of money they have remaining while on vacation depends on how long they stay. We can use this
information to define our variables, including units.

So, the amount of money remaining depends on the number of weeks:      .

Notice that the unit of dollars per week matches the unit of our output variable divided by our input variable. Also,
because the slope is negative, the linear function is decreasing. This should make sense because she is spending money
each week.

The rate of change is constant, so we can start with the linear model     Then we can substitute the
intercept and slope provided.

To find the t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept), we set the output to zero, and solve for the input.

The t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) is 8.75 weeks. Because this represents the input value when the output will be
zero, we could say that Elan will have no money left after 8.75 weeks.
When modeling any real-life scenario with functions, there is typically a limited domain over which that model will be
valid--almost no trend continues indefinitely. Here the domain refers to the number of weeks. In this case, it doesn't
make sense to talk about input values less than zero. A negative input value could refer to a number of weeks before
Elan saved $3,500, but the scenario discussed poses the question once they saved $3,500 because this is when the trip
and subsequent spending starts. It is also likely that this model is not valid after the t-intercept (horizontal axis
intercept), unless Elan uses a credit card and goes into debt. The domain represents the set of input values, so the
reasonable domain for this function is
In this example, we were given a written description of the situation. We followed the steps of modeling a problem to
362 4 · Linear Functions

       analyze the information. However, the information provided may not always be the same. Sometimes we might be
       provided with an intercept. Other times we might be provided with an output value. We must be careful to analyze the
       information we are given, and use it appropriately to build a linear model.

      Using a Given Intercept to Build a Model

       Some real-world problems provide the vertical axis intercept, which is the constant or initial value. Once the vertical axis
       intercept is known, the t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) can be calculated. Suppose, for example, that Hannah plans
       to pay off a no-interest loan from her parents. Her loan balance is $1,000. She plans to pay $250 per month until her
       balance is $0. The y-intercept is the initial amount of her debt, or $1,000. The rate of change, or slope, is -$250 per
       month. We can then use the slope-intercept form and the given information to develop a linear model.

       Now we can set the function equal to 0, and solve for to find the x-intercept.

The x-intercept is the number of months it takes her to reach a balance of $0. The x-intercept is 4 months, so it will take
Hannah four months to pay off her loan.

Using a Given Input and Output to Build a Model

Many real-world applications are not as direct as the ones we just considered. Instead they require us to identify some
aspect of a linear function. We might sometimes instead be asked to evaluate the linear model at a given input or set the
equation of the linear model equal to a specified output.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a word problem that includes two pairs of input and output values, use the linear function to solve a
  problem.

   1. Identify the input and output values.
   2. Convert the data to two coordinate pairs.
   3. Find the slope.
   4. Write the linear model.
   5. Use the model to make a prediction by evaluating the function at a given x-value.
   6. Use the model to identify an x-value that results in a given y-value.
   7. Answer the question posed.

EXAMPLE 1

Using a Linear Model to Investigate a Town's Population
A town's population has been growing linearly. In 2004, the population was 6,200. By 2009, the population had grown to
8,100. Assume this trend continues.

 Predict the population in 2013.   Identify the year in which the population will reach 15,000.

     Solution

The two changing quantities are the population size and time. While we could use the actual year value as the input

quantity, doing so tends to lead to very cumbersome equations because the y-intercept would correspond to the year 0,

more than 2000 years ago!

To make computation a little nicer, we will define our input as the number of years since 2004.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 363

To predict the population in 2013 (  ), we would first need an equation for the population. Likewise, to find when the

population would reach 15,000, we would need to solve for the input that would provide an output of 15,000. To write an

equation, we need the initial value and the rate of change, or slope.

To determine the rate of change, we will use the change in output per change in input.

The problem gives us two input-output pairs. Converting them to match our defined variables, the year 2004 would

correspond to  giving the point           Notice that through our clever choice of variable definition, we have

"given" ourselves the y-intercept of the function. The year 2009 would correspond to    giving the point

The two coordinate pairs are         and  Recall that we encountered examples in which we were provided

two points earlier in the chapter. We can use these values to calculate the slope.

We already know the y-intercept of the line, so we can immediately write the equation:
To predict the population in 2013, we evaluate our function at

If the trend continues, our model predicts a population of 9,620 in 2013.

To find when the population will reach 15,000, we can set              and solve for

Our model predicts the population will reach 15,000 in a little more than 23 years after 2004, or somewhere around the
year 2027.

TRY IT #1      A company sells doughnuts. They incur a fixed cost of $25,000 for rent, insurance, and other
               expenses. It costs $0.25 to produce each doughnut.

                Write a linear model to represent the cost             of the company as a function of  the number of

               doughnuts produced.

                Find and interpret the y-intercept.

TRY IT #2      A city's population has been growing linearly. In 2008, the population was 28,200. By 2012, the
               population was 36,800. Assume this trend continues.

                Predict the population in 2014.
                Identify the year in which the population will reach 54,000.

Using a Diagram to Build a Model

It is useful for many real-world applications to draw a picture to gain a sense of how the variables representing the input
and output may be used to answer a question. To draw the picture, first consider what the problem is asking for. Then,
determine the input and the output. The diagram should relate the variables. Often, geometrical shapes or figures are
364 4 · Linear Functions

       drawn. Distances are often traced out. If a right triangle is sketched, the Pythagorean Theorem relates the sides. If a
       rectangle is sketched, labeling width and height is helpful.

         EXAMPLE 2
       Using a Diagram to Model Distance Walked
       Anna and Emanuel start at the same intersection. Anna walks east at 4 miles per hour while Emanuel walks south at 3
       miles per hour. They are communicating with a two-way radio that has a range of 2 miles. How long after they start
       walking will they fall out of radio contact?

            Solution
       In essence, we can partially answer this question by saying they will fall out of radio contact when they are 2 miles apart,
       which leads us to ask a new question:
       "How long will it take them to be 2 miles apart"?
       In this problem, our changing quantities are time and position, but ultimately we need to know how long will it take for
       them to be 2 miles apart. We can see that time will be our input variable, so we'll define our input and output variables.

       Because it is not obvious how to define our output variable, we'll start by drawing a picture such as Figure 2.

                                      Figure 2

Initial Value: They both start at the same intersection so when  the distance traveled by each person should also be
0. Thus the initial value for each is 0.

Rate of Change: Anna is walking 4 miles per hour and Emanuel is walking 3 miles per hour, which are both rates of
change. The slope for is 4 and the slope for is 3.

Using those values, we can write formulas for the distance each person has walked.

For this problem, the distances from the starting point are important. To notate these, we can define a coordinate
system, identifying the "starting point" at the intersection where they both started. Then we can use the variable,
which we introduced above, to represent Anna's position, and define it to be a measurement from the starting point in
the eastward direction. Likewise, can use the variable, to represent Emanuel's position, measured from the starting
point in the southward direction. Note that in defining the coordinate system, we specified both the starting point of the
measurement and the direction of measure.

We can then define a third variable, to be the measurement of the distance between Anna and Emanuel. Showing the
variables on the diagram is often helpful, as we can see from Figure 3.

Recall that we need to know how long it takes for the distance between them, to equal 2 miles. Notice that for any

given input the outputs          and  represent distances.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 365

                                                                              Figure 3
Figure 2 shows us that we can use the Pythagorean Theorem because we have drawn a right angle.
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we get:

In this scenario we are considering only positive values of so our distance  will always be positive. We can simplify

this answer to  This means that the distance between Anna and Emanuel is also a linear function. Because is

a linear function, we can now answer the question of when the distance between them will reach 2 miles. We will set the

output          and solve for

They will fall out of radio contact in 0.4 hour, or 24 minutes.

Q&A             Should I draw diagrams when given information based on a geometric shape?
                Yes. Sketch the figure and label the quantities and unknowns on the sketch.

EXAMPLE 3

Using a Diagram to Model Distance Between Cities
There is a straight road leading from the town of Westborough to Agritown 30 miles east and 10 miles north. Partway
down this road, it junctions with a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading to the town of Eastborough. If the
town of Eastborough is located 20 miles directly east of the town of Westborough, how far is the road junction from
Westborough?

Solution

It might help here to draw a picture of the situation. See Figure 4. It would then be helpful to introduce a coordinate

system. While we could place the origin anywhere, placing it at Westborough seems convenient. This puts Agritown at

coordinates     and Eastborough at
366 4 · Linear Functions

                                                                              Figure 4
Using this point along with the origin, we can find the slope of the line from Westborough to Agritown.

Now we can write an equation to describe the road from Westborough to Agritown.

From this, we can determine the perpendicular road to Eastborough will have slope  Because the town of
Eastborough is at the point (20, 0), we can find the equation.

We can now find the coordinates of the junction of the roads by finding the intersection of these lines. Setting them
equal,

The roads intersect at the point (18, 6). Using the distance formula, we can now find the distance from Westborough to
the junction.

     Analysis
One nice use of linear models is to take advantage of the fact that the graphs of these functions are lines. This means
real-world applications discussing maps need linear functions to model the distances between reference points.

TRY IT #3                 There is a straight road leading from the town of Timpson to Ashburn 60 miles east and 12 miles
                          north. Partway down the road, it junctions with a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading
                          to the town of Garrison. If the town of Garrison is located 22 miles directly east of the town of
                          Timpson, how far is the road junction from Timpson?

Modeling a Set of Data with Linear Functions

Real-world situations including two or more linear functions may be modeled with a system of linear equations.
Remember, when solving a system of linear equations, we are looking for points the two lines have in common. Typically,
there are three types of answers possible, as shown in Figure 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 367

                                                  Figure 5

...

     HOW TO

Given a situation that represents a system of linear equations, write the system of equations and identify the
solution.

1. Identify the input and output of each linear model.                                     or find the point of
2. Identify the slope and y-intercept of each linear model.
3. Find the solution by setting the two linear functions equal to another and solving for

     intersection on a graph.

  EXAMPLE 4

Building a System of Linear Models to Choose a Truck Rental Company
Jamal is choosing between two truck-rental companies. The first, Keep on Trucking, Inc., charges an up-front fee of $20,
then 59 cents a mile. The second, Move It Your Way, charges an up-front fee of $16, then 63 cents a mile4 . When will
Keep on Trucking, Inc. be the better choice for Jamal?

     Solution
The two important quantities in this problem are the cost and the number of miles driven. Because we have two
companies to consider, we will define two functions in Table 1.

             Input                                distance driven in miles

             Outputs                              cost, in dollars, for renting from Keep on Trucking
                                                  cost, in dollars, for renting from Move It Your Way

                                   Initial Value  Up-front fee:  and
                                Rate of Change
                              Table 1             /mile and                 /mile
A linear function is of the form
                                                  Using the rates of change and initial charges, we can write the equations

Using these equations, we can determine when Keep on Trucking, Inc., will be the better choice. Because all we have to
make that decision from is the costs, we are looking for when Move It Your Way, will cost less, or when
The solution pathway will lead us to find the equations for the two functions, find the intersection, and then see where

4 Rates retrieved Aug 2, 2010 from http://www.budgettruck.com and http://www.uhaul.com/
368 4 · Linear Functions

the  function is smaller.

These graphs are sketched in Figure 6, with   in blue.

                                                                              Figure 6
To find the intersection, we set the equations equal and solve:

This tells us that the cost from the two companies will be the same if 100 miles are driven. Either by looking at the graph,

or noting that            is growing at a slower rate, we can conclude that Keep on Trucking, Inc. will be the cheaper price

when more than 100 miles are driven, that is  .

     MEDIA
     Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with linear function models.
     Interpreting a Linear Function (http://openstax.org/l/interpretlinear)

        4.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain how to find the        2. Explain how to find the                            3. Explain how to interpret the
    input variable in a word          output variable in a word                             initial value in a word
    problem that uses a linear        problem that uses a linear                            problem that uses a linear
    function.                         function.                                             function.

4. Explain how to determine
    the slope in a word problem
    that uses a linear function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 369

Algebraic

5. Find the area of a              6. Find the area of a triangle      7. Find the area of a triangle
                                                                           bounded by the y-axis, the
parallelogram bounded by           bounded by the x-axis, the

the y-axis, the line          the  line             and the            line  and the

line                   and the     line perpendicular to               line perpendicular to
                                   that passes through the             that passes through the
line parallel to       passing     origin.                             origin.

through

8. Find the area of a parallelogram bounded by the

x-axis, the line       the line          and the

line parallel to       passing through

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town's population has been decreasing at a constant rate. In 2010
the population was 5,900. By 2012 the population had dropped to 4,700. Assume this trend continues.

9. Predict the population in       10. Identify the year in which
    2016.                                the population will reach 0.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town's population has been increased at a constant rate. In 2010
the population was 46,020. By 2012 the population had increased to 52,070. Assume this trend continues.

11. Predict the population in      12. Identify the year in which
      2016.                              the population will reach
                                         75,000.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town has an initial population of 75,000. It grows at a constant rate
of 2,500 per year for 5 years.

13. Find the linear function       14. Find a reasonable domain        15. If the function is
      that models the town's             and range for the function          graphed, find and interpret
      population as a function                                               the x- and y-intercepts.
      of the year, where is the
      number of years since the
      model began.

16. If the function is             17. When will the population        18. What is the population in
      graphed, find and interpret        reach 100,000?                      the year 12 years from the
      the slope of the function.                                             onset of the model?

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The weight of a newborn is 7.5 pounds. The baby gained one-half
pound a month for its first year.

19. Find the linear function       20. Find a reasonable domain        21. If the function is
      that models the baby's             and range for the function          graphed, find and interpret
      weight as a function of                                                the x- and y-intercepts.
      the age of the baby, in
      months,

22. If the function W is           23. When did the baby weight        24. What is the output when
      graphed, find and interpret        10.4 pounds?                        the input is 6.2?
      the slope of the function.
370 4 · Linear Functions

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The number of people afflicted with the common cold in the winter
months steadily decreased by 205 each year from 2005 until 2010. In 2005, 12,025 people were inflicted.

25. Find the linear function       26. Find a reasonable domain         27. If the function is
      that models the number of          and range for the function           graphed, find and interpret
      people inflicted with the                                               the x- and y-intercepts.
      common cold as a
      function of the year,

28. If the function is             29. When will the output reach       30. In what year will the
      graphed, find and interpret        0?                                   number of people be
      the slope of the function.                                              9,700?

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 7, which shows the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in
a given year, where represents the number of years since 1980.

31. Find the linear function                                  Figure 7  33. Find and interpret the
      where depends on the                                                    x-intercept.
      number of years since        32. Find and interpret the
      1980.                              y-intercept.

34. Find and interpret the
      slope.

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 8, which shows the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in
a given year, where represents the number of years since 1980.

                                   Figure 8

Access for free at openstax.org
35. Find the linear function  36. Find and interpret the                                      4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 371
      where depends on the          y-intercept.
      number of years since                                   37. Find and interpret the
      1980.                                                         x-intercept.

38. Find and interpret the
      slope.

Numeric

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Mississippi and Hawaii (adjusted for inflation) shown in Table
2. Assume that the house values are changing linearly.

                              Year Mississippi Hawaii

                              1950 $25,200                    $74,400

                              2000 $71,400 $272,700

                              Table 2

39. In which state have home  40. If these trends were to     41. If we assume the linear
      values increased at a         continue, what would be         trend existed before 1950
      higher rate?                  the median home value in        and continues after 2000,
                                    Mississippi in 2010?            the two states' median
                                                                    house values will be (or
                                                                    were) equal in what year?
                                                                    (The answer might be
                                                                    absurd.)

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Indiana and Alabama (adjusted for inflation) shown in Table
3. Assume that the house values are changing linearly.

                              Year Indiana Alabama

                              1950 $37,700 $27,100

                              2000 $94,300 $85,100

                              Table 3

42. In which state have home  43. If these trends were to     44. If we assume the linear
      values increased at a         continue, what would be         trend existed before 1950
      higher rate?                  the median home value in        and continues after 2000,
                                    Indiana in 2010?                the two states' median
                                                                    house values will be (or
                                                                    were) equal in what year?
                                                                    (The answer might be
                                                                    absurd.)
372 4 · Linear Functions

Real-World Applications

45. In 2004, a school               46. In 2003, a town's            47. A phone company has a
      population was 1001. By             population was 1431. By          monthly cellular plan
      2008 the population had             2007 the population had          where a customer pays a
      grown to 1697. Assume the           grown to 2134. Assume the        flat monthly fee and then a
      population is changing              population is changing           certain amount of money
      linearly.                           linearly.                        per minute used for voice
                                                                           or video calling. If a
    How much did the                    How much did the                   customer uses 410
                                                                           minutes, the monthly cost
      population grow between             population grow between          will be $71.50. If the
      the year 2004 and 2008?             the year 2003 and 2007?          customer uses 720
                                                                           minutes, the monthly cost
    How long did it take the            How long did it take the           will be $118.

      population to grow from             population to grow from        Find a linear equation
      1001 students to 1697               1431 people to 2134
      students?                           people?                          for the monthly cost of the
                                                                           cell plan as a function of x,
    What is the average                 What is the average                the number of monthly
                                                                           minutes used.
      population growth per               population growth per
      year?                               year?                          Interpret the slope and

    What was the                        What was the                       y-intercept of the equation.

      population in the year              population in the year         Use your equation to
      2000?                               2000?
                                                                           find the total monthly cost
    Find an equation for the            Find an equation for the           if 687 minutes are used.

      population, of the                  population, of the town
      school t years after 2000.            years after 2000.

    Using your equation,                Using your equation,

      predict the population of           predict the population of
      the school in 2011.                 the town in 2014.

48. A phone company has a           49. In 1991, the moose           50. In 2003, the owl population
      monthly cellular data plan          population in a park was         in a park was measured to
      where a customer pays a             measured to be 4,360. By         be 340. By 2007, the
      flat monthly fee of $10 and         1999, the population was         population was measured
      then a certain amount of            measured again to be             again to be 285. The
      money per megabyte (MB)             5,880. Assume the                population changes
      of data used on the phone.          population continues to          linearly. Let the input be
      If a customer uses 20 MB,           change linearly.                 years since 2003.
      the monthly cost will be
      $11.20. If the customer           Find a formula for the           Find a formula for the
      uses 130 MB, the monthly
      cost will be $17.80.                moose population, P since        owl population, Let the
                                          1990.                            input be years since 2003.
    Find a linear equation
                                        What does your model             What does your model
      for the monthly cost of the
      data plan as a function of          predict the moose                predict the owl population
                                          population to be in 2003?        to be in 2012?
         the number of MB used.

    Interpret the slope and

      y-intercept of the equation.

    Use your equation to

      find the total monthly cost
      if 250 MB are used.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         4.2 · Modeling with Linear Functions 373

51. The Federal Helium               52. Suppose the world's oil         53. You are choosing between
      Reserve held about 16                reserves in 2014 are 1,820          two different prepaid cell
      billion cubic feet of helium         billion barrels. If, on             phone plans. The first plan
      in 2010 and is being                 average, the total reserves         charges a rate of 26 cents
      depleted by about 2.1                are decreasing by 25 billion        per minute. The second
      billion cubic feet each year.        barrels of oil each year:           plan charges a monthly fee
                                                                               of $19.95 plus 11 cents per
    Give a linear equation               Give a linear equation                minute. How many
                                                                               minutes would you have to
      for the remaining federal            for the remaining oil               use in a month in order for
      helium reserves, in                  reserves, in terms of               the second plan to be
      terms of the number of               the number of years since           preferable?
      years since 2010.                    now.

    In 2015, what will the               Seven years from now,

      helium reserves be?                  what will the oil reserves
                                           be?
    If the rate of depletion
                                         If the rate at which the
      doesn't change, in what
      year will the Federal                reserves are decreasing is
      Helium Reserve be                    constant, when will the
      depleted?                            world's oil reserves be
                                           depleted?

54. You are choosing between         55. When hired at a new job         56. When hired at a new job
      two different window                 selling jewelry, you are            selling electronics, you are
      washing companies. The               given two pay options:              given two pay options:
      first charges $5 per
      window. The second                   Option A: Base salary of            Option A: Base salary of
      charges a base fee of $40            $17,000 a year with a               $14,000 a year with a
      plus $3 per window. How              commission of 12% of your           commission of 10% of your
      many windows would you               sales                               sales
      need to have for the
      second company to be                 Option B: Base salary of            Option B: Base salary of
      preferable?                          $20,000 a year with a               $19,000 a year with a
                                           commission of 5% of your            commission of 4% of your
                                           sales                               sales

                                           How much jewelry would              How much electronics
                                           you need to sell for option         would you need to sell for
                                           A to produce a larger               option A to produce a
                                           income?                             larger income?

57. When hired at a new job          58. When hired at a new job
      selling electronics, you are         selling electronics, you are
      given two pay options:               given two pay options:

      Option A: Base salary of             Option A: Base salary of
      $20,000 a year with a                $10,000 a year with a
      commission of 12% of your            commission of 9% of your
      sales                                sales

      Option B: Base salary of             Option B: Base salary of
      $26,000 a year with a                $20,000 a year with a
      commission of 3% of your             commission of 4% of your
      sales                                sales

      How much electronics                 How much electronics
      would you need to sell for           would you need to sell for
      option A to produce a                option A to produce a
      larger income?                       larger income?
374 4 · Linear Functions

    4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data

      Learning Objectives

       In this section, you will:
                  Draw and interpret scatter diagrams.
                  Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit.
                  Distinguish between linear and nonlinear relations.
                  Fit a regression line to a set of data and use the linear model to make predictions.

       A professor is attempting to identify trends among final exam scores. His class has a mixture of students, so he wonders
       if there is any relationship between age and final exam scores. One way for him to analyze the scores is by creating a
       diagram that relates the age of each student to the exam score received. In this section, we will examine one such
       diagram known as a scatter plot.

     Drawing and Interpreting Scatter Plots

       A scatter plot is a graph of plotted points that may show a relationship between two sets of data. If the relationship is
       from a linear model, or a model that is nearly linear, the professor can draw conclusions using his knowledge of linear
       functions. Figure 1 shows a sample scatter plot.

                                          Figure 1 A scatter plot of age and final exam score variables
Notice this scatter plot does not indicate a linear relationship. The points do not appear to follow a trend. In other words,
there does not appear to be a relationship between the age of the student and the score on the final exam.

  EXAMPLE 1

Using a Scatter Plot to Investigate Cricket Chirps
Table 1 shows the number of cricket chirps in 15 seconds, for several different air temperatures, in degrees Fahrenheit5 .
Plot this data, and determine whether the data appears to be linearly related.

Chirps  44 35 20.4 33 31 35 18.5 37 26

Temperature 80.5 70.5 57 66 68 72 52 73.5 53

Table 1 Cricket Chirps vs Air Temperature

     Solution
Plotting this data, as depicted in Figure 2 suggests that there may be a trend. We can see from the trend in the data that
the number of chirps increases as the temperature increases. The trend appears to be roughly linear, though certainly
not perfectly so.

5 Selected data from http://classic.globe.gov/fsl/scientistsblog/2007/10/. Retrieved Aug 3, 2010
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 375

                                                                              Figure 2

Finding the Line of Best Fit

Once we recognize a need for a linear function to model that data, the natural follow-up question is "what is that linear
function?" One way to approximate our linear function is to sketch the line that seems to best fit the data. Then we can
extend the line until we can verify the y-intercept. We can approximate the slope of the line by extending it until we can
estimate the

  EXAMPLE 2

Finding a Line of Best Fit
Find a linear function that fits the data in Table 1 by "eyeballing" a line that seems to fit.

     Solution
On a graph, we could try sketching a line. Using the starting and ending points of our hand drawn line, points (0, 30) and
(50, 90), this graph has a slope of

and a y-intercept at 30. This gives an equation of

where is the number of chirps in 15 seconds, and    is the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. The resulting
equation is represented in Figure 3.
376 4 · Linear Functions

                                                                              Figure 3

     Analysis
This linear equation can then be used to approximate answers to various questions we might ask about the trend.

Recognizing Interpolation or Extrapolation

While the data for most examples does not fall perfectly on the line, the equation is our best guess as to how the
relationship will behave outside of the values for which we have data. We use a process known as interpolation when
we predict a value inside the domain and range of the data. The process of extrapolation is used when we predict a
value outside the domain and range of the data.

Figure 4 compares the two processes for the cricket-chirp data addressed in Example 2. We can see that interpolation
would occur if we used our model to predict temperature when the values for chirps are between 18.5 and 44.
Extrapolation would occur if we used our model to predict temperature when the values for chirps are less than 18.5 or
greater than 44.

There is a difference between making predictions inside the domain and range of values for which we have data and

outside that domain and range. Predicting a value outside of the domain and range has its limitations. When our model

no longer applies after a certain point, it is sometimes called model breakdown. For example, predicting a cost function

for a period of two years may involve examining the data where the input is the time in years and the output is the cost.

But if we try to extrapolate a cost when        that is in 50 years, the model would not apply because we could not

account for factors fifty years in the future.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 377

Figure 4 Interpolation occurs within the domain and range of the provided data whereas extrapolation occurs outside.
  Interpolation and Extrapolation
  Different methods of making predictions are used to analyze data.
  The method of interpolation involves predicting a value inside the domain and/or range of the data.
  The method of extrapolation involves predicting a value outside the domain and/or range of the data.
  Model breakdown occurs at the point when the model no longer applies.
  EXAMPLE 3
Understanding Interpolation and Extrapolation
Use the cricket data from Table 1 to answer the following questions:

 Would predicting the temperature when crickets are chirping 30 times in 15 seconds be interpolation or

extrapolation? Make the prediction, and discuss whether it is reasonable.

 Would predicting the number of chirps crickets will make at 40 degrees be interpolation or extrapolation? Make

the prediction, and discuss whether it is reasonable.
     Solution

 The number of chirps in the data provided varied from 18.5 to 44. A prediction at 30 chirps per 15 seconds is

inside the domain of our data, so would be interpolation. Using our model:
Based on the data we have, this value seems reasonable.

 The temperature values varied from 52 to 80.5. Predicting the number of chirps at 40 degrees is extrapolation

because 40 is outside the range of our data. Using our model:

We can compare the regions of interpolation and extrapolation using Figure 5.
378 4 · Linear Functions

                                                                              Figure 5

     Analysis
Our model predicts the crickets would chirp 8.33 times in 15 seconds. While this might be possible, we have no reason to
believe our model is valid outside the domain and range. In fact, generally crickets stop chirping altogether below
around 50 degrees.

TRY IT #1                 According to the data from Table 1, what temperature can we predict it is if we counted 20 chirps
                          in 15 seconds?

Finding the Line of Best Fit Using a Graphing Utility

While eyeballing a line works reasonably well, there are statistical techniques for fitting a line to data that minimize the
differences between the line and data values6 . One such technique is called least squares regression and can be
computed by many graphing calculators, spreadsheet software, statistical software, and many web-based calculators7 .
Least squares regression is one means to determine the line that best fits the data, and here we will refer to this method
as linear regression.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given data of input and corresponding outputs from a linear function, find the best fit line using linear
  regression.

   1. Enter the input in List 1 (L1).
   2. Enter the output in List 2 (L2).
   3. On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg).

  EXAMPLE 4
Finding a Least Squares Regression Line
Find the least squares regression line using the cricket-chirp data in Table 2.

     Solution
 1. Enter the input (chirps) in List 1 (L1).

6 Technically, the method minimizes the sum of the squared differences in the vertical direction between the line and the data values.
7 For example, http://www.shodor.org/unchem/math/lls/leastsq.html

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 379

 2. Enter the output (temperature) in List 2 (L2). See Table 2.
                                            L1 44 35 20.4 33 31 35 18.5 37 26
                                            L2 80.5 70.5 57 66 68 72 52 73.5 53

                                          Table 2
 3. On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg). Using the cricket chirp data from earlier, with technology

      we obtain the equation:

     Analysis
Notice that this line is quite similar to the equation we "eyeballed" but should fit the data better. Notice also that using
this equation would change our prediction for the temperature when hearing 30 chirps in 15 seconds from 66 degrees
to:

The graph of the scatter plot with the least squares regression line is shown in Figure 6.

     Figure 6

Q&A  Will there ever be a case where two different lines will serve as the best fit for the data?
     No. There is only one best fit line.

Distinguishing Between Linear and Nonlinear Models

As we saw above with the cricket-chirp model, some data exhibit strong linear trends, but other data, like the final exam
scores plotted by age, are clearly nonlinear. Most calculators and computer software can also provide us with the
correlation coefficient, which is a measure of how closely the line fits the data. Many graphing calculators require the
user to turn a "diagnostic on" selection to find the correlation coefficient, which mathematicians label as The
correlation coefficient provides an easy way to get an idea of how close to a line the data falls.

We should compute the correlation coefficient only for data that follows a linear pattern or to determine the degree to
which a data set is linear. If the data exhibits a nonlinear pattern, the correlation coefficient for a linear regression is
meaningless. To get a sense for the relationship between the value of and the graph of the data, Figure 7 shows some
large data sets with their correlation coefficients. Remember, for all plots, the horizontal axis shows the input and the
vertical axis shows the output.
380 4 · Linear Functions

   Figure 7 Plotted data and related correlation coefficients. (credit: "DenisBoigelot," Wikimedia Commons)

Correlation Coefficient

The correlation coefficient is a value, between -1 and 1.

·             suggests a positive (increasing) relationship

·             suggests a negative (decreasing) relationship

· The closer the value is to 0, the more scattered the data.

· The closer the value is to 1 or -1, the less scattered the data is.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding a Correlation Coefficient
Calculate the correlation coefficient for cricket-chirp data in Table 1.

Solution

Because the data appear to follow a linear pattern, we can use technology to calculate Enter the inputs and

corresponding outputs and select the Linear Regression. The calculator will also provide you with the correlation

coefficient,              This value is very close to 1, which suggests a strong increasing linear relationship.

Note: For some calculators, the Diagnostics must be turned "on" in order to get the correlation coefficient when linear
regression is performed: [2nd]>[0]>[alpha][x-1], then scroll to DIAGNOSTICSON.

Fitting a Regression Line to a Set of Data

Once we determine that a set of data is linear using the correlation coefficient, we can use the regression line to make
predictions. As we learned above, a regression line is a line that is closest to the data in the scatter plot, which means
that only one such line is a best fit for the data.

  EXAMPLE 6

Using a Regression Line to Make Predictions
Gasoline consumption in the United States has been steadily increasing. Consumption data from 1994 to 2004 is shown
in Table 3.8 Determine whether the trend is linear, and if so, find a model for the data. Use the model to predict the
consumption in 2008.

8 http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/2005/html/table_04_10.html
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 381

           Year  '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 '00 '01 '02 '03 '04

Consumption (billions of gallons) 113 116 118 119 123 125 126 128 131 133 136

Table 3

The scatter plot of the data, including the least squares regression line, is shown in Figure 8.

                                                                              Figure 8
     Solution
We can introduce a new input variable, representing years since 1994.
The least squares regression equation is:

Using technology, the correlation coefficient was calculated to be 0.9965, suggesting a very strong increasing linear
trend.
Using this to predict consumption in 2008

The model predicts 144.244 billion gallons of gasoline consumption in 2008.

TRY IT #2  Use the model we created using technology in Example 6 to predict the gas consumption in 2011.
           Is this an interpolation or an extrapolation?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with fitting linear models to data.

Introduction to Regression Analysis (http://openstax.org/l/introregress)
Linear Regression (http://openstax.org/l/linearregress)
382 4 · Linear Functions

        4.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe what it means if     2. What is interpolation when    3. What is extrapolation when
    there is a model breakdown       using a linear model?            using a linear model?
    when using a linear model.

4. Explain the difference        5. Explain how to interpret the
    between a positive and a         absolute value of a
    negative correlation             correlation coefficient.
    coefficient.

Algebraic                                               7. A regression was run to determine whether there is
                                                            a relationship between the diameter of a tree ( ,
6. A regression was run to determine whether there is       in inches) and the tree's age ( , in years). The
    a relationship between hours of TV watched per          results of the regression are given below. Use this
    day and number of sit-ups a person can do               to predict the age of a tree with diameter 10 inches.
    The results of the regression are given below. Use
    this to predict the number of sit-ups a person who
    watches 11 hours of TV can do.

For the following exercises, draw a scatter plot for the data provided. Does the data appear to be linearly related?

8.                                                      9.

    0  2                  4      6 8 10                     1234 5  6

    -22 -19 -15 -11 -6 -2                                   46 50 59 75 100 136

10.                                                     11.
        100 250 300 450 600 750                                 1 3 5 7 9 11

         12 12.6 13.1 14 14.5 15.2                              1 9 28 65 125 216

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 383

12. For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If we   13. For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If
      wanted to know when the population would reach           we wanted to know when the temperature
      15,000, would the answer involve interpolation or        would reach 28°F, would the answer involve
      extrapolation? Eyeball the line, and estimate the        interpolation or extrapolation? Eyeball the line
      answer.                                                  and estimate the answer.

     Year Population                                               Temperature,°F 16 18 20 25 30

     1990  11,500                                                  Time, seconds 46 50 54 55 62

     1995  12,100

     2000  12,700

     2005  13,000

     2010  13,750

Graphical

For the following exercises, match each scatterplot with one of the four specified correlations in Figure 9 and Figure 10.

                                                         Figure 9

                           Figure 10

14.                   15.                                          16.

17.
384 4 · Linear Functions

       For the following exercises, draw a best-fit line for the plotted data.
       18.

       19.

       20.

       21.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 385

Numeric                             23. The U.S. import of wine (in     24. Table 6 shows the year and
                                          hectoliters) for several            the number of people
22. The U.S. Census tracks the            years is given in Table 5.          unemployed in a particular
      percentage of persons 25            Determine whether the               city for several years.
      years or older who are              trend appears linear. If so,        Determine whether the
      college graduates. That             and assuming the trend              trend appears linear. If so,
      data for several years is           continues, in what year will        and assuming the trend
      given in Table 4.9                  imports exceed 12,000               continues, in what year will
      Determine whether the               hectoliters?                        the number of unemployed
      trend appears linear. If so,                                            reach 5?
      and assuming the trend                Year Imports
      continues, in what year will                                      Year        Number
      the percentage exceed                 1992 2665                            Unemployed
      35%?
                                            1994 2688
  Year        Percent                                                   1990     750
            Graduates                       1996 3565
  1990                                                                  1992     670
  1992          21.3                        1998 4129
  1994          21.4                                                    1994     650
  1996          22.2                        2000 4584
  1998          23.6                                                    1996     605
  2000          24.4                        2002 5655
  2002          25.6                                                    1998     550
  2004          26.7                        2004 6549
  2006          27.7                                                    2000     510
  2008            28                        2006 7950
Table 4         29.4                                                    2002     460
                                            2008 8487
                                                                        2004     420
                                            2009 9462
                                                                        2006     380
                                          Table 5
                                                                        2008     320

                                                                        Table 6

Technology

For the following exercises, use each set of data to calculate the regression line using a calculator or other technology
tool, and determine the correlation coefficient to 3 decimal places of accuracy.

25.                                 26.
                8 15 26 31 56                      5 7 10 12 15

23 41 53 72 103                                                         4 12 17 22 24

9 Based on data from http://www.census.gov/hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps/historical/index.html. Accessed 5/1/2014.
386 4 · Linear Functions                     28.

       27.                                            4 44.8
                                                      5 43.1
               3 21.9 10 18.54                        6 38.8
               4 22.22 11 15.76                       7 39
               5 22.74 12 13.68                       8 38
               6 22.26 13 14.1                        9 32.7
               7 20.78 14 14.02                      10 30.1
               8 17.6 15 11.94                       11 29.3
               9 16.52 16 12.76                      12 27
                                                     13 25.8

29.                                          30.
               21 25 30 31 40 50
                                                     100 2000
               17 11 2 -1 -18 -40                     80 1798
                                                      60 1589
                                                      55 1580
                                                      40 1390
                                                      20 1202

31.
               900 988 1000 1010 1200 1205

70 80 82                         84 105 108

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.3 · Fitting Linear Models to Data 387

Extensions

32. Graph           Pick a set of five ordered          33. Graph           Pick a set of five ordered

pairs using inputs              and use linear          pairs using inputs                  and use linear

regression to verify that the function is a good fit    regression to verify the function.

for the data.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs shows dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of over the
ten-year span, (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years:

34. Use linear regression to    35. Find to the nearest tenth      36. Find to the nearest tenth
      determine a function            and interpret the                  and interpret the
      where the profit in             x-intercept.                       y-intercept.
      thousands of dollars
      depends on the number of
      units sold in hundreds.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs shows the population and the year over the ten-year span, (population, year) for specific
recorded years:

37. Use linear regression to determine a function       38. Predict when the population will hit 8,000.
      where the year depends on the population. Round
      to three decimal places of accuracy.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company increased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs show the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of over the ten year
span, (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years:

39. Use linear regression to determine a function y,    40. Predict when the profit will exceed one million
      where the profit in thousands of dollars depends        dollars.
      on the number of units sold in hundreds.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs show dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of over the
ten-year span (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years:

41. Use linear regression to determine a function y,    42. Predict when the profit will dip below the $25,000
      where the profit in thousands of dollars depends        threshold.
      on the number of units sold in hundreds.
388 4 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

correlation coefficient a value, between -1 and 1 that indicates the degree of linear correlation of variables, or how

closely a regression line fits a data set.

decreasing linear function a function with a negative slope: If

extrapolation predicting a value outside the domain and range of the data

horizontal line a line defined by            where is a real number. The slope of a horizontal line is 0.

increasing linear function a function with a positive slope: If

interpolation predicting a value inside the domain and range of the data

least squares regression a statistical technique for fitting a line to data in a way that minimizes the differences

between the line and data values

linear function a function with a constant rate of change that is a polynomial of degree 1, and whose graph is a

straight line

model breakdown when a model no longer applies after a certain point

parallel lines two or more lines with the same slope

perpendicular lines two lines that intersect at right angles and have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each other

point-slope form the equation for a line that represents a linear function of the form

slope the ratio of the change in output values to the change in input values; a measure of the steepness of a line

slope-intercept form the equation for a line that represents a linear function in the form

vertical line a line defined by    where is a real number. The slope of a vertical line is undefined.

Key Concepts

4.1 Linear Functions

· Linear functions can be represented in words, function notation, tabular form, and graphical form. See Example 1.

· An increasing linear function results in a graph that slants upward from left to right and has a positive slope. A

decreasing linear function results in a graph that slants downward from left to right and has a negative slope. A

constant linear function results in a graph that is a horizontal line. See Example 2.

· Slope is a rate of change. The slope of a linear function can be calculated by dividing the difference between

y-values by the difference in corresponding x-values of any two points on the line. See Example 3 and Example 4.

· An equation for a linear function can be written from a graph. See Example 5.

· The equation for a linear function can be written if the slope and initial value are known. See Example 6 and

Example 7.

· A linear function can be used to solve real-world problems given information in different forms. See Example 8,

Example 9, and Example 10.

· Linear functions can be graphed by plotting points or by using the y-intercept and slope. See Example 11 and

Example 12.

· Graphs of linear functions may be transformed by using shifts up, down, left, or right, as well as through stretches,

compressions, and reflections. See Example 13.

· The equation for a linear function can be written by interpreting the graph. See Example 14.

· The x-intercept is the point at which the graph of a linear function crosses the x-axis. See Example 15.

· Horizontal lines are written in the form,           See Example 16.

· Vertical lines are written in the form,    See Example 17.

· Parallel lines have the same slope. Perpendicular lines have negative reciprocal slopes, assuming neither is vertical.

See Example 18.

· A line parallel to another line, passing through a given point, may be found by substituting the slope value of the

line and the x- and y-values of the given point into the equation,                and using the that results.

Similarly, the point-slope form of an equation can also be used. See Example 19.

· A line perpendicular to another line, passing through a given point, may be found in the same manner, with the

exception of using the negative reciprocal slope. See Example 20 and Example 21.

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions

· We can use the same problem strategies that we would use for any type of function.
· When modeling and solving a problem, identify the variables and look for key values, including the slope and

   y-intercept. See Example 1.
· Draw a diagram, where appropriate. See Example 2 and Example 3.
· Check for reasonableness of the answer.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           4 · Exercises 389

· Linear models may be built by identifying or calculating the slope and using the y-intercept.

 The x-intercept may be found by setting           which is setting the expression     equal to 0.

 The point of intersection of a system of linear equations is the point where the x- and y-values are the same. See

Example 4.

 A graph of the system may be used to identify the points where one line falls below (or above) the other line.

4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data

· Scatter plots show the relationship between two sets of data. See Example 1.
· Scatter plots may represent linear or non-linear models.
· The line of best fit may be estimated or calculated, using a calculator or statistical software. See Example 2.
· Interpolation can be used to predict values inside the domain and range of the data, whereas extrapolation can be

    used to predict values outside the domain and range of the data. See Example 3.
· The correlation coefficient, indicates the degree of linear relationship between data. See Example 4.
· A regression line best fits the data. See Example 5.
· The least squares regression line is found by minimizing the squares of the distances of points from a line passing

    through the data and may be used to make predictions regarding either of the variables. See Example 6.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Linear Functions                   2. Determine whether the            3. Determine whether the
1. Determine whether the               algebraic equation is linear.       function is increasing or
                                                                           decreasing.
    algebraic equation is linear.

4. Determine whether the           5. Given each set of                6. Given each set of
    function is increasing or          information, find a linear          information, find a linear
    decreasing.                        equation that satisfies the         equation that satisfies the
                                       given conditions, if possible.      given conditions, if possible.

                                   Passes through  and                 x-intercept at  and

                                                                       y-intercept at

7. Find the slope of the line shown in the graph.  8. Find the slope of the line graphed.
390 4 · Exercises

9. Write an equation in slope-intercept form for the  10. Does the following table
    line shown.                                             represent a linear function? If
                                                            so, find the linear equation
                                                            that models the data.

                                                                x -4 0 2 10

                                                              g(x) 18 -2 -12 -52

11. Does the following table             12. On June 1st, a company has
      represent a linear function? If          $4,000,000 profit. If the
      so, find the linear equation that        company then loses
      models the data.                         150,000 dollars per day
                                               thereafter in the month of
     x  6          8             12 26         June, what is the
                                               company's profit nth day
     g(x) -8 -12 -18 -46                       after June 1st?

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or
neither parallel nor perpendicular:

13.                              14.

For the following exercises, find the x- and y- intercepts of the given equation

15.                              16.

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of the pairs of lines to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2. Is each pair of
lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither?

17. Line 1: Passes through       18. Line 1: Passes through    19. Write an equation for a line
                and                                and               perpendicular to
                                                                                          and passing
      Line 2: Passes through           Line 2: Passes through        through the point (5, 20).
                and                            and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             4 · Exercises 391

20. Find the equation of a line     21. Sketch a graph of the linear    22. Find the point of
      with a y- intercept of              function                            intersection for the 2 linear
      and slope
                                                                              functions:

23. A car rental company
      offers two plans for renting
      a car.

      Plan A: 25 dollars per day
      and 10 cents per mile

      Plan B: 50 dollars per day
      with free unlimited mileage

      How many miles would you
      need to drive for plan B to
      save you money?

Modeling with Linear Functions

24. Find the area of a triangle     25. A town's population             26. The number of people
                                          increases at a constant             afflicted with the common
bounded by the y axis, the                rate. In 2010 the                   cold in the winter months
                                          population was 55,000. By           dropped steadily by 50
line     and                              2012 the population had             each year since 2004 until
                                          increased to 76,000. If this        2010. In 2004, 875 people
the line perpendicular to                 trend continues, predict            were inflicted.
                                          the population in 2016.
that passes through the                                                       Find the linear function
                                                                              that models the number of
origin.                                                                       people afflicted with the
                                                                              common cold C as a
                                                                              function of the year,
                                                                              When will no one be
                                                                              afflicted?

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 1 showing the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in a
given year, where represents years since 1980.

27. Find the linear function y, where y depends on  Figure 1
      the number of years since 1980.                   28. Find and interpret the y-intercept.
392 4 · Exercises

For the following exercise, consider this scenario: In 2004, a school population was 1,700. By 2012 the population had
grown to 2,500.

29. Assume the population is changing linearly.

    How much did the population grow between

      the year 2004 and 2012?

    What is the average population growth per

      year?

    Find an equation for the population, P, of the

      school t years after 2004.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: In 2000, the moose population in a park was measured to be 6,500. By
2010, the population was measured to be 12,500. Assume the population continues to change linearly.

30. Find a formula for the        31. What does your model
      moose population, .               predict the moose
                                        population to be in 2020?

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The median home values in subdivisions Pima Central and East Valley
(adjusted for inflation) are shown in Table 1. Assume that the house values are changing linearly.

                                  Year Pima Central East Valley

                                  1970     32,000                  120,250

                                  2010     85,000                  150,000

                                  Table 1

32. In which subdivision have     33. If these trends were to
      home values increased at a        continue, what would be
      higher rate?                      the median home value in
                                        Pima Central in 2015?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        4 · Exercises 393

Fitting Linear Models to Data      35. Draw a scatter plot for the  36. Eight students were asked
34. Draw a scatter plot for the          data in Table 3. If we           to estimate their score on a
                                         wanted to know when the          10-point quiz. Their
      data in Table 2. Then              population would reach           estimated and actual
      determine whether the              15,000, would the answer         scores are given in Table 4.
      data appears to be linearly        involve interpolation or         Plot the points, then sketch
      related.                           extrapolation?                   a line that fits the data.

0 -105

2 -50                                     Year Population           Predicted Actual

4        1                                1990     5,600            6        6

6 55                                      1995     5,950            7        7

8 105                                     2000     6,300            7        8

10 160                                    2005     6,600            8        8

Table 2                                   2010     6,900            7        9

                                          Table 3                   9        10

                                                                    10       10

                                                                    10       9

                                                                    Table 4

37. Draw a best-fit line for the plotted
      data.

For the following exercises, consider the data in Table 5, which shows the percent of unemployed in a city of people 25
years or older who are college graduates is given below, by year.

                                   Year            2000 2002 2005 2007 2010

            Percent Graduates 6.5 7.0 7.4 8.2 9.0

            Table 5
394 4 · Exercises

38. Determine whether the          39. In what year will the          40. Based on the set of data given
      trend appears to be linear.        percentage exceed 12%?             in Table 6, calculate the
      If so, and assuming the                                               regression line using a
      trend continues, find a                                               calculator or other technology
      linear regression model to                                            tool, and determine the
      predict the percent of                                                correlation coefficient to three
      unemployed in a given                                                 decimal places.
      year to three decimal
      places.                                                                        17 20 23 26 29

                                                                                     15 25 31 37 40

                                                                            Table 6

41. Based on the set of data given
      in Table 7, calculate the
      regression line using a
      calculator or other technology
      tool, and determine the
      correlation coefficient to three
      decimal places.

               10 12 15 18 20

               36 34 30 28 22

      Table 7

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs show the population and the year over the ten-year span (population, year) for specific recorded
years:

42. Use linear regression to       43. Predict when the               44. What is the correlation
      determine a function               population will hit 12,000.        coefficient for this model to
      where the year depends on                                             three decimal places of
      the population, to three                                              accuracy?
      decimal places of accuracy.

45. According to the model,
      what is the population in
      2014?

Practice Test                      2. Determine whether the           3. Determine whether the
                                       following function is              following function is
1. Determine whether the               increasing or decreasing.          increasing or decreasing.
    following algebraic equation
    can be written as a linear
    function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4 · Exercises 395

4. Find a linear equation that     5. Find a linear equation, that       6. Find the slope of the line in Figure
    passes through (5, 1) and (3,      has an x intercept at (-4, 0)         1.
    -9), if possible.                  and a y-intercept at (0, -6), if
                                       possible.

7. Write an equation for line in Figure 2.                                                       Figure 1

                                                          8. Does Table 1 represent a linear function? If so, find
                                                              a linear equation that models the data.
                                                                            -6 0 2 4
                                                                            14 32 38 44
                                                              Table 1

Figure 2

9. Does Table 2 represent a linear function? If so, find  10. At 6 am, an online
    a linear equation that models the data.                     company has sold 120
         x 1 3 7 11                                             items that day. If the
                                                                company sells an average
      g(x) 4 9 19 12                                            of 30 items per hour for
    Table 2                                                     the remainder of the day,
                                                                write an expression to
                                                                represent the number of
                                                                items that were sold after
                                                                6 am.
396 4 · Exercises

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or
neither parallel nor perpendicular.

11.                               12.                                     13. Find the x- and y-intercepts

                                                                          of the equation

14. Given below are               15. Write an equation for a line        16. Sketch a line with a
      descriptions of two lines.        perpendicular to
      Find the slopes of Line 1                              and passing  y-intercept of            and
      and Line 2. Is the pair of        through the point
      lines parallel,                                                     slope
      perpendicular, or neither?

      Line 1: Passes through
                   and

      Line 2: Passes through
              and

17. Graph of the linear           18. For the two linear                  19. A car rental company
      function                          functions, find the point of            offers two plans for renting
                                        intersection:                           a car.

                                                                                Plan A: $25 per day and
                                                                                $0.10 per mile

                                                                                Plan B: $40 per day with
                                                                                free unlimited mileage

                                                                                How many miles would you
                                                                                need to drive for plan B to
                                                                                save you money?

20. Find the area of a triangle   21. A town's population                 22. The number of people
                                        increases at a constant                 afflicted with the common
     bounded by the y axis, the         rate. In 2010 the                       cold in the winter months
                                        population was 65,000. By               dropped steadily by 25
     line                and            2012 the population had                 each year since 2002 until
                                        increased to 90,000.                    2012. In 2002, 8,040 people
     the line perpendicular to          Assuming this trend                     were inflicted. Find the
                                        continues, predict the                  linear function that models
     that passes through the            population in 2018.                     the number of people
                                                                                afflicted with the common
     origin.                                                                    cold as a function of the
                                                                                year, When will less than
                                                                                6,000 people be afflicted?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        4 · Exercises 397

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 3, showing the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in a
given year, where represents years since 1980.

23. Find the linear function                              Figure 3  25. In 2004, a school
      where depends on the                                                population was 1250. By
      number of years since   24. Find and interpret the                  2012 the population had
      1980.                         y-intercept.                          dropped to 875. Assume
                                                                          the population is changing
                                                                          linearly.

                                                                        How much did the

                                                                          population drop between
                                                                          the year 2004 and 2012?

                                                                        What is the average

                                                                          population decline per
                                                                          year?

                                                                        Find an equation for the

                                                                          population, P, of the school
                                                                          t years after 2004.

26. Draw a scatter plot for the data provided in Table  27. Draw a best-fit line for the plotted data.
      3. Then determine whether the data appears to be
      linearly related.

0        2  46                8 10

-450 -200 10 265 500 755

Table 3

For the following exercises, use Table 4, which shows the percent of unemployed persons 25 years or older who are
college graduates in a particular city, by year.

                              Year  2000 2002 2005 2007 2010

                Percent Graduates 8.5 8.0 7.2 6.7 6.4

            Table 4
398 4 · Exercises

28. Determine whether the           29. In what year will the          30. Based on the set of data given in
      trend appears linear. If so,        percentage drop below              Table 5, calculate the regression line
      and assuming the trend              4%?                                using a calculator or other
      continues, find a linear                                               technology tool, and determine the
      regression model to                                                    correlation coefficient. Round to
      predict the percent of                                                 three decimal places of accuracy.
      unemployed in a given
      year to three decimal                                                    x 16 18 20 24 26
      places.
                                                                               y 106 110 115 120 125

                                                                             Table 5

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The
following ordered pairs shows the population (in hundreds) and the year over the ten-year span, (population, year) for
specific recorded years:

31. Use linear regression to        32. Predict when the               33. What is the correlation
      determine a function y,             population will hit 20,000.        coefficient for this model?
      where the year depends on
      the population. Round to
      three decimal places of
      accuracy.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      5 · Introduction 399

5  POLYNOMIAL AND RATIONAL FUNCTIONS

Whether they think about it in mathematical terms or not, scuba divers must consider the impact of functional
relationships in order to remain safe. The gas laws, which are a series of relations and equations that describe the
behavior of most gases, play a core role in diving. This diver, near the wreck of a World War II Japanese ocean liner
turned troop transport, must remain attentive to gas laws during their dive and as they ascend to the surface. (credit:
"Aikoku - Aft Gun": modification of work by montereydiver/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Quadratic Functions
  5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions
  5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions
  5.4 Dividing Polynomials
  5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions
  5.6 Rational Functions
  5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions
  5.8 Modeling Using Variation

      Introduction to Polynomial and Rational Functions

You don't need to dive very deep to feel the effects of pressure. As a person in their neighborhood pool moves eight,
ten, twelve feet down, they often feel pain in their ears as a result of water and air pressure differentials. Pressure plays
a much greater role at ocean diving depths.

id="scuban">Scuba and free divers are constantly negotiating the effects of pressure in order to experience enjoyable,
safe, and productive dives. Gases in a person's respiratory system and diving apparatus interact according to certain
physical properties, which upon discovery and evaluation are collectively known as the gas laws. Some are conceptually
simple, such as the inverse relationship regarding pressure and volume, and others are more complex. While their
formulas seem more straightforward than many you will encounter in this chapter, the gas laws are generally
polynomial expressions.
400 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

    5.1 Quadratic Functions

      Learning Objectives

       In this section, you will:
                  Recognize characteristics of parabolas.
                  Understand how the graph of a parabola is related to its quadratic function.
                  Determine a quadratic function's minimum or maximum value.
                  Solve problems involving a quadratic function's minimum or maximum value.

                                      Figure 1 An array of satellite dishes. (credit: Matthew Colvin de Valle, Flickr)
       Curved antennas, such as the ones shown in Figure 1, are commonly used to focus microwaves and radio waves to
       transmit television and telephone signals, as well as satellite and spacecraft communication. The cross-section of the
       antenna is in the shape of a parabola, which can be described by a quadratic function.
       In this section, we will investigate quadratic functions, which frequently model problems involving area and projectile
       motion. Working with quadratic functions can be less complex than working with higher degree functions, so they
       provide a good opportunity for a detailed study of function behavior.

     Recognizing Characteristics of Parabolas

       The graph of a quadratic function is a U-shaped curve called a parabola. One important feature of the graph is that it has
       an extreme point, called the vertex. If the parabola opens up, the vertex represents the lowest point on the graph, or
       the minimum value of the quadratic function. If the parabola opens down, the vertex represents the highest point on the
       graph, or the maximum value. In either case, the vertex is a turning point on the graph. The graph is also symmetric with
       a vertical line drawn through the vertex, called the axis of symmetry. These features are illustrated in Figure 2.

                                                                                     Figure 2
       The y-intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points at which the
       parabola crosses the x-axis. If they exist, the x-intercepts represent the zeros, or roots, of the quadratic function, the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.1 · Quadratic Functions 401

values of at which

EXAMPLE 1

Identifying the Characteristics of a Parabola       intercept of the parabola shown in Figure 3.
Determine the vertex, axis of symmetry, zeros, and

                                                    Figure 3

Solution

The vertex is the turning point of the graph. We can see that the vertex is at      Because this parabola opens upward,

the axis of symmetry is the vertical line that intersects the parabola at the vertex. So the axis of symmetry is       This

parabola does not cross the axis, so it has no zeros. It crosses the axis at        so this is the y-intercept.

Understanding How the Graphs of Parabolas are Related to Their Quadratic
Functions

The general form of a quadratic function presents the function in the form

where and are real numbers and      If              the parabola opens upward. If       the parabola opens

downward. We can use the general form of a parabola to find the equation for the axis of symmetry.

The axis of symmetry is defined by  If we use the quadratic formula,                    to solve

                for the intercepts, or zeros, we find the value of halfway between them is always                 the

equation for the axis of symmetry.

Figure 4 represents the graph of the quadratic function written in general form as                In this form,
                                                                                                                This also
           and      Because         the parabola opens upward. The axis of symmetry is

makes sense because we can see from the graph that the vertical line            divides the graph in half. The vertex

always occurs along the axis of symmetry. For a parabola that opens upward, the vertex occurs at the lowest point on

the graph, in this instance,        The intercepts, those points where the parabola crosses the axis, occur at

and
402 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                                              Figure 4
The standard form of a quadratic function presents the function in the form

where    is the vertex. Because the vertex appears in the standard form of the quadratic function, this form is also

known as the vertex form of a quadratic function.

As with the general form, if               the parabola opens upward and the vertex is a minimum. If  the parabola opens

downward, and the vertex is a maximum. Figure 5 represents the graph of the quadratic function written in standard

form as                          Since        in this example,  In this form,                         and

Because  the parabola opens downward. The vertex is at

                                                                              Figure 5                Figure 6 is the

The standard form is useful for determining how the graph is transformed from the graph of
graph of this basic function.

                                                   Figure 6

If       the graph shifts upward, whereas if  the graph shifts downward. In Figure 5,                 so the graph is shifted

4 units upward. If  the graph shifts toward the right and if    the graph shifts to the left. In Figure 5,             so

the graph is shifted 2 units to the left. The magnitude of indicates the stretch of the graph. If     the point

associated with a particular value shifts farther from the x-axis, so the graph appears to become narrower, and there

is a vertical stretch. But if              the point associated with a particular value shifts closer to the x-axis, so the graph

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.1 · Quadratic Functions 403

appears to become wider, but in fact there is a vertical compression. In Figure 5,  so the graph becomes
narrower.

The standard form and the general form are equivalent methods of describing the same function. We can see this by
expanding out the general form and setting it equal to the standard form.

For the linear terms to be equal, the coefficients must be equal.
This is the axis of symmetry we defined earlier. Setting the constant terms equal:

In practice, though, it is usually easier to remember that k is the output value of the function when the input is so

Forms of Quadratic Functions

A quadratic function is a polynomial function of degree two. The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola.

The general form of a quadratic function is   where and are real numbers and

The standard form of a quadratic function is  where

The vertex  is located at

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a graph of a quadratic function, write the equation of the function in general form.
 1. Identify the horizontal shift of the parabola; this value is Identify the vertical shift of the parabola; this value is

 2. Substitute the values of the horizontal and vertical shift for and in the function
 3. Substitute the values of any point, other than the vertex, on the graph of the parabola for and
 4. Solve for the stretch factor,
 5. Expand and simplify to write in general form.

  EXAMPLE 2                                                                         and then expand the

Writing the Equation of a Quadratic Function from the Graph
Write an equation for the quadratic function in Figure 7 as a transformation of
formula, and simplify terms to write the equation in general form.
404 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

     Solution                                               Figure 7
We can see the graph of g is the graph of                shifted to the left 2 and down 3, giving a formula in the form

Substituting the coordinates of a point on the curve, such as      we can solve for the stretch factor.

In standard form, the algebraic model for this graph is
To write this in general polynomial form, we can expand the formula and simplify terms.

Notice that the horizontal and vertical shifts of the basic graph of the quadratic function determine the location of the
vertex of the parabola; the vertex is unaffected by stretches and compressions.

Analysis

We can check our work using the table feature on a graphing utility. First enter         Next, select

then use                                   and  and select         See Table 1.

                                                -6 -4 -2 0 2

                                                5 -1 -3 -1 5

                                                Table 1

The ordered pairs in the table correspond to points on the graph.

TRY IT #1 A coordinate grid has been superimposed over the quadratic path of a basketball in Figure 8. Find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    5.1 · Quadratic Functions 405

an equation for the path of the ball. Does the shooter make the basket?

                                                             Figure 8 (credit: modification of work by Dan Meyer)

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a quadratic function in general form, find the vertex of the parabola.
 1. Identify
 2. Find the x-coordinate of the vertex, by substituting and into
 3. Find the y-coordinate of the vertex, by evaluating

  EXAMPLE 3                                 Rewrite the quadratic in standard form (vertex form).

Finding the Vertex of a Quadratic Function
Find the vertex of the quadratic function

     Solution

Rewriting into standard form, the stretch factor will be the same as the in the original quadratic. First, find the
horizontal coordinate of the vertex. Then find the vertical coordinate of the vertex. Substitute the values into standard
form, using the " " from the general form.
406 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

The standard form of a quadratic function prior to writing the function then becomes the following:

     Analysis
One reason we may want to identify the vertex of the parabola is that this point will inform us where the maximum or
minimum value of the output occurs, and where it occurs,

    TRY IT #2      Given the equation                       write the equation in general form and then in standard
                   form.

Finding the Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function

Any number can be the input value of a quadratic function. Therefore, the domain of any quadratic function is all real
numbers. Because parabolas have a maximum or a minimum point, the range is restricted. Since the vertex of a
parabola will be either a maximum or a minimum, the range will consist of all y-values greater than or equal to the
y-coordinate at the turning point or less than or equal to the y-coordinate at the turning point, depending on whether
the parabola opens up or down.

Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function

The domain of any quadratic function is all real numbers unless the context of the function presents some
restrictions.

The range of a quadratic function written in general form              with a positive value is

               or                           the range of a quadratic function written in general form with a negative  value

is               or 

The range of a quadratic function written in standard form             with a positive value is

the range of a quadratic function written in standard form with a negative value is

    ...

         HOW TO

Given a quadratic function, find the domain and range.

1. Identify the domain of any quadratic function as all real numbers.

2. Determine whether is positive or negative. If is positive, the parabola has a minimum. If is negative, the

    parabola has a maximum.

3. Determine the maximum or minimum value of the parabola,

4. If the parabola has a minimum, the range is given by     or  If the parabola has a maximum, the

    range is given by                      or 

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function
Find the domain and range of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          5.1 · Quadratic Functions 407

     Solution
As with any quadratic function, the domain is all real numbers.
Because is negative, the parabola opens downward and has a maximum value. We need to determine the maximum
value. We can begin by finding the value of the vertex.

The maximum value is given by

The range is  or 

       TRY IT #3 Find the domain and range of

Determining the Maximum and Minimum Values of Quadratic Functions

The output of the quadratic function at the vertex is the maximum or minimum value of the function, depending on the
orientation of the parabola. We can see the maximum and minimum values in Figure 9.

                                                                              Figure 9

There are many real-world scenarios that involve finding the maximum or minimum value of a quadratic function, such
as applications involving area and revenue.

  EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Maximum Value of a Quadratic Function
A backyard farmer wants to enclose a rectangular space for a new garden within her fenced backyard. She has
purchased 80 feet of wire fencing to enclose three sides, and she will use a section of the backyard fence as the fourth
side.

 Find a formula for the area enclosed by the fence if the sides of fencing perpendicular to the existing fence have

length

 What dimensions should she make her garden to maximize the enclosed area?

     Solution
Let's use a diagram such as Figure 10 to record the given information. It is also helpful to introduce a temporary
variable, to represent the width of the garden and the length of the fence section parallel to the backyard fence.
408 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                Figure 10

 We know we have only 80 feet of fence available, and                          or more simply,  This

allows us to represent the width, in terms of

Now we are ready to write an equation for the area the fence encloses. We know the area of a rectangle is length
multiplied by width, so

This formula represents the area of the fence in terms of the variable length  The function, written in general form,
is

 The quadratic has a negative leading coefficient, so the graph will open downward, and the vertex will be the

maximum value for the area. In finding the vertex, we must be careful because the equation is not written in standard

polynomial form with decreasing powers. This is why we rewrote the function in general form above. Since is the

coefficient of the squared term,           and

To find the vertex:

The maximum value of the function is an area of 800 square feet, which occurs when              feet. When the shorter

sides are 20 feet, there is 40 feet of fencing left for the longer side. To maximize the area, she should enclose the garden

so the two shorter sides have length 20 feet and the longer side parallel to the existing fence has length 40 feet.

     Analysis
This problem also could be solved by graphing the quadratic function. We can see where the maximum area occurs on a
graph of the quadratic function in Figure 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5.1 · Quadratic Functions 409

                                                                           Figure 11

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an application involving revenue, use a quadratic equation to find the maximum.
 1. Write a quadratic equation for a revenue function.
 2. Find the vertex of the quadratic equation.
 3. Determine the y-value of the vertex.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding Maximum Revenue
The unit price of an item affects its supply and demand. That is, if the unit price goes up, the demand for the item will
usually decrease. For example, a local newspaper currently has 84,000 subscribers at a quarterly charge of $30. Market
research has suggested that if the owners raise the price to $32, they would lose 5,000 subscribers. Assuming that
subscriptions are linearly related to the price, what price should the newspaper charge for a quarterly subscription to
maximize their revenue?

     Solution
Revenue is the amount of money a company brings in. In this case, the revenue can be found by multiplying the price
per subscription times the number of subscribers, or quantity. We can introduce variables, for price per subscription
and for quantity, giving us the equation

Because the number of subscribers changes with the price, we need to find a relationship between the variables. We

know that currently  and                      We also know that if the price rises to $32, the newspaper would lose 5,000

subscribers, giving a second pair of values,  and  From this we can find a linear equation relating the

two quantities. The slope will be

This tells us the paper will lose 2,500 subscribers for each dollar they raise the price. We can then solve for the
y-intercept.

This gives us the linear equation                  relating cost and subscribers. We now return to our revenue
equation.
410 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

       We now have a quadratic function for revenue as a function of the subscription charge. To find the price that will
       maximize revenue for the newspaper, we can find the vertex.

       The model tells us that the maximum revenue will occur if the newspaper charges $31.80 for a subscription. To find what
       the maximum revenue is, we evaluate the revenue function.

            Analysis
       This could also be solved by graphing the quadratic as in Figure 12. We can see the maximum revenue on a graph of the
       quadratic function.

                                                                             Figure 12

Finding the x- and y-Intercepts of a Quadratic Function

Much as we did in the application problems above, we also need to find intercepts of quadratic equations for graphing
parabolas. Recall that we find the intercept of a quadratic by evaluating the function at an input of zero, and we find
the intercepts at locations where the output is zero. Notice in Figure 13 that the number of intercepts can vary
depending upon the location of the graph.

                                 Figure 13 Number of x-intercepts of a parabola

...

     HOW TO

Given a quadratic function       find the  and x-intercepts.

1. Evaluate  to find the y-intercept.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 5.1 · Quadratic Functions 411

2. Solve the quadratic equation                 to find the x-intercepts.

  EXAMPLE 7

Finding the y- and x-Intercepts of a Parabola
Find the y- and x-intercepts of the quadratic

     Solution
We find the y-intercept by evaluating

So the y-intercept is at
For the x-intercepts, we find all solutions of

In this case, the quadratic can be factored easily, providing the simplest method for solution.

So the x-intercepts are at       and

Analysis

By graphing the function, we can confirm that the graph crosses the y-axis at      We can also confirm that the graph

crosses the x-axis at       and       See Figure 14

                                                     Figure 14

Rewriting Quadratics in Standard Form

In Example 7, the quadratic was easily solved by factoring. However, there are many quadratics that cannot be factored.
We can solve these quadratics by first rewriting them in standard form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a quadratic function, find the intercepts by rewriting in standard form.

1. Substitute and into

2. Substitute          into the general form of the quadratic function to find

3. Rewrite the quadratic in standard form using and

4. Solve for when the output of the function will be zero to find the intercepts.
412 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

  EXAMPLE 8

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Parabola
Find the intercepts of the quadratic function

     Solution
We begin by solving for when the output will be zero.

Because the quadratic is not easily factorable in this case, we solve for the intercepts by first rewriting the quadratic in
standard form.

We know that  Then we solve for and

So now we can rewrite in standard form.
We can now solve for when the output will be zero.

The graph has x-intercepts at              and

We can check our work by graphing the given function on a graphing utility and observing the  intercepts. See Figure
15.

                                                       Figure 15

Analysis

We could have achieved the same results using the quadratic formula. Identify  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.1 · Quadratic Functions 413

So the x-intercepts occur at  and

TRY IT #4  In a Try It, we found the standard and general form for the function          Now
           find the y- and x-intercepts (if any).

EXAMPLE 9

Applying the Vertex and x-Intercepts of a Parabola
A ball is thrown upward from the top of a 40 foot high building at a speed of 80 feet per second. The ball's height above
ground can be modeled by the equation

 When does the ball reach the maximum height?   What is the maximum height of the ball?
 When does the ball hit the ground?

     Solution

 The ball reaches the maximum height at the vertex of the parabola.

The ball reaches a maximum height after 2.5 seconds.

 To find the maximum height, find the coordinate of the vertex of the parabola.

The ball reaches a maximum height of 140 feet.
414 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

     To find when the ball hits the ground, we need to determine when the height is zero,

       We use the quadratic formula.

       Because the square root does not simplify nicely, we can use a calculator to approximate the values of the solutions.

       The second answer is outside the reasonable domain of our model, so we conclude the ball will hit the ground after
       about 5.458 seconds. See Figure 16.

                                                                           Figure 16

Note that the graph does not represent the physical path of the ball upward and downward. Keep the quantities on
each axis in mind while interpreting the graph.

TRY IT #5  A rock is thrown upward from the top of a 112-foot high cliff overlooking the ocean at a speed of
           96 feet per second. The rock's height above ocean can be modeled by the equation

               When does the rock reach the maximum height?
               What is the maximum height of the rock?  When does the rock hit the ocean?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with quadratic equations.

Graphing Quadratic Functions in General Form (http://openstax.org/l/graphquadgen)
Graphing Quadratic Functions in Standard Form (http://openstax.org/l/graphquadstan)
Quadratic Function Review (http://openstax.org/l/quadfuncrev)
Characteristics of a Quadratic Function (http://openstax.org/l/characterquad)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    5.1 · Quadratic Functions 415

        5.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain the advantage of       2. How can the vertex of a       3. Explain why the condition of
    writing a quadratic function      parabola be used in solving               is imposed in the
    in standard form.                 real-world problems?
                                                                       definition of the quadratic
                                                                       function.

4. What is another name for       5. What two algebraic methods
    the standard form of a            can be used to find the
    quadratic function?               horizontal intercepts of a
                                      quadratic function?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, rewrite the quadratic functions in standard form and give the vertex.

6.                                7.                               8.

9.                                10.                              11.

12.                               13.

For the following exercises, determine whether there is a minimum or maximum value to each quadratic function. Find
the value and the axis of symmetry.

14.                               15.                              16.

17.                               18.                              19.

20.

For the following exercises, determine the domain and range of the quadratic function.

21.                               22.                              23.

24.                               25.

For the following exercises, use the vertex  and a point on the graph        to find the general form of the equation
of the quadratic function.

26.                               27.                                   28.

29.                               30.                                  31.

32.                               33.
416 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Graphical

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the quadratic function and give the vertex, axis of symmetry, and
intercepts.

34.                                        35.                    36.

37.                                        38.                    39.

For the following exercises, write the equation for the graphed quadratic function.

40.                                             41.                    42.

43.                                             44.                    45.

Numeric

For the following exercises, use the table of values that represent points on the graph of a quadratic function. By
determining the vertex and axis of symmetry, find the general form of the equation of the quadratic function.

46.                                        47.                    48.

     -2 -1 0 1 2                                     -2 -1 0 1 2       -2 -1 0 1 2

         5 2 125                                     1 0 149           -2 1 2 1 -2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.1 · Quadratic Functions 417

49.                                50.

     -2 -1 0 1 2                                 -2 -1 0 1 2

     -8 -3 0 1 0                                 8 2 028

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the answer.

51. Graph on the same set of axes the functions        52. Graph on the same set of axes
                                                                                                  and
               ,         , and                .                                                   and

     What appears to be the effect of changing the           What appears to be the effect of adding a
     coefficient?                                            constant?

53. Graph on the same set of axes                      54. The path of an object projected at a 45 degree

                                        , and          angle with initial velocity of 80 feet per second is

                                                       given by the function                            where

     What appears to be the effect of adding or        is the horizontal distance traveled and          is the
     subtracting those numbers?
                                                       height in feet. Use the TRACE feature of your

                                                       calculator to determine the height of the object

                                                       when it has traveled 100 feet away horizontally.

55. A suspension bridge can be modeled by the

     quadratic function                 with

                         where is the number of

     feet from the center and    is height in feet.

     Use the TRACE feature of your calculator to

     estimate how far from the center does the bridge

     have a height of 100 feet.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use the vertex of the graph of the quadratic function and the direction the graph opens to
find the domain and range of the function.

56. Vertex        opens up.        57. Vertex          opens down.  58. Vertex    opens
                                                                          down.

59. Vertex               opens
      up.

For the following exercises, write the equation of the quadratic function that contains the given point and has the same
shape as the given function.

60. Contains      and has          61. Contains        and has      62. Contains  and has the

     shape of                           the shape of                shape of

     Vertex is on the axis.             Vertex is on the axis.      Vertex is on the axis.
418 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

63. Contains  and has                      64. Contains  and has the            65. Contains   has the

the shape of                               shape of                             shape of

Vertex is on the axis.                     Vertex is on the axis.               Vertex has x-coordinate of

Real-World Applications                    67. Find the dimensions of the       68. Find the dimensions of the
                                                 rectangular dog park split           rectangular dog park
66. Find the dimensions of the                   into 2 pens of the same              producing the greatest
      rectangular dog park                       size producing the greatest          enclosed area split into 3
      producing the greatest                     possible enclosed area               sections of the same size
      enclosed area given 200                    given 300 feet of fencing.           given 500 feet of fencing.
      feet of fencing.

69. Among all of the pairs of              70. Among all of the pairs of        71. Suppose that the price per
      numbers whose sum is 6,                    numbers whose difference
      find the pair with the                     is 12, find the pair with the  unit in dollars of a cell
      largest product. What is                   smallest product. What is
      the product?                               the product?                   phone production is

                                                                                modeled by

                                                                                               where

                                                                                is in thousands of phones

                                                                                produced, and the revenue

                                                                                represented by thousands

                                                                                of dollars is              Find

                                                                                the production level that

                                                                                will maximize revenue.

72. A rocket is launched in the            73. A ball is thrown in the air      74. A soccer stadium holds
      air. Its height, in meters                 from the top of a building.          62,000 spectators. With a
      above sea level, as a                      Its height, in meters above          ticket price of $11, the
      function of time, in seconds,              ground, as a function of             average attendance has
      is given by                                time, in seconds, is given           been 26,000. When the
                                                 by                                   price dropped to $9, the
      Find the maximum height                    How long does it take to             average attendance rose to
      the rocket attains.                        reach maximum height?                31,000. Assuming that
                                                                                      attendance is linearly
                                                                                      related to ticket price, what
                                                                                      ticket price would
                                                                                      maximize revenue?

75. A farmer finds that if she
      plants 75 trees per acre,
      each tree will yield 20
      bushels of fruit. She
      estimates that for each
      additional tree planted per
      acre, the yield of each tree
      will decrease by 3 bushels.
      How many trees should
      she plant per acre to
      maximize her harvest?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                        5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 419

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Identify power functions.
           Identify end behavior of power functions.
           Identify polynomial functions.
           Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomial functions.

                                                             Figure 1 (credit: Jason Bay, Flickr)
Suppose a certain species of bird thrives on a small island. Its population over the last few years is shown in Table 1.

         Year

Bird Population

Table 1

The population can be estimated using the function          where represents the bird

population on the island years after 2009. We can use this model to estimate the maximum bird population and when it

will occur. We can also use this model to predict when the bird population will disappear from the island. In this section,

we will examine functions that we can use to estimate and predict these types of changes.

Identifying Power Functions

Before we can understand the bird problem, it will be helpful to understand a different type of function. A power
function is a function with a single term that is the product of a real number, a coefficient, and a variable raised to a
fixed real number.

As an example, consider functions for area or volume. The function for the area of a circle with radius is

and the function for the volume of a sphere with radius is

Both of these are examples of power functions because they consist of a coefficient, or    multiplied by a variable
raised to a power.

  Power Function

  A power function is a function that can be represented in the form
420 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

where and are real numbers, and is known as the coefficient.

Q&A              Is              a power function?

                 No. A power function contains a variable base raised to a fixed power. This function has a constant base
                 raised to a variable power. This is called an exponential function, not a power function.

  EXAMPLE 1

Identifying Power Functions
Which of the following functions are power functions?

     Solution
All of the listed functions are power functions.

The constant and identity functions are power functions because they can be written as       and

respectively.

The quadratic and cubic functions are power functions with whole number powers          and

The reciprocal and reciprocal squared functions are power functions with negative whole number powers because they

can be written as                and

The square and cube root functions are power functions with fractional powers because they can be written as

             or

TRY IT #1 Which functions are power functions?

Identifying End Behavior of Power Functions

Figure 2 shows the graphs of                        and  which are all power functions with even, whole-

number powers. Notice that these graphs have similar shapes, very much like that of the quadratic function in the

toolkit. However, as the power increases, the graphs flatten somewhat near the origin and become steeper away from

the origin.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 421

                                        Figure 2 Even-power functions

To describe the behavior as numbers become larger and larger, we use the idea of infinity. We use the symbol  for

positive infinity and for negative infinity. When we say that " approaches infinity," which can be symbolically

written as   we are describing a behavior; we are saying that is increasing without bound.

With the positive even-power function, as the input increases or decreases without bound, the output values become

very large, positive numbers. Equivalently, we could describe this behavior by saying that as approaches positive or

negative infinity, the  values increase without bound. In symbolic form, we could write

                                                                   

Figure 3 shows the graphs of                          and        which are all power functions with odd, whole-

number powers. Notice that these graphs look similar to the cubic function in the toolkit. Again, as the power increases,

the graphs flatten near the origin and become steeper away from the origin.

                                        Figure 3 Odd-power functions

These examples illustrate that functions of the form         reveal symmetry of one kind or another. First, in Figure 2

we see that even functions of the form                even, are symmetric about the axis. In Figure 3 we see that odd

functions of the form         odd, are symmetric about the origin.

For these odd power functions, as approaches negative infinity,    decreases without bound. As approaches

positive infinity,      increases without bound. In symbolic form we write

                                                                   

                                                                 

The behavior of the graph of a function as the input values get very small (   ) and get very large (    ) is

referred to as the end behavior of the function. We can use words or symbols to describe end behavior.

Figure 4 shows the end behavior of power functions in the form                where is a non-negative integer
depending on the power and the constant.
422 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                      Figure 4

...

     HOW TO

Given a power function                     where is a non-negative integer, identify the end behavior.

1. Determine whether the power is even or odd.
2. Determine whether the constant is positive or negative.
3. Use Figure 4 to identify the end behavior.

EXAMPLE 2

Identifying the End Behavior of a Power Function
Describe the end behavior of the graph of

Solution

The coefficient is 1 (positive) and the exponent of the power function is 8 (an even number). As approaches infinity, the

output (value of    ) increases without bound. We write as         As approaches negative infinity, the

output increases without bound. In symbolic form, as               We can graphically represent the function as

shown in Figure 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 423

                                                   Figure 5

EXAMPLE 3

Identifying the End Behavior of a Power Function.
Describe the end behavior of the graph of

Solution

The exponent of the power function is 9 (an odd number). Because the coefficient is (negative), the graph is the

reflection about the axis of the graph of          Figure 6 shows that as approaches infinity, the output decreases

without bound. As approaches negative infinity, the output increases without bound. In symbolic form, we would write

                                                             

                                                             

                                                                              Figure 6
     Analysis
We can check our work by using the table feature on a graphing utility.

                                                                      -10 1,000,000,000
                                                                    Table 2
424 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                  -5  1,953,125

                                                  0   0

                                                  5   -1,953,125

                                                  10 -1,000,000,000

                                           Table 2

We can see from Table 2 that, when we substitute very small values for the output is very large, and when we
substitute very large values for the output is very small (meaning that it is a very large negative value).

       TRY IT #2 Describe in words and symbols the end behavior of

Identifying Polynomial Functions

An oil pipeline bursts in the Gulf of Mexico, causing an oil slick in a roughly circular shape. The slick is currently 24 miles
in radius, but that radius is increasing by 8 miles each week. We want to write a formula for the area covered by the oil
slick by combining two functions. The radius of the spill depends on the number of weeks that have passed. This
relationship is linear.

We can combine this with the formula for the area of a circle.

Composing these functions gives a formula for the area in terms of weeks.

Multiplying gives the formula.

This formula is an example of a polynomial function. A polynomial function consists of either zero or the sum of a finite
number of non-zero terms, each of which is a product of a number, called the coefficient of the term, and a variable
raised to a non-negative integer power.

  Polynomial Functions

  Let be a non-negative integer. A polynomial function is a function that can be written in the form

This is called the general form of a polynomial function. Each is a coefficient and can be any real number, but  .

Each expression  is a term of a polynomial function.

  EXAMPLE 4

Identifying Polynomial Functions
Which of the following are polynomial functions?

Access for free at openstax.org
                      5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 425

     Solution
The first two functions are examples of polynomial functions because they can be written in the form

                                                      where the powers are non-negative integers and the coefficients are real
numbers.

·  can be written as

·  can be written as

·  cannot be written in this form and is therefore not a polynomial function.

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial Function

Because of the form of a polynomial function, we can see an infinite variety in the number of terms and the power of the
variable. Although the order of the terms in the polynomial function is not important for performing operations, we
typically arrange the terms in descending order of power, or in general form. The degree of the polynomial is the
highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial; it is the power of the first variable if the function is in
general form. The leading term is the term containing the highest power of the variable, or the term with the highest
degree. The leading coefficient is the coefficient of the leading term.

  Terminology of Polynomial Functions

  We often rearrange polynomials so that the powers are descending.

  When a polynomial is written in this way, we say that it is in general form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a polynomial function, identify the degree and leading coefficient.
   1. Find the highest power of to determine the degree of the function.
   2. Identify the term containing the highest power of to find the leading term.
   3. Identify the coefficient of the leading term.

  EXAMPLE 5
Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial Function
Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the following polynomial functions.

     Solution     the highest power of is 3, so the degree is 3. The leading term is the term containing that
For the function
426 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

degree,  The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

For the function  the highest power of is so the degree is         The leading term is the term containing that degree,

The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

For the function  the highest power of is so the degree is         The leading term is the term containing that

degree, The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

TRY IT #3 Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the polynomial

Identifying End Behavior of Polynomial Functions

Knowing the degree of a polynomial function is useful in helping us predict its end behavior. To determine its end
behavior, look at the leading term of the polynomial function. Because the power of the leading term is the highest, that
term will grow significantly faster than the other terms as gets very large or very small, so its behavior will dominate
the graph. For any polynomial, the end behavior of the polynomial will match the end behavior of the power function
consisting of the leading term. See Table 3.

                  Polynomial Function      Leading Term            Graph of Polynomial Function

               Table 3

Access for free at openstax.org
Polynomial Function  Leading Term                  5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 427

                                   Graph of Polynomial Function

               Table 3

  EXAMPLE 6
Identifying End Behavior and Degree of a Polynomial Function
Describe the end behavior and determine a possible degree of the polynomial function in Figure 7.
428 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                        Figure 7

     Solution        get very large, the output values    increase without bound. As the input values get very small,
As the input values
the output values    decrease without bound. We can describe the end behavior symbolically by writing

                                                                  

                                                                  

In words, we could say that as values approach infinity, the function values approach infinity, and as values approach
negative infinity, the function values approach negative infinity.

We can tell this graph has the shape of an odd degree power function that has not been reflected, so the degree of the
polynomial creating this graph must be odd and the leading coefficient must be positive.

TRY IT #4            Describe the end behavior, and determine a possible degree of the polynomial function in Figure
                     8.

                                                                  Figure 8

EXAMPLE 7

Identifying End Behavior and Degree of a Polynomial Function

Given the function                         express the function as a polynomial in general form, and determine the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 429

leading term, degree, and end behavior of the function.

     Solution
Obtain the general form by expanding the given expression for

The general form is                      The leading term is       therefore, the degree of the polynomial is 4.

The degree is even (4) and the leading coefficient is negative (-3), so the end behavior is

                                                                 

                                                               

TRY IT #5            Given the function                            express the function as a polynomial in

                     general form and determine the leading term, degree, and end behavior of the function.

Identifying Local Behavior of Polynomial Functions

In addition to the end behavior of polynomial functions, we are also interested in what happens in the "middle" of the
function. In particular, we are interested in locations where graph behavior changes. A turning point is a point at which
the function values change from increasing to decreasing or decreasing to increasing.

We are also interested in the intercepts. As with all functions, the y-intercept is the point at which the graph intersects

the vertical axis. The point corresponds to the coordinate pair in which the input value is zero. Because a polynomial is a

function, only one output value corresponds to each input value so there can be only one y-intercept  The

x-intercepts occur at the input values that correspond to an output value of zero. It is possible to have more than one

x-intercept. See Figure 9.

                                                                            Figure 9

Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomial Functions

A turning point of a graph is a point at which the graph changes direction from increasing to decreasing or
decreasing to increasing. The y-intercept is the point at which the function has an input value of zero. The x-intercepts
are the points at which the output value is zero.
430 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given a polynomial function, determine the intercepts.

1. Determine the y-intercept by setting          and finding the corresponding output value.

2. Determine the x-intercepts by solving for the input values that yield an output value of zero.

EXAMPLE 8

Determining the Intercepts of a Polynomial Function     written in factored form for your convenience, determine
Given the polynomial function
the y- and x-intercepts.

     Solution
The y-intercept occurs when the input is zero so substitute 0 for

The y-intercept is (0, 8).
The x-intercepts occur when the output is zero.

The x-intercepts are                       and

We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in Figure 10.

                                                 Figure 10

EXAMPLE 9

Determining the Intercepts of a Polynomial Function with Factoring

Given the polynomial function                    determine the y- and x-intercepts.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 431

     Solution
The y-intercept occurs when the input is zero.

The y-intercept is

The x-intercepts occur when the output is zero. To determine when the output is zero, we will need to factor the
polynomial.

The x-intercepts are  and

We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in Figure 11. We can see that the function is even
because

                                                Figure 11

TRY IT #6 Given the polynomial function                      determine the y- and x-intercepts.

Comparing Smooth and Continuous Graphs

The degree of a polynomial function helps us to determine the number of x-intercepts and the number of turning points.
A polynomial function of degree is the product of factors, so it will have at most roots or zeros, or x-intercepts.
The graph of the polynomial function of degree must have at most turning points. This means the graph has at
most one fewer turning point than the degree of the polynomial or one fewer than the number of factors.

A continuous function has no breaks in its graph: the graph can be drawn without lifting the pen from the paper. A
smooth curve is a graph that has no sharp corners. The turning points of a smooth graph must always occur at rounded
curves. The graphs of polynomial functions are both continuous and smooth.

Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomials

A polynomial of degree will have, at most, x-intercepts and  turning points.
432 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 10

Determining the Number of Intercepts and Turning Points of a Polynomial
Without graphing the function, determine the local behavior of the function by finding the maximum number of
x-intercepts and turning points for

     Solution                              so there are at most 10 x-intercepts and at most 9 turning points.
The polynomial has a degree of

TRY IT #7   Without graphing the function, determine the maximum number of x-intercepts and turning
            points for

  EXAMPLE 11

Drawing Conclusions about a Polynomial Function from the Graph
What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown in Figure 12 based on its intercepts and
turning points?

                                                                             Figure 12

     Solution
The end behavior of the graph tells us this is the graph of an even-degree polynomial. See Figure 13.

                                                                             Figure 13
The graph has 2 x-intercepts, suggesting a degree of 2 or greater, and 3 turning points, suggesting a degree of 4 or
greater. Based on this, it would be reasonable to conclude that the degree is even and at least 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 433

TRY IT #8             What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown in Figure 14 based
                      on its intercepts and turning points?

                                                            Figure 14

EXAMPLE 12

Drawing Conclusions about a Polynomial Function from the Factors

Given the function                      determine the local behavior.

     Solution
The y-intercept is found by evaluating

The y-intercept is
The x-intercepts are found by determining the zeros of the function.

The x-intercepts are  and

The degree is 3 so the graph has at most 2 turning points.

TRY IT #9 Given the function                                          determine the local behavior.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with power and polynomial functions.

Find Key Information about a Given Polynomial Function (http://openstax.org/l/keyinfopoly)
End Behavior of a Polynomial Function (http://openstax.org/l/endbehavior)
Turning Points and intercepts of Polynomial Functions (http://openstax.org/l/turningpoints)
Least Possible Degree of a Polynomial Function (http://openstax.org/l/leastposdegree)
434 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

        5.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain the difference                  2. If a polynomial function is in  3. In general, explain the end
    between the coefficient of a               factored form, what would          behavior of a power
    power function and its                     be a good first step in order      function with odd degree if
    degree.                                    to determine the degree of         the leading coefficient is
                                               the function?                      positive.

4. What is the relationship                5. What can we conclude if, in
    between the degree of a
    polynomial function and the                 general, the graph of a
    maximum number of
    turning points in its graph?                polynomial function exhibits

                                                the following end behavior?

                                                As                       

                                                and as

                                                          

Algebraic

For the following exercises, identify the function as a power function, a polynomial function, or neither.

6.                                         7.                                 8.

9.                                         10.                                11.

For the following exercises, find the degree and leading coefficient for the given polynomial.

12.                                        13.                                14.

15.                                        16.

For the following exercises, determine the end behavior of the functions.

17.                                        18.                                19.

20.                                        21.                                22.

23.                                        24.

For the following exercises, find the intercepts of the functions.

25.                                        26.                                  27.
                                                                              30.
28.                                        29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 435

Graphical

For the following exercises, determine the least possible degree of the polynomial function shown.

31.        32.  33.

34.        35.  36.

37.        38.
436 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph of the function provided is a graph of a polynomial function. If
so, determine the number of turning points and the least possible degree for the function.

39.                                             40.       41.

42.                                             43.       44.

45.

Numeric

For the following exercises, make a table to confirm the end behavior of the function.

46.                                        47.       48.

49.                                        50.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.2 · Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 437

Technology

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions using a calculator. Based on the graph, determine the
intercepts and the end behavior.

51.                                 52.                                    53.

54.                                 55.                                    56.

57.                                 58.                                    59.

60.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use the information about the graph of a polynomial function to determine the function.
Assume the leading coefficient is 1 or -1. There may be more than one correct answer.

61. The     intercept is       The       intercepts are  62. The        intercept is    The   intercepts are

            ,    Degree is 2.                                           ,       Degree is 2.

     End behavior: as     ,               ; as  ,        End behavior: as               ,      , as

                                                                        ,             

63. The intercept is           The  intercepts are       64. The intercept is           The intercept is
                                                               Degree is 3.
         ,       Degree is 3.               , as
                                                               End behavior: as
     End behavior: as     ,                                                             ,      , as  ,
                                                                         
         ,       

65. The intercept is           There is no intercept.
      Degree is 4.
                          ,               , as  ,
      End behavior: as

              

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use the written statements to construct a polynomial function that represents the required
information.

66. An oil slick is expanding as    67. A cube has an edge of 3            68. A rectangle has a length of
      a circle. The radius of the         feet. The edge is increasing           10 inches and a width of 6
      circle is increasing at the         at the rate of 2 feet per              inches. If the length is
      rate of 20 meters per day.          minute. Express the                    increased by inches and
      Express the area of the             volume of the cube as a                the width increased by
      circle as a function of the         function of the number                 twice that amount, express
      number of days elapsed.             of minutes elapsed.                    the area of the rectangle as
                                                                                 a function of
438 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

69. An open box is to be                   70. A rectangle is twice as long
      constructed by cutting out                 as it is wide. Squares of
      square corners of inch                     side 2 feet are cut out from
      sides from a piece of                      each corner. Then the sides
      cardboard 8 inches by 8                    are folded up to make an
      inches and then folding up                 open box. Express the
      the sides. Express the                     volume of the box as a
      volume of the box as a                     function of the width ( ).
      function of

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Recognize characteristics of graphs of polynomial functions.
           Use factoring to find zeros of polynomial functions.
           Identify zeros and their multiplicities.
           Determine end behavior.
           Understand the relationship between degree and turning points.
           Graph polynomial functions.
           Use the Intermediate Value Theorem.

The revenue in millions of dollars for a fictional cable company from 2006 through 2013 is shown in Table 1.

Year                                       2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Revenues 52.4 52.8 51.2 49.5 48.6 48.6 48.7 47.1

Table 1

The revenue can be modeled by the polynomial function

where represents the revenue in millions of dollars and represents the year, with  corresponding to 2006. Over

which intervals is the revenue for the company increasing? Over which intervals is the revenue for the company

decreasing? These questions, along with many others, can be answered by examining the graph of the polynomial

function. We have already explored the local behavior of quadratics, a special case of polynomials. In this section we will

explore the local behavior of polynomials in general.

Recognizing Characteristics of Graphs of Polynomial Functions

Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more have graphs that do not have sharp corners; recall that these types of graphs
are called smooth curves. Polynomial functions also display graphs that have no breaks. Curves with no breaks are called
continuous. Figure 1 shows a graph that represents a polynomial function and a graph that represents a function that is
not a polynomial.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 439

                                                                              Figure 1
  EXAMPLE 1
Recognizing Polynomial Functions
Which of the graphs in Figure 2 represents a polynomial function?

                                                                              Figure 2
440 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

     Solution                                                                              has a sharp corner. The
The graphs of and are graphs of polynomial functions. They are smooth and continuous.

The graphs of and are graphs of functions that are not polynomials. The graph of function
graph of function is not continuous.

Q&A  Do all polynomial functions have as their domain all real numbers?
     Yes. Any real number is a valid input for a polynomial function.

Using Factoring to Find Zeros of Polynomial Functions

Recall that if is a polynomial function, the values of for which     are called zeros of If the equation of the

polynomial function can be factored, we can set each factor equal to zero and solve for the zeros.

We can use this method to find intercepts because at the intercepts we find the input values when the output value
is zero. For general polynomials, this can be a challenging prospect. While quadratics can be solved using the relatively
simple quadratic formula, the corresponding formulas for cubic and fourth-degree polynomials are not simple enough
to remember, and formulas do not exist for general higher-degree polynomials. Consequently, we will limit ourselves to
three cases:

1. The polynomial can be factored using known methods: greatest common factor and trinomial factoring.
2. The polynomial is given in factored form.
3. Technology is used to determine the intercepts.

...

     HOW TO

Given a polynomial function find the x-intercepts by factoring.

 1. Set
 2. If the polynomial function is not given in factored form:
 a. Factor out any common monomial factors.
b. Factor any factorable binomials or trinomials.

 3. Set each factor equal to zero and solve to find the intercepts.

  EXAMPLE 2

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function by Factoring
Find the x-intercepts of

     Solution
We can attempt to factor this polynomial to find solutions for

This gives us five x-intercepts:                    and              See Figure 3. We can see that this is an even

function because it is symmetric about the y-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 441

                                        Figure 3

EXAMPLE 3

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function by Factoring
Find the x-intercepts of

     Solution       by factoring.
Find solutions for

There are three x-intercepts:      and  See Figure 4.

                                        Figure 4
442 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

         EXAMPLE 4
       Finding the y- and x-Intercepts of a Polynomial in Factored Form
       Find the y- and x-intercepts of

            Solution
       The y-intercept can be found by evaluating

       So the y-intercept is
       The x-intercepts can be found by solving

So the x-intercepts are          and

     Analysis
We can always check that our answers are reasonable by using a graphing calculator to graph the polynomial as shown
in Figure 5.

                                      Figure 5

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function Using a Graph
Find the x-intercepts of

     Solution
This polynomial is not in factored form, has no common factors, and does not appear to be factorable using techniques
previously discussed. Fortunately, we can use technology to find the intercepts. Keep in mind that some values make
graphing difficult by hand. In these cases, we can take advantage of graphing utilities.

Looking at the graph of this function, as shown in Figure 6, it appears that there are x-intercepts at  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 443

                                                                              Figure 6  and verifying that
We can check whether these are correct by substituting these values for

Since  we have:

Each x-intercept corresponds to a zero of the polynomial function and each zero yields a factor, so we can now write the
polynomial in factored form.

       TRY IT #1 Find the y- and x-intercepts of the function

Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities

Graphs behave differently at various x-intercepts. Sometimes, the graph will cross over the horizontal axis at an
intercept. Other times, the graph will touch the horizontal axis and "bounce" off.
Suppose, for example, we graph the function shown.

Notice in Figure 7 that the behavior of the function at each of the x-intercepts is different.
444 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 7 Identifying the behavior of the graph at an x-intercept by examining the multiplicity of the zero.

The x-intercept       is the solution of equation           The graph passes directly through the x-intercept at

The factor is linear (has a degree of 1), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a line--it passes directly

through the intercept. We call this a single zero because the zero corresponds to a single factor of the function.

The x-intercept       is the repeated solution of equation               The graph touches the axis at the intercept and

changes direction. The factor is quadratic (degree 2), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a quadratic--it

bounces off of the horizontal axis at the intercept.

The factor is repeated, that is, the factor  appears twice. The number of times a given factor appears in the

factored form of the equation of a polynomial is called the multiplicity. The zero associated with this factor,     has

multiplicity 2 because the factor            occurs twice.

The x-intercept       is the repeated solution of factor    The graph passes through the axis at the

intercept, but flattens out a bit first. This factor is cubic (degree 3), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a

cubic--with the same S-shape near the intercept as the toolkit function  We call this a triple zero, or a zero

with multiplicity 3.

For zeros with even multiplicities, the graphs touch or are tangent to the x-axis. For zeros with odd multiplicities, the
graphs cross or intersect the x-axis. See Figure 8 for examples of graphs of polynomial functions with multiplicity 1, 2,
and 3.

                                                                              Figure 8
For higher even powers, such as 4, 6, and 8, the graph will still touch and bounce off of the horizontal axis but, for each
increasing even power, the graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the x-axis.
For higher odd powers, such as 5, 7, and 9, the graph will still cross through the horizontal axis, but for each increasing
odd power, the graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the x-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 445

Graphical Behavior of Polynomials at x-Intercepts

If a polynomial contains a factor of the form      the behavior near the intercept is determined by the power

We say that  is a zero of multiplicity

The graph of a polynomial function will touch the x-axis at zeros with even multiplicities. The graph will cross the
x-axis at zeros with odd multiplicities.

The sum of the multiplicities is the degree of the polynomial function.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a graph of a polynomial function of degree identify the zeros and their multiplicities.

 1. If the graph crosses the x-axis and appears almost linear at the intercept, it is a single zero.
 2. If the graph touches the x-axis and bounces off of the axis, it is a zero with even multiplicity.
 3. If the graph crosses the x-axis at a zero, it is a zero with odd multiplicity.
 4. The sum of the multiplicities is

  EXAMPLE 6

Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities
Use the graph of the function of degree 6 in Figure 9 to identify the zeros of the function and their possible multiplicities.

                                                   Figure 9

     Solution
The polynomial function is of degree 6. The sum of the multiplicities must be 6.

Starting from the left, the first zero occurs at   The graph touches the x-axis, so the multiplicity of the zero must
be even. The zero of most likely has multiplicity

The next zero occurs at  The graph looks almost linear at this point. This is a single zero of multiplicity 1.

The last zero occurs at  The graph crosses the x-axis, so the multiplicity of the zero must be odd. We know that the

multiplicity is likely 3 and that the sum of the multiplicities is 6.

TRY IT #2                Use the graph of the function of degree 9 in Figure 10 to identify the zeros of the function and
                         their multiplicities.
446 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                                                             Figure 10

Determining End Behavior

As we have already learned, the behavior of a graph of a polynomial function of the form

will either ultimately rise or fall as increases without bound and will either rise or fall as decreases without bound.
This is because for very large inputs, say 100 or 1,000, the leading term dominates the size of the output. The same is
true for very small inputs, say -100 or -1,000.

Recall that we call this behavior the end behavior of a function. As we pointed out when discussing quadratic equations,

when the leading term of a polynomial function,  is an even power function, as increases or decreases without

bound,  increases without bound. When the leading term is an odd power function, as decreases without bound,

also decreases without bound; as increases without bound,  also increases without bound. If the leading

term is negative, it will change the direction of the end behavior. Figure 11 summarizes all four cases.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 447

                                                       Figure 11

Understanding the Relationship between Degree and Turning Points

In addition to the end behavior, recall that we can analyze a polynomial function's local behavior. It may have a turning

point where the graph changes from increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or decreasing to increasing (falling to

rising). Look at the graph of the polynomial function             in Figure 12. The graph has three

turning points.
448 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                                             Figure 12

This function is a 4th degree polynomial function and has 3 turning points. The maximum number of turning points of
a polynomial function is always one less than the degree of the function.

Interpreting Turning Points

A turning point is a point of the graph where the graph changes from increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or
decreasing to increasing (falling to rising).

A polynomial of degree will have at most     turning points.

EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Maximum Number of Turning Points Using the Degree of a Polynomial Function
Find the maximum number of turning points of each polynomial function.

  Solution                                 



First, rewrite the polynomial function in descending order:

Identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial function is of degree 5.

The maximum number of turning points is



First, identify the leading term of the polynomial function if the function were expanded.

Then, identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial function is of degree 4.
The maximum number of turning points is

Graphing Polynomial Functions

We can use what we have learned about multiplicities, end behavior, and turning points to sketch graphs of polynomial
functions. Let us put this all together and look at the steps required to graph polynomial functions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 449

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a polynomial function, sketch the graph.
 1. Find the intercepts.
 2. Check for symmetry. If the function is an even function, its graph is symmetrical about the axis, that is,

                             If a function is an odd function, its graph is symmetrical about the origin, that is,

 3. Use the multiplicities of the zeros to determine the behavior of the polynomial at the intercepts.
 4. Determine the end behavior by examining the leading term.
 5. Use the end behavior and the behavior at the intercepts to sketch a graph.
 6. Ensure that the number of turning points does not exceed one less than the degree of the polynomial.
 7. Optionally, use technology to check the graph.

EXAMPLE 8

Sketching the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Sketch a graph of

Solution

This graph has two x-intercepts. At     the factor is squared, indicating a multiplicity of 2. The graph will bounce at

this x-intercept. At  the function has a multiplicity of one, indicating the graph will cross through the axis at this

intercept.

The y-intercept is found by evaluating

The y-intercept is

Additionally, we can see the leading term, if this polynomial were multiplied out, would be  so the end behavior is

that of a vertically reflected cubic, with the outputs decreasing as the inputs approach infinity, and the outputs

increasing as the inputs approach negative infinity. See Figure 13.

To sketch this, we consider that:                              Figure 13

· As         the function                so we know the graph starts in the second quadrant and is decreasing toward

the axis.
450 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

· Since                                    is not equal to  the graph does not display symmetry.
· At
         the graph bounces off of the x-axis, so the function must start increasing.
    At
         the graph crosses the y-axis at the y-intercept. See Figure 14.

                                            Figure 14

Somewhere after this point, the graph must turn back down or start decreasing toward the horizontal axis because the

graph passes through the next intercept at  See Figure 15.

                                            Figure 15

As   the function                          so we know the graph continues to decrease, and we can stop drawing the graph in

the fourth quadrant.

Using technology, we can create the graph for the polynomial function, shown in Figure 16, and verify that the resulting
graph looks like our sketch in Figure 15.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 451

Figure 16 The complete graph of the polynomial function

TRY IT #3 Sketch a graph of

Using the Intermediate Value Theorem

In some situations, we may know two points on a graph but not the zeros. If those two points are on opposite sides of

the x-axis, we can confirm that there is a zero between them. Consider a polynomial function whose graph is smooth

and continuous. The Intermediate Value Theorem states that for two numbers and in the domain of if            and

then the function takes on every value between              and  (While the theorem is intuitive, the

proof is actually quite complicated and requires higher mathematics.) We can apply this theorem to a special case that is

useful in graphing polynomial functions. If a point on the graph of a continuous function at       lies above the axis

and another point at  lies below the axis, there must exist a third point between             and  where the

graph crosses the axis. Call this point  This means that we are assured there is a solution where

In other words, the Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that when a polynomial function changes from a negative value
to a positive value, the function must cross the axis. Figure 17 shows that there is a zero between and

                      Figure 17 Using the Intermediate Value Theorem to show there exists a zero.

Intermediate Value Theorem

Let be a polynomial function. The Intermediate Value Theorem states that if  and              have opposite signs,

then there exists at least one value between and for which
452 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 9

Using the Intermediate Value Theorem                    has at least two real zeros between  and
Show that the function

     Solution          at the integer values               and See Table 2.
As a start, evaluate

                                                        12 3 4

                                                        5 0 -3 2

                                              Table 2

We see that one zero occurs at             Also, since  is negative and  is positive, by the Intermediate Value

Theorem, there must be at least one real zero between 3 and 4.

We have shown that there are at least two real zeros between       and

Analysis

We can also see on the graph of the function in Figure 18 that there are two real zeros between   and

                                                        Figure 18

TRY IT #4 Show that the function                                         has at least one real zero between  and

Writing Formulas for Polynomial Functions

Now that we know how to find zeros of polynomial functions, we can use them to write formulas based on graphs.
Because a polynomial function written in factored form will have an x-intercept where each factor is equal to zero, we
can form a function that will pass through a set of x-intercepts by introducing a corresponding set of factors.

Factored Form of Polynomials

If a polynomial of lowest degree has horizontal intercepts at                then the polynomial can be written

in the factored form:                                              where the powers on each factor can be

determined by the behavior of the graph at the corresponding intercept, and the stretch factor can be determined

given a value of the function other than the x-intercept.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a graph of a polynomial function, write a formula for the function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 453

   1. Identify the x-intercepts of the graph to find the factors of the polynomial.
   2. Examine the behavior of the graph at the x-intercepts to determine the multiplicity of each factor.
   3. Find the polynomial of least degree containing all the factors found in the previous step.
   4. Use any other point on the graph (the y-intercept may be easiest) to determine the stretch factor.

  EXAMPLE 10
Writing a Formula for a Polynomial Function from the Graph
Write a formula for the polynomial function shown in Figure 19.

                                      Figure 19

Solution

This graph has three x-intercepts:    and The y-intercept is located at  At  and                             the graph

passes through the axis linearly, suggesting the corresponding factors of the polynomial will be linear. At  the

graph bounces at the intercept, suggesting the corresponding factor of the polynomial will be second degree

(quadratic). Together, this gives us

To determine the stretch factor, we utilize another point on the graph. We will use the intercept            to solve for

The graphed polynomial appears to represent the function
       TRY IT #5 Given the graph shown in Figure 20, write a formula for the function shown.
454 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                           Figure 20

Using Local and Global Extrema

With quadratics, we were able to algebraically find the maximum or minimum value of the function by finding the vertex.
For general polynomials, finding these turning points is not possible without more advanced techniques from calculus.
Even then, finding where extrema occur can still be algebraically challenging. For now, we will estimate the locations of
turning points using technology to generate a graph.

Each turning point represents a local minimum or maximum. Sometimes, a turning point is the highest or lowest point
on the entire graph. In these cases, we say that the turning point is a global maximum or a global minimum. These are
also referred to as the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values of the function.

Local and Global Extrema

A local maximum or local minimum at        (sometimes called the relative maximum or minimum, respectively) is

the output at the highest or lowest point on the graph in an open interval around  If a function has a local

maximum at then                            for all in an open interval around  If a function has a local minimum at

then  for all in an open interval around

A global maximum or global minimum is the output at the highest or lowest point of the function. If a function has

a global maximum at then                   for all If a function has a global minimum at then  for all

We can see the difference between local and global extrema in Figure 21.

                                           Figure 21

Q&A   Do all polynomial functions have a global minimum or maximum?

      No. Only polynomial functions of even degree have a global minimum or maximum. For example,
                   has neither a global maximum nor a global minimum.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 455

  EXAMPLE 11

Using Local Extrema to Solve Applications
An open-top box is to be constructed by cutting out squares from each corner of a 14 cm by 20 cm sheet of plastic and
then folding up the sides. Find the size of squares that should be cut out to maximize the volume enclosed by the box.

     Solution
We will start this problem by drawing a picture like that in Figure 22, labeling the width of the cut-out squares with a
variable,

                                                                             Figure 22  cm by  cm rectangle for the base of

Notice that after a square is cut out from each end, it leaves a
the box, and the box will be cm tall. This gives the volume

Notice, since the factors are          and  the three zeros are 10, 7, and 0, respectively. Because a height of 0

cm is not reasonable, we consider the only the zeros 10 and 7. The shortest side is 14 and we are cutting off two squares,

so values may take on are greater than zero or less than 7. This means we will restrict the domain of this function to

Using technology to sketch the graph of     on this reasonable domain, we get a graph like that in Figure

23. We can use this graph to estimate the maximum value for the volume, restricted to values for that are reasonable

for this problem--values from 0 to 7.

                                            Figure 23

From this graph, we turn our focus to only the portion on the reasonable domain,               We can estimate the

maximum value to be around 340 cubic cm, which occurs when the squares are about 2.75 cm on each side. To improve

this estimate, we could use advanced features of our technology, if available, or simply change our window to zoom in

on our graph to produce Figure 24.
456 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                                             Figure 24

From this zoomed-in view, we can refine our estimate for the maximum volume to about 339 cubic cm, when the squares
measure approximately 2.7 cm on each side.

TRY IT #6 Use technology to find the maximum and minimum values on the interval                                of the function

MEDIA
Access the following online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphing polynomial functions.
Intermediate Value Theorem (http://openstax.org/l/ivt)

        5.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is the difference                  2. If a polynomial function of   3. Explain how the
    between an intercept and                   degree has distinct              Intermediate Value
    a zero of a polynomial                     zeros, what do you know          Theorem can assist us in
    function                                   about the graph of the           finding a zero of a function.
                                               function?

4. Explain how the factored                5. If the graph of a polynomial
    form of the polynomial                     just touches the x-axis and
    helps us in graphing it.                   then changes direction,
                                               what can we conclude about
                                               the factored form of the
                                               polynomial?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 457

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the or t-intercepts of the polynomial functions.

6.                       7.                                        8.

9.                       10.                                       11.

12.                      13.                                       14.

15.                      16.                                       17.

18.                      19.                                       20.

21.                      22.                                       23.

For the following exercises, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to confirm that the given polynomial has at least one
zero within the given interval.

24.             between  25.       between                         26.                    between

           and                and                                                    and

27.             between  28.       between 29.

     and        .             and                                               between   and

For the following exercises, find the zeros and give the multiplicity of each.

30.                      31.                                       32.

33.                      34.                                                    35.

36.                                37.

38.                      39.                                       40.

41.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions. Note  and intercepts, multiplicity, and end behavior.
                                                                      44.
42.                      43.

45.                      46.                                       47.
458 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write the formula for a polynomial function of least degree.

48.                                        49.                                  50.

51.                                        52.

For the following exercises, use the graph to identify zeros and multiplicity.

53.                                        54.                                  55.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         5.3 · Graphs of Polynomial Functions 459

56.

For the following exercises, use the given information about the polynomial graph to write the equation.

57. Degree 3. Zeros at             58. Degree 3. Zeros at              59. Degree 5. Roots of
                and                                 and
                                                                            multiplicity 2 at  and
      y-intercept at                     y-intercept at
                                                                            , and a root of

                                                                            multiplicity 1 at

                                                                            y-intercept at

60. Degree 4. Root of              61. Degree 5. Double zero at        62. Degree 3. Zeros at
                                                   and triple zero at                  and
     multiplicity 2 at   and                       Passes through the
                                                                             y-intercept at
     a roots of multiplicity 1 at        point

     and

     y-intercept at

63. Degree 3. Zeros at             64. Degree 5. Roots of              65. Degree 4. Roots of
                 and                     multiplicity 2 at
                                                  and a root of  and        multiplicity 2 at  and
      y-intercept at                     multiplicity 1 at
                                                                            roots of multiplicity 1 at
                                         y-intercept at                             and

                                                                            y-intercept at

66. Double zero at           and
      triple zero at     Passes
      through the point

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to approximate local minima and maxima or the global minimum and
maximum.

67.                                68.                                 69.

70.                                71.
460 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Extensions

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write a polynomial function of least degree.

72.                                        73.                                  74.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, write the polynomial function that models the given situation.

75. A rectangle has a length of            76. Consider the same                77. A square has sides of 12
      10 units and a width of 8                  rectangle of the preceding
      units. Squares of by                       problem. Squares of by         units. Squares       by
      units are cut out of each                      units are cut out of each
      corner, and then the sides                 corner. Express the volume          units are cut out of
      are folded up to create an                 of the box as a polynomial
      open box. Express the                      in terms of                    each corner, and then the
      volume of the box as a
      polynomial function in                                                    sides are folded up to
      terms of
                                                                                create an open box.

                                                                                Express the volume of the

                                                                                box as a function in terms

                                                                                of

78. A cylinder has a radius of             79. A right circular cone has a
              units and a height of
                                           radius of      and a
      3 units greater. Express the
      volume of the cylinder as a          height 3 units less. Express
      polynomial function.
                                           the volume of the cone as a

                                           polynomial function. The

                                           volume of a cone is

                                                          for radius

                                           and height

5.4 Dividing Polynomials

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use long division to divide polynomials.
           Use synthetic division to divide polynomials.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 461

                                Figure 1 Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C. (credit: Ron Cogswell, Flickr)

The exterior of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., is a large rectangular solid with length 61.5 meters (m), width
40 m, and height 30 m.1 We can easily find the volume using elementary geometry.

So the volume is 73,800 cubic meters  Suppose we knew the volume, length, and width. We could divide to find the
height.

As we can confirm from the dimensions above, the height is 30 m. We can use similar methods to find any of the missing

dimensions. We can also use the same method if any, or all, of the measurements contain variable expressions. For

example, suppose the volume of a rectangular solid is given by the polynomial  The length of

the solid is given by the width is given by  To find the height of the solid, we can use polynomial division, which

is the focus of this section.

Using Long Division to Divide Polynomials

We are familiar with the long division algorithm for ordinary arithmetic. We begin by dividing into the digits of the
dividend that have the greatest place value. We divide, multiply, subtract, include the digit in the next place value
position, and repeat. For example, let's divide 178 by 3 using long division.

Another way to look at the solution is as a sum of parts. This should look familiar, since it is the same method used to
check division in elementary arithmetic.

We call this the Division Algorithm and will discuss it more formally after looking at an example.
Division of polynomials that contain more than one term has similarities to long division of whole numbers. We can write

1 National Park Service. "Lincoln Memorial Building Statistics." http://www.nps.gov/linc/historyculture/lincoln-memorial-building-statistics.htm.
Accessed 4/3/2014
462 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

a polynomial dividend as the product of the divisor and the quotient added to the remainder. The terms of the

polynomial division correspond to the digits (and place values) of the whole number division. This method allows us to

divide two polynomials. For example, if we were to divide                    by     using the long division algorithm,

it would look like this:

We have found
or
We can identify the dividend, the divisor, the quotient, and the remainder.

Writing the result in this manner illustrates the Division Algorithm.

The Division Algorithm

The Division Algorithm states that, given a polynomial dividend        and a non-zero polynomial divisor     where
                                                                                                          such that
the degree of  is less than or equal to the degree of      , there exist unique polynomials  and

    is the quotient and is the remainder. The remainder is either equal to zero or has degree strictly less than

If  then                  divides evenly into  This means that, in this case, both  and      are factors of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 463

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a polynomial and a binomial, use long division to divide the polynomial by the binomial.

 1. Set up the division problem.
 2. Determine the first term of the quotient by dividing the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the

      divisor.
 3. Multiply the answer by the divisor and write it below the like terms of the dividend.
 4. Subtract the bottom binomial from the top binomial.
 5. Bring down the next term of the dividend.
 6. Repeat steps 2-5 until reaching the last term of the dividend.
 7. If the remainder is non-zero, express as a fraction using the divisor as the denominator.

EXAMPLE 1

Using Long Division to Divide a Second-Degree Polynomial

Divide           by

Solution

The quotient is      The remainder is 0. We write the result as

or

     Analysis
This division problem had a remainder of 0. This tells us that the dividend is divided evenly by the divisor, and that the
divisor is a factor of the dividend.

EXAMPLE 2

Using Long Division to Divide a Third-Degree Polynomial

Divide               by
464 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

            Solution

There is a remainder of 1. We can express the result as:

     Analysis
We can check our work by using the Division Algorithm to rewrite the solution. Then multiply.

    Notice, as we write our result,

· the dividend is
· the divisor is
· the quotient is
· the remainder is

TRY IT #1 Divide                                 by

Using Synthetic Division to Divide Polynomials

As we've seen, long division of polynomials can involve many steps and be quite cumbersome. Synthetic division is a
shorthand method of dividing polynomials for the special case of dividing by a linear factor whose leading coefficient is
1.

To illustrate the process, recall the example at the beginning of the section.

Divide  by                                 using the long division algorithm.

The final form of the process looked like this:

There is a lot of repetition in the table. If we don't write the variables but, instead, line up their coefficients in columns
under the division sign and also eliminate the partial products, we already have a simpler version of the entire problem.

Synthetic division carries this simplification even a few more steps. Collapse the table by moving each of the rows up to
fill any vacant spots. Also, instead of dividing by 2, as we would in division of whole numbers, then multiplying and
subtracting the middle product, we change the sign of the "divisor" to -2, multiply and add. The process starts by
bringing down the leading coefficient.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 465

We then multiply it by the "divisor" and add, repeating this process column by column, until there are no entries left. The

bottom row represents the coefficients of the quotient; the last entry of the bottom row is the remainder. In this case,

the quotient is     and the remainder is        The process will be made more clear in Example 3.

Synthetic Division

Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used when the divisor is a binomial in the form  where is a real
number. In synthetic division, only the coefficients are used in the division process.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given two polynomials, use synthetic division to divide.

 1. Write for the divisor.
 2. Write the coefficients of the dividend.
 3. Bring the lead coefficient down.
 4. Multiply the lead coefficient by Write the product in the next column.
 5. Add the terms of the second column.
 6. Multiply the result by Write the product in the next column.
 7. Repeat steps 5 and 6 for the remaining columns.
 8. Use the bottom numbers to write the quotient. The number in the last column is the remainder and has degree

      0, the next number from the right has degree 1, the next number from the right has degree 2, and so on.

EXAMPLE 3

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Second-Degree Polynomial

Use synthetic division to divide            by

     Solution
Begin by setting up the synthetic division. Write and the coefficients.

Bring down the lead coefficient. Multiply the lead coefficient by

Continue by adding the numbers in the second column. Multiply the resulting number by         Write the result in the next
column. Then add the numbers in the third column.

The result is       The remainder is 0. So      is a factor of the original polynomial.

     Analysis
Just as with long division, we can check our work by multiplying the quotient by the divisor and adding the remainder.
466 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 4

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Third-Degree Polynomial

Use synthetic division to divide                            by

Solution

The binomial divisor is          so        Add each column, multiply the result by -2, and repeat until the last column is

reached.

The result is                    The remainder is 0. Thus,      is a factor of

Analysis

The graph of the polynomial function                                  in Figure 2 shows a zero at  This

confirms that  is a factor of

                                                            Figure 2

EXAMPLE 5

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Fourth-Degree Polynomial

Use synthetic division to divide                            by

     Solution
Notice there is no x-term. We will use a zero as the coefficient for that term.

The result is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 467

TRY IT #2 Use synthetic division to divide                           by

Using Polynomial Division to Solve Application Problems

Polynomial division can be used to solve a variety of application problems involving expressions for area and volume. We
looked at an application at the beginning of this section. Now we will solve that problem in the following example.

EXAMPLE 6

Using Polynomial Division in an Application Problem

The volume of a rectangular solid is given by the polynomial                    The length of the solid is given by

and the width is given by  Find the height, of the solid.

     Solution
There are a few ways to approach this problem. We need to divide the expression for the volume of the solid by the
expressions for the length and width. Let us create a sketch as in Figure 3.

                                                                              Figure 3
We can now write an equation by substituting the known values into the formula for the volume of a rectangular solid.

To solve for first divide both sides by

Now solve for using synthetic division.

The quotient is  and the remainder is 0. The height of the solid is

TRY IT #3        The area of a rectangle is given by                            The width of the rectangle is given by

                           Find an expression for the length of the rectangle.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polynomial division.

Dividing a Trinomial by a Binomial Using Long Division (http://openstax.org/l/dividetribild)
Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Long Division (http://openstax.org/l/dividepolybild)
Ex 2: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division (http://openstax.org/l/dividepolybisd2)
Ex 4: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division (http://openstax.org/l/dividepolybisd4)
468 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

        5.4 SECTION EXERCISES                              2. If a polynomial of degree is divided by a binomial
                                                               of degree 1, what is the degree of the quotient?
Verbal

1. If division of a polynomial by a binomial results in a
    remainder of zero, what can be conclude?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use long division to divide. Specify the quotient and the remainder.

3.                                         4.                   5.

6.                                         7.                   8.

9.                                         10.                  11.

12.                                            13.

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient. Ensure the equation is in the form required by
synthetic division. (Hint: divide the dividend and divisor by the coefficient of the linear term in the divisor.)

14.                                            15.                        16.

17.                                                 18.

19.                                            20.                   21.

22.                                             23.                  24.

25.                                                  26.

27.                                        28.

29.                                                        30.

31.                                                        32.

33.                                                        34.

35.                                                        36.

37.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 469

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine whether the first expression is a factor of the second. If it
is, indicate the factorization.

38.                              39.                               40.

41.                              42.                 43.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the graph of the third-degree polynomial and one factor to write the factored form of
the polynomial suggested by the graph. The leading coefficient is one.

44. Factor is                         45. Factor is                              46. Factor is

47. Factor is                         48. Factor is

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder.

49.                              50.                 51.

52.                              53.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator with CAS to answer the questions.

54. Consider   with              What do you         55. Consider                for            What do you

     expect the result to be if                      expect the result to be if
470 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

56. Consider               for              What do you    57. Consider    with        What do you
                                           What do you
     expect the result to be if                            expect the result to be if

58. Consider     with

     expect the result to be if

Extensions

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine the quotient involving a complex number.

59.                                        60.                      61.

62.                                        63.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use the given length and area of a rectangle to express the width algebraically.

64. Length is              area is         65. Length is   area is  66. Length is      area is

For the following exercises, use the given volume of a box and its length and width to express the height of the box
algebraically.

67. Volume is                                   length is  68. Volume is                        length is
                 width is                                                 width is

69. Volume is                                   length is  70. Volume is               length is
      width is                                                   width is

For the following exercises, use the given volume and radius of a cylinder to express the height of the cylinder
algebraically.

71. Volume is                                   radius is  72. Volume is                        radius is

73. Volume is
      radius is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 471

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Evaluate a polynomial using the Remainder Theorem.
           Use the Factor Theorem to solve a polynomial equation.
           Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find rational zeros.
           Find zeros of a polynomial function.
           Use the Linear Factorization Theorem to find polynomials with given zeros.
           Use Descartes' Rule of Signs.
           Solve real-world applications of polynomial equations

A new bakery offers decorated, multi-tiered cakes for display and cutting at Quinceañera and wedding celebrations, as
well as sheet cakes for children's birthday parties and other special occasions to serve most of the guests. The bakery
wants the volume of a small sheet cake to be 351 cubic inches. The cake is in the shape of a rectangular solid. They want
the length of the cake to be four inches longer than the width of the cake and the height of the cake to be one-third of
the width. What should the dimensions of the cake pan be?

This problem can be solved by writing a cubic function and solving a cubic equation for the volume of the cake. In this
section, we will discuss a variety of tools for writing polynomial functions and solving polynomial equations.

Evaluating a Polynomial Using the Remainder Theorem

In the last section, we learned how to divide polynomials. We can now use polynomial division to evaluate polynomials

using the Remainder Theorem. If the polynomial is divided by      the remainder may be found quickly by evaluating

the polynomial function at that is,    Let's walk through the proof of the theorem.

Recall that the Division Algorithm states that, given a polynomial dividend      and a non-zero polynomial divisor ,
there exist unique polynomials and such that

and either         or the degree of is less than the degree of . In practice divisors,        will have degrees less

than or equal to the degree of . If the divisor,       is     this takes the form

Since the divisor  is linear, the remainder will be a constant, And, if we evaluate this for  we have

In other words,    is the remainder obtained by dividing      by

The Remainder Theorem

If a polynomial    is divided by       then the remainder is the value

...

     HOW TO

Given a polynomial function evaluate              at       using the Remainder Theorem.

1. Use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by
2. The remainder is the value

EXAMPLE 1

Using the Remainder Theorem to Evaluate a Polynomial

Use the Remainder Theorem to evaluate                                        at
472 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

            Solution
       To find the remainder using the Remainder Theorem, use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by

       The remainder is 25. Therefore,
            Analysis

       We can check our answer by evaluating

TRY IT #1 Use the Remainder Theorem to evaluate                                              at

Using the Factor Theorem to Solve a Polynomial Equation

The Factor Theorem is another theorem that helps us analyze polynomial equations. It tells us how the zeros of a
polynomial are related to the factors. Recall that the Division Algorithm.

If is a zero, then the remainder is              and                  or

Notice, written in this form,    is a factor of       We can conclude if is a zero of  then      is a factor of

Similarly, if    is a factor of  then the remainder of the Division Algorithm                                 is 0. This tells

us that is a zero.

This pair of implications is the Factor Theorem. As we will soon see, a polynomial of degree in the complex number
system will have zeros. We can use the Factor Theorem to completely factor a polynomial into the product of factors.
Once the polynomial has been completely factored, we can easily determine the zeros of the polynomial.

The Factor Theorem

According to the Factor Theorem, is a zero of         if and only if   is a factor of

...

     HOW TO

Given a factor and a third-degree polynomial, use the Factor Theorem to factor the polynomial.

1. Use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by

2. Confirm that the remainder is 0.

3. Write the polynomial as the product of             and the quadratic quotient.

4. If possible, factor the quadratic.

5. Write the polynomial as the product of factors.

EXAMPLE 2

Using the Factor Theorem to Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Expression

Show that        is a factor of                       Find the remaining factors. Use the factors to determine the zeros of

the polynomial.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 473

     Solution                                    is a factor of the polynomial.
We can use synthetic division to show that

The remainder is zero, so          is a factor of the polynomial. We can use the Division Algorithm to write the polynomial

as the product of the divisor and the quotient:

We can factor the quadratic factor to write the polynomial as

By the Factor Theorem, the zeros of              are -2, 3, and 5.

TRY IT #2  Use the Factor Theorem to find the zeros of                           given that           is a
           factor of the polynomial.

Using the Rational Zero Theorem to Find Rational Zeros

Another use for the Remainder Theorem is to test whether a rational number is a zero for a given polynomial. But first
we need a pool of rational numbers to test. The Rational Zero Theorem helps us to narrow down the number of
possible rational zeros using the ratio of the factors of the constant term and factors of the leading coefficient of the
polynomial

Consider a quadratic function with two zeros,    and           By the Factor Theorem, these zeros have factors

associated with them. Let us set each factor equal to 0, and then construct the original quadratic function absent its
stretching factor.

Notice that two of the factors of the constant term, 6, are the two numerators from the original rational roots: 2 and 3.
Similarly, two of the factors from the leading coefficient, 20, are the two denominators from the original rational roots: 5
and 4.

We can infer that the numerators of the rational roots will always be factors of the constant term and the denominators
will be factors of the leading coefficient. This is the essence of the Rational Zero Theorem; it is a means to give us a pool
of possible rational zeros.

The Rational Zero Theorem

The Rational Zero Theorem states that, if the polynomial                                                          has integer
                                                                      is a factor of the constant term and is a
coefficients, then every rational zero of      has the form    where

factor of the leading coefficient

When the leading coefficient is 1, the possible rational zeros are the factors of the constant term.
474 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given a polynomial function                use the Rational Zero Theorem to find rational zeros.

1. Determine all factors of the constant term and all factors of the leading coefficient.
2. Determine all possible values of where is a factor of the constant term and is a factor of the leading

     coefficient. Be sure to include both positive and negative candidates.
3. Determine which possible zeros are actual zeros by evaluating each case of

EXAMPLE 3

Listing All Possible Rational Zeros
List all possible rational zeros of

     Solution                              are the quotients of the factors of the last term, -4, and the factors of the leading
The only possible rational zeros of
coefficient, 2.

The constant term is -4; the factors of -4 are

The leading coefficient is 2; the factors of 2 are

If any of the four real zeros are rational zeros, then they will be of one of the following factors of -4 divided by one of the
factors of 2.

Note that  and                   which have already been listed. So we can shorten our list.

EXAMPLE 4

Using the Rational Zero Theorem to Find Rational Zeros
Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the rational zeros of

     Solution                                      is a zero of  then is a factor of 1 and is a factor of 2.
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if

The factors of 1 are and the factors of 2 are and The possible values for are and These are the

possible rational zeros for the function. We can determine which of the possible zeros are actual zeros by substituting
these values for in

Of those,                        are not zeros of   1 is the only rational zero of

TRY IT #3 Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the rational zeros of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 475

Finding the Zeros of Polynomial Functions

The Rational Zero Theorem helps us to narrow down the list of possible rational zeros for a polynomial function. Once
we have done this, we can use synthetic division repeatedly to determine all of the zeros of a polynomial function.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a polynomial function use synthetic division to find its zeros.

   1. Use the Rational Zero Theorem to list all possible rational zeros of the function.
   2. Use synthetic division to evaluate a given possible zero by synthetically dividing the candidate into the

        polynomial. If the remainder is 0, the candidate is a zero. If the remainder is not zero, discard the candidate.
   3. Repeat step two using the quotient found with synthetic division. If possible, continue until the quotient is a

        quadratic.
   4. Find the zeros of the quadratic function. Two possible methods for solving quadratics are factoring and using the

        quadratic formula.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function with Repeated Real Zeros
Find the zeros of

     Solution                               is a zero of       then is a factor of -1 and is a factor of 4.
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if

The factors of are and the factors of are                 and The possible values for are                    and These

are the possible rational zeros for the function. We will use synthetic division to evaluate each possible zero until we find
one that gives a remainder of 0. Let's begin with 1.

Dividing by  gives a remainder of 0, so 1 is a zero of the function. The polynomial can be written as

The quadratic is a perfect square.    can be written as

We already know that 1 is a zero. The other zero will have a multiplicity of 2 because the factor is squared. To find the
other zero, we can set the factor equal to 0.

The zeros of the function are 1 and with multiplicity 2.

     Analysis                         in Figure 1. Notice, at  the graph bounces off the x-axis, indicating the even
Look at the graph of the function
multiplicity (2,4,6...) for the zero  At    the graph crosses the x-axis, indicating the odd multiplicity (1,3,5...) for
the zero
476 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                          Figure 1

Using the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra

Now that we can find rational zeros for a polynomial function, we will look at a theorem that discusses the number of
complex zeros of a polynomial function. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra tells us that every polynomial function
has at least one complex zero. This theorem forms the foundation for solving polynomial equations.

Suppose is a polynomial function of degree four, and                The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that there

is at least one complex solution, call it By the Factor Theorem, we can write  as a product of         and a

polynomial quotient. Since                 is linear, the polynomial quotient will be of degree three. Now we apply the

Fundamental Theorem of Algebra to the third-degree polynomial quotient. It will have at least one complex zero, call it

So we can write the polynomial quotient as a product of             and a new polynomial quotient of degree two.

Continue to apply the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra until all of the zeros are found. There will be four of them and

each one will yield a factor of

The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra

The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that, if        is a polynomial of degree n > 0, then      has at least one
complex zero.

We can use this theorem to argue that, if   is a polynomial of degree          and is a non-zero real number, then
       has exactly linear factors

where      are complex numbers. Therefore,                has roots if we allow for multiplicities.

Q&A        Does every polynomial have at least one imaginary zero?

           No. Real numbers are a subset of complex numbers, but not the other way around. A complex number is
           not necessarily imaginary. Real numbers are also complex numbers.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function with Complex Zeros
Find the zeros of

     Solution                               is a zero of  then is a factor of 3 and is a factor of 3.
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 477

The factors of 3 are and The possible values for and therefore the possible rational zeros for the function, are
                         We will use synthetic division to evaluate each possible zero until we find one that gives a remainder of

0. Let's begin with -3.

Dividing by   gives a remainder of 0, so -3 is a zero of the function. The polynomial can be written as

We can then set the quadratic equal to 0 and solve to find the other zeros of the function.

The zeros of  are -3 and

Analysis

Look at the graph of the function in Figure 2. Notice that, at         the graph crosses the x-axis, indicating an odd

multiplicity (1) for the zero       Also note the presence of the two turning points. This means that, since there is a 3rd

degree polynomial, we are looking at the maximum number of turning points. So, the end behavior of increasing

without bound to the right and decreasing without bound to the left will continue. Thus, all the x-intercepts for the

function are shown. So either the multiplicity of  is 1 and there are two complex solutions, which is what we

found, or the multiplicity at       is three. Either way, our result is correct.

                                                   Figure 2

TRY IT #4 Find the zeros of

Using the Linear Factorization Theorem to Find Polynomials with Given Zeros

A vital implication of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, as we stated above, is that a polynomial function of degree

will have zeros in the set of complex numbers, if we allow for multiplicities. This means that we can factor the

polynomial function into factors. The Linear Factorization Theorem tells us that a polynomial function will have the

same number of factors as its degree, and that each factor will be in the form     where is a complex number.

Let be a polynomial function with real coefficients, and suppose                  is a zero of  Then, by the Factor

Theorem,      is a factor of        For to have real coefficients,                 must also be a factor of       This is

true because any factor other than                 when multiplied by             will leave imaginary components in the

product. Only multiplication with conjugate pairs will eliminate the imaginary parts and result in real coefficients. In

other words, if a polynomial function with real coefficients has a complex zero    then the complex conjugate

must also be a zero of              This is called the Complex Conjugate Theorem.
478 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Complex Conjugate Theorem

According to the Linear Factorization Theorem, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors as its

degree, and each factor will be in the form  , where is a complex number.

If the polynomial function has real coefficients and a complex zero in the form            then the complex conjugate

of the zero,         is also a zero.

    ...

         HOW TO

Given the zeros of a polynomial function and a point (c, f(c)) on the graph of   use the Linear Factorization
Theorem to find the polynomial function.

    1. Use the zeros to construct the linear factors of the polynomial.

    2. Multiply the linear factors to expand the polynomial.

    3. Substitute    into the function to determine the leading coefficient.

    4. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 7

Using the Linear Factorization Theorem to Find a Polynomial with Given Zeros
Find a fourth degree polynomial with real coefficients that has zeros of -3, 2, such that

    Solution

Because           is a zero, by the Complex Conjugate Theorem       is also a zero. The polynomial must have factors of

                                 and       Since we are looking for a degree 4 polynomial, and now have four zeros, we have

all four factors. Let's begin by multiplying these factors.

We need to find a to ensure                Substitute          and       into

So the polynomial function is

or

     Analysis                    were zeros, but only one of these zeros needed to be given. If is a zero of a polynomial
We found that both and            must also be a zero of the polynomial because is the complex conjugate of
with real coefficients, then

    Q&A       If     were given as a zero of a polynomial with real coefficients, would    also need to be a
              zero?

              Yes. When any complex number with an imaginary component is given as a zero of a polynomial with real
              coefficients, the conjugate must also be a zero of the polynomial.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 479

TRY IT #5 Find a third degree polynomial with real coefficients that has zeros of 5 and such that

Using Descartes' Rule of Signs

There is a straightforward way to determine the possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros for any polynomial

function. If the polynomial is written in descending order, Descartes' Rule of Signs tells us of a relationship between the

number of sign changes in  and the number of positive real zeros. For example, the polynomial function below has

one sign change.

This tells us that the function must have 1 positive real zero.        and the number of negative real zeros.
There is a similar relationship between the number of sign changes in

In this case,     has 3 sign changes. This tells us that  could have 3 or 1 negative real zeros.

Descartes' Rule of Signs

According to Descartes' Rule of Signs, if we let                                              be a polynomial function
with real coefficients:                                                                         or is less than the
                                                                                                   or is less than the
  · The number of positive real zeros is either equal to the number of sign changes of
      number of sign changes by an even integer.

  · The number of negative real zeros is either equal to the number of sign changes of
      number of sign changes by an even integer.

  EXAMPLE 8

Using Descartes' Rule of Signs
Use Descartes' Rule of Signs to determine the possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros for

     Solution
Begin by determining the number of sign changes.

                                                                              Figure 3            to determine the

There are two sign changes, so there are either 2 or 0 positive real roots. Next, we examine
number of negative real roots.

                                                                              Figure 4
Again, there are two sign changes, so there are either 2 or 0 negative real roots.
There are four possibilities, as we can see in Table 1.
480 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

           Positive Real Zeros Negative Real Zeros Complex Zeros Total Zeros

                                 2         2                      0  4

                                 2         0                      2  4

                                 0         2                      2  4

                                 0         0                      4  4

           Table 1

     Analysis
We can confirm the numbers of positive and negative real roots by examining a graph of the function. See Figure 5. We
can see from the graph that the function has 0 positive real roots and 2 negative real roots.

                                           Figure 5

TRY IT #6  Use Descartes' Rule of Signs to determine the maximum possible numbers of positive and

           negative real zeros for                                   Use a graph to verify the numbers

           of positive and negative real zeros for the function.

Solving Real-World Applications

We have now introduced a variety of tools for solving polynomial equations. Let's use these tools to solve the bakery
problem from the beginning of the section.

EXAMPLE 9

Solving Polynomial Equations
A new bakery offers decorated, multi-tiered cakes for display and cutting at Quinceañera and wedding celebrations, as
well as sheet cakes for children's birthday parties and other special occasions to serve most of the guests. The bakery
wants the volume of a small sheet cake to be 351 cubic inches. The cake is in the shape of a rectangular solid. They want
the length of the cake to be four inches longer than the width of the cake and the height of the cake to be one-third of
the width. What should the dimensions of the cake pan be?

     Solution                                                                                                     We were
Begin by writing an equation for the volume of the cake. The volume of a rectangular solid is given by
given that the length must be four inches longer than the width, so we can express the length of the cake as
We were given that the height of the cake is one-third of the width, so we can express the height of the cake as

Let's write the volume of the cake in terms of width of the cake.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 481

Substitute the given volume into this equation.

Descartes' rule of signs tells us there is one positive solution. The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that the possible

rational zeros are                               and                          We can use synthetic division to

test these possible zeros. Only positive numbers make sense as dimensions for a cake, so we need not test any negative

values. Let's begin by testing values that make the most sense as dimensions for a small sheet cake. Use synthetic

division to check

Since 1 is not a solution, we will check

Since 3 is not a solution either, we will test

Synthetic division gives a remainder of 0, so 9 is a solution to the equation. We can use the relationships between the
width and the other dimensions to determine the length and height of the sheet cake pan.

The sheet cake pan should have dimensions 13 inches by 9 inches by 3 inches.

TRY IT #7           A shipping container in the shape of a rectangular solid must have a volume of 84 cubic meters.
                    The client tells the manufacturer that, because of the contents, the length of the container must
                    be one meter longer than the width, and the height must be one meter greater than twice the
                    width. What should the dimensions of the container be?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with zeros of polynomial functions.

Real Zeros, Factors, and Graphs of Polynomial Functions (http://openstax.org/l/realzeros)
Complex Factorization Theorem (http://openstax.org/l/factortheorem)
Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function (http://openstax.org/l/findthezeros)
Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function 2 (http://openstax.org/l/findthezeros2)
Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function 3 (http://openstax.org/l/findthezeros3)
482 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

        5.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe a use for the                  2. Explain why the Rational         3. What is the difference
    Remainder Theorem.                         Zero Theorem does not               between rational and real
                                               guarantee finding zeros of a        zeros?
                                               polynomial function.

4. If Descartes' Rule of Signs             5. If synthetic division reveals a
    reveals a no change of signs               zero, why should we try that
    or one sign of changes,                    value again as a possible
    what specific conclusion can               solution?
    be drawn?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder.

6.                                         7.                                  8.

9.                                         10.

11.                                             12.

13.

For the following exercises, use the Factor Theorem to find all real zeros for the given polynomial function and one
factor.

14.                                             15.

16.                                             17.

18.                                             19.

20.                                        21.

For the following exercises, use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the real solution(s) to each equation.

22.                                        23.                                 24.

25.                                        26.                                 27.

28.                                        29.                                 30.

31.                                        32.                                 33.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.5 · Zeros of Polynomial Functions 483

34.                           35.                                                 36.

37.                                38.                                            39.

For the following exercises, find all complex solutions (real and non-real).

40.                           41.                              42.

43.                           44.                                                 45.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use Descartes' Rule to determine the possible number of positive and negative solutions.
Confirm with the given graph.

46.                           47.                              48.

49.                           50.                                                      51.

52.                           53.

54.                                     55.

Numeric

For the following exercises, list all possible rational zeros for the functions.

56.                           57.                              58.

59.                           60.

Technology

For the following exercises, use your calculator to graph the polynomial function. Based on the graph, find the rational
zeros. All real solutions are rational.

61.                           62.                              63.

64.                                          65.

Extensions

For the following exercises, construct a polynomial function of least degree possible using the given information.

66. Real roots: -1, 1, 3 and  67. Real roots: -1, 1 (with      68. Real roots: -2, (with
                                    multiplicity 2 and 1) and        multiplicity 2) and
484 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

69. Real roots: , 0, and                   70. Real roots: -4, -1, 1, 4 and

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, find the dimensions of the box described.

71. The length is twice as long            72. The length, width, and         73. The length is one inch
      as the width. The height is                height are consecutive             more than the width, which
      2 inches greater than the                  whole numbers. The                 is one inch more than the
      width. The volume is 192                   volume is 120 cubic inches.        height. The volume is
      cubic inches.                                                                 86.625 cubic inches.

74. The length is three times              75. The length is 3 inches more
      the height and the height                  than the width. The width
      is one inch less than the                  is 2 inches more than the
      width. The volume is 108                   height. The volume is 120
      cubic inches.                              cubic inches.

For the following exercises, find the dimensions of the right circular cylinder described.

76. The radius is 3 inches more            77. The height is one less than    78. The radius and height
      than the height. The                       one half the radius. The           differ by one meter. The
      volume is cubic                            volume is cubic                    radius is larger and the
      meters.                                    meters.                            volume is cubic
                                                                                    meters.

79. The radius and height                  80. The radius is meter

differ by two meters. The                  greater than the height.

height is greater and the                  The volume is  cubic

volume is     cubic                        meters.

meters.

5.6 Rational Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use arrow notation.
           Solve applied problems involving rational functions.
           Find the domains of rational functions.
           Identify vertical asymptotes.
           Identify horizontal asymptotes.
           Graph rational functions.

Suppose we know that the cost of making a product is dependent on the number of items, produced. This is given by

the equation                               If we want to know the average cost for producing items, we would

divide the cost function by the number of items,

The average cost function, which yields the average cost per item for items produced, is

Many other application problems require finding an average value in a similar way, giving us variables in the
denominator. Written without a variable in the denominator, this function will contain a negative integer power.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            5.6 · Rational Functions 485

In the last few sections, we have worked with polynomial functions, which are functions with non-negative integers for
exponents. In this section, we explore rational functions, which have variables in the denominator.

Using Arrow Notation

We have seen the graphs of the basic reciprocal function and the squared reciprocal function from our study of toolkit
functions. Examine these graphs, as shown in Figure 1, and notice some of their features.

                                                        Figure 1

Several things are apparent if we examine the graph of

1. On the left branch of the graph, the curve approaches the x-axis             

2. As the graph approaches  from the left, the curve drops, but as we approach zero from the right, the curve

rises.

3. Finally, on the right branch of the graph, the curves approaches the x-axis                  

To summarize, we use arrow notation to show that or     is approaching a particular value. See Table 1.

        Symbol                                          Meaning

                            approaches from the left (                          but close to )

                            approaches from the right (                         but close to )

                            approaches infinity ( increases without bound)

                            approaches negative infinity ( decreases without bound)

                            the output approaches infinity (the output increases without bound)

                    the output approaches negative infinity (the output decreases without bound)

                                                        the output approaches

        Table 1
486 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Local Behavior of

Let's begin by looking at the reciprocal function,  We cannot divide by zero, which means the function is

undefined at  so zero is not in the domain. As the input values approach zero from the left side (becoming very

small, negative values), the function values decrease without bound (in other words, they approach negative infinity). We

can see this behavior in Table 2.

                                                    -0.1 -0.01 -0.001 -0.0001

                                                    -10 -100 -1000 -10,000

                                                  Table 2

We write in arrow notation

                                                                              

As the input values approach zero from the right side (becoming very small, positive values), the function values increase
without bound (approaching infinity). We can see this behavior in Table 3.

                                                    0.1 0.01 0.001 0.0001

                                                    10 100 1000 10,000

                                                     Table 3

We write in arrow notation

                                                                             

See Figure 2.

                                                    Figure 2

This behavior creates a vertical asymptote, which is a vertical line that the graph approaches but never crosses. In this

case, the graph is approaching the vertical line    as the input becomes close to zero. See Figure 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      5.6 · Rational Functions 487

Vertical Asymptote                                  Figure 3

A vertical asymptote of a graph is a vertical line    where the graph tends toward positive or negative infinity as
the inputs approach We write
                                                                   

End Behavior of                                                                       approach negative infinity, the

As the values of approach infinity, the function values approach 0. As the values of
function values approach 0. See Figure 4. Symbolically, using arrow notation

                                

                                                    Figure 4

Based on this overall behavior and the graph, we can see that the function approaches 0 but never actually reaches 0; it

seems to level off as the inputs become large. This behavior creates a horizontal asymptote, a horizontal line that the

graph approaches as the input increases or decreases without bound. In this case, the graph is approaching the

horizontal line  See Figure 5.
488 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                             Figure 5

Horizontal Asymptote

A horizontal asymptote of a graph is a horizontal line    where the graph approaches the line as the inputs
increase or decrease without bound. We write
                                                           
                                                       

  EXAMPLE 1

Using Arrow Notation
Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior of the function graphed in Figure 6.

                                             Figure 6

     Solution                                             which tells us that the function is undefined at
Notice that the graph is showing a vertical asymptote at

                                                            

And as the inputs decrease without bound, the graph appears to be leveling off at output values of 4, indicating a

horizontal asymptote at          As the inputs increase without bound, the graph levels off at 4.

                                                          

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.6 · Rational Functions 489

TRY IT #1  Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior for the reciprocal squared
           function.

  EXAMPLE 2

Using Transformations to Graph a Rational Function
Sketch a graph of the reciprocal function shifted two units to the left and up three units. Identify the horizontal and
vertical asymptotes of the graph, if any.

     Solution
Shifting the graph left 2 and up 3 would result in the function

or equivalently, by giving the terms a common denominator,

The graph of the shifted function is displayed in Figure 7.

                                           Figure 7

Notice that this function is undefined at  and the graph also is showing a vertical asymptote at

                                                                                    

As the inputs increase and decrease without bound, the graph appears to be leveling off at output values of 3, indicating
a horizontal asymptote at

                                                                 

     Analysis
Notice that horizontal and vertical asymptotes are shifted left 2 and up 3 along with the function.

TRY IT #2  Sketch the graph, and find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the reciprocal squared
           function that has been shifted right 3 units and down 4 units.

Solving Applied Problems Involving Rational Functions

In Example 2, we shifted a toolkit function in a way that resulted in the function    This is an example of a

rational function. A rational function is a function that can be written as the quotient of two polynomial functions. Many
real-world problems require us to find the ratio of two polynomial functions. Problems involving rates and
concentrations often involve rational functions.
490 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

         Rational Function
         A rational function is a function that can be written as the quotient of two polynomial functions

  EXAMPLE 3

Solving an Applied Problem Involving a Rational Function
After running out of pre-packaged supplies, a nurse in a refugee camp is preparing an intravenous sugar solution for
patients in the camp hospital. A large mixing tank currently contains 100 gallons of distilled water into which 5 pounds of
sugar have been mixed. A tap will open pouring 10 gallons per minute of water into the tank at the same time sugar is
poured into the tank at a rate of 1 pound per minute. Find the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon in the tank
after 12 minutes. Is that a greater ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon than at the beginning?

     Solution
Let be the number of minutes since the tap opened. Since the water increases at 10 gallons per minute, and the sugar
increases at 1 pound per minute, these are constant rates of change. This tells us the amount of water in the tank is
changing linearly, as is the amount of sugar in the tank. We can write an equation independently for each:

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon, , will be the ratio of pounds of sugar to gallons of water

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon after 12 minutes is given by evaluating  at

This means the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is 17 pounds of sugar to 220 gallons of water.
At the beginning, the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is

Since                            the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is greater after 12 minutes than at the
beginning.

TRY IT #3   There are 1,200 first-year and 1,500 second-year students at a rally at noon. After 12 p.m., 20 first-
            year students arrive at the rally every five minutes while 15 second-year students leave the rally.
            Find the ratio of first-year to second-year students at 1 p.m.

Finding the Domains of Rational Functions

A vertical asymptote represents a value at which a rational function is undefined, so that value is not in the domain of
the function. A reciprocal function cannot have values in its domain that cause the denominator to equal zero. In
general, to find the domain of a rational function, we need to determine which inputs would cause division by zero.

  Domain of a Rational Function

  The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those that cause the denominator to equal zero.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.6 · Rational Functions 491

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a rational function, find the domain.
   1. Set the denominator equal to zero.
   2. Solve to find the x-values that cause the denominator to equal zero.
   3. The domain is all real numbers except those found in Step 2.

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Domain of a Rational Function
Find the domain of

     Solution
Begin by setting the denominator equal to zero and solving.

The denominator is equal to zero when  The domain of the function is all real numbers except

     Analysis
A graph of this function, as shown in Figure 8, confirms that the function is not defined when

There is a vertical asymptote at                          Figure 8  We will discuss these types of holes in greater
detail later in this section.     and a hole in the graph at

       TRY IT #4 Find the domain of

Identifying Vertical Asymptotes of Rational Functions

By looking at the graph of a rational function, we can investigate its local behavior and easily see whether there are
asymptotes. We may even be able to approximate their location. Even without the graph, however, we can still
determine whether a given rational function has any asymptotes, and calculate their location.

Vertical Asymptotes

The vertical asymptotes of a rational function may be found by examining the factors of the denominator that are not
common to the factors in the numerator. Vertical asymptotes occur at the zeros of such factors.
492 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Given a rational function, identify any vertical asymptotes of its graph.
          1. Factor the numerator and denominator.
          2. Note any restrictions in the domain of the function.
          3. Reduce the expression by canceling common factors in the numerator and the denominator.
          4. Note any values that cause the denominator to be zero in this simplified version. These are where the vertical

                asymptotes occur.
          5. Note any restrictions in the domain where asymptotes do not occur. These are removable discontinuities, or

                "holes."

         EXAMPLE 5

       Identifying Vertical Asymptotes
       Find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of

            Solution
       First, factor the numerator and denominator.

To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine where this function will be undefined by setting the denominator equal to
zero:

Neither  nor               are zeros of the numerator, so the two values indicate two vertical asymptotes. The graph in

Figure 9 confirms the location of the two vertical asymptotes.

                                 Figure 9

Removable Discontinuities

Occasionally, a graph will contain a hole: a single point where the graph is not defined, indicated by an open circle. We
call such a hole a removable discontinuity.

For example, the function        may be re-written by factoring the numerator and the denominator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.6 · Rational Functions 493

Notice that  is a common factor to the numerator and the denominator. The zero of this factor,                    is the

location of the removable discontinuity. Notice also that  is not a factor in both the numerator and denominator. The

zero of this factor,   is the vertical asymptote. See Figure 10. [Note that removable discontinuities may not be visible

when we use a graphing calculator, depending upon the window selected.]

                                                 Figure 10

Removable Discontinuities of Rational Functions

A removable discontinuity occurs in the graph of a rational function at         if is a zero for a factor in the

denominator that is common with a factor in the numerator. We factor the numerator and denominator and check

for common factors. If we find any, we set the common factor equal to 0 and solve. This is the location of the

removable discontinuity. This is true if the multiplicity of this factor is greater than or equal to that in the

denominator. If the multiplicity of this factor is greater in the denominator, then there is still an asymptote at that

value.

  EXAMPLE 6

Identifying Vertical Asymptotes and Removable Discontinuities for a Graph
Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph of

     Solution
Factor the numerator and the denominator.

Notice that there is a common factor in the numerator and the denominator,      The zero for this factor is               This
is the location of the removable discontinuity.                                 The zero for this factor is                 The

Notice that there is a factor in the denominator that is not in the numerator,

vertical asymptote is  See Figure 11.
494 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                                             Figure 11  but at  the graph will have a hole.
The graph of this function will have the vertical asymptote at

       TRY IT #5 Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph of

Identifying Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions

While vertical asymptotes describe the behavior of a graph as the output gets very large or very small, horizontal
asymptotes help describe the behavior of a graph as the input gets very large or very small. Recall that a polynomial's
end behavior will mirror that of the leading term. Likewise, a rational function's end behavior will mirror that of the ratio
of the function that is the ratio of the leading terms.
There are three distinct outcomes when checking for horizontal asymptotes:
Case 1: If the degree of the denominator > degree of the numerator, there is a horizontal asymptote at

In this case, the end behavior is               This tells us that, as the inputs increase or decrease without bound, this

function will behave similarly to the function        and the outputs will approach zero, resulting in a horizontal

asymptote at  See Figure 12. Note that this graph crosses the horizontal asymptote.

Figure 12 Horizontal asymptote                  when

Case 2: If the degree of the denominator < degree of the numerator by one, we get a slant asymptote.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5.6 · Rational Functions 495

In this case, the end behavior is                    This tells us that as the inputs increase or decrease without bound,

this function will behave similarly to the function             As the inputs grow large, the outputs will grow and not level

off, so this graph has no horizontal asymptote. However, the graph of            looks like a diagonal line, and since

will behave similarly to it will approach a line close to            This line is a slant asymptote.

To find the equation of the slant asymptote, divide             The quotient is  and the remainder is 2. The slant

asymptote is the graph of the line                   See Figure 13.

Figure 13 Slant asymptote when                                         where degree of

Case 3: If the degree of the denominator = degree of the numerator, there is a horizontal asymptote at         where

and are the leading coefficients of  and                   for

In this case, the end behavior is                    This tells us that as the inputs grow large, this function will behave like

the function  which is a horizontal line. As                           resulting in a horizontal asymptote at           See

Figure 14. Note that this graph crosses the horizontal asymptote.

              Figure 14 Horizontal asymptote when
496 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

       Notice that, while the graph of a rational function will never cross a vertical asymptote, the graph may or may not cross a
       horizontal or slant asymptote. Also, although the graph of a rational function may have many vertical asymptotes, the
       graph will have at most one horizontal (or slant) asymptote.
       It should be noted that, if the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the denominator by more than one,
       the end behavior of the graph will mimic the behavior of the reduced end behavior fraction. For instance, if we had the
       function

with end behavior

the end behavior of the graph would look similar to that of an even polynomial with a positive leading coefficient.

                                                                       

Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions

The horizontal asymptote of a rational function can be determined by looking at the degrees of the numerator and
denominator.

  · Degree of numerator is less than degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at
  · Degree of numerator is greater than degree of denominator by one: no horizontal asymptote; slant asymptote.
  · Degree of numerator is equal to degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at ratio of leading coefficients.

EXAMPLE 7

Identifying Horizontal and Slant Asymptotes
For the functions listed, identify the horizontal or slant asymptote.

                                  

  Solution

For these solutions, we will use

                   The degree of                          so we can find the horizontal asymptote by taking the ratio
                                                                or
of the leading terms. There is a horizontal asymptote at

                   The degree of  and degree of             Since          by 1, there is a slant asymptote found at

The quotient is    and the remainder is 13. There is a slant asymptote at

                   The degree of  degree of                 so there is a horizontal asymptote

  EXAMPLE 8

Identifying Horizontal Asymptotes
In the sugar concentration problem earlier, we created the equation
Find the horizontal asymptote and interpret it in context of the problem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            5.6 · Rational Functions 497

     Solution
Both the numerator and denominator are linear (degree 1). Because the degrees are equal, there will be a horizontal
asymptote at the ratio of the leading coefficients. In the numerator, the leading term is with coefficient 1. In the
denominator, the leading term is with coefficient 10. The horizontal asymptote will be at the ratio of these values:

                                                             

This function will have a horizontal asymptote at
This tells us that as the values of t increase, the values of will approach In context, this means that, as more time
goes by, the concentration of sugar in the tank will approach one-tenth of a pound of sugar per gallon of water or
pounds per gallon.

  EXAMPLE 9
Identifying Horizontal and Vertical Asymptotes
Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the function

     Solution
First, note that this function has no common factors, so there are no potential removable discontinuities.

The function will have vertical asymptotes when the denominator is zero, causing the function to be undefined. The

denominator will be zero at              indicating vertical asymptotes at these values.

The numerator has degree 2, while the denominator has degree 3. Since the degree of the denominator is greater than

the degree of the numerator, the denominator will grow faster than the numerator, causing the outputs to tend towards

zero as the inputs get large, and so as    This function will have a horizontal asymptote at                See

Figure 15.

                                                                      Figure 15
TRY IT #6 Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of the function:
498 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Intercepts of Rational Functions

A rational function will have a y-intercept at         , if the function is defined at zero. A rational function will not have a

y-intercept if the function is not defined at zero.

Likewise, a rational function will have x-intercepts at the inputs that cause the output to be zero. Since a fraction is
only equal to zero when the numerator is zero, x-intercepts can only occur when the numerator of the rational
function is equal to zero.

  EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Intercepts of a Rational Function
Find the intercepts of

     Solution
We can find the y-intercept by evaluating the function at zero

The x-intercepts will occur when the function is equal to zero:

The y-intercept is               the x-intercepts are  and        See Figure 16.

                                                       Figure 16

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   5.6 · Rational Functions 499

TRY IT #7  Given the reciprocal squared function that is shifted right 3 units and down 4 units, write this as a
           rational function. Then, find the x- and y-intercepts and the horizontal and vertical asymptotes.

Graphing Rational Functions

In Example 9, we see that the numerator of a rational function reveals the x-intercepts of the graph, whereas the
denominator reveals the vertical asymptotes of the graph. As with polynomials, factors of the numerator may have
integer powers greater than one. Fortunately, the effect on the shape of the graph at those intercepts is the same as we
saw with polynomials.

The vertical asymptotes associated with the factors of the denominator will mirror one of the two toolkit reciprocal
functions. When the degree of the factor in the denominator is odd, the distinguishing characteristic is that on one side
of the vertical asymptote the graph heads towards positive infinity, and on the other side the graph heads towards
negative infinity. See Figure 17.

                                                                             Figure 17

When the degree of the factor in the denominator is even, the distinguishing characteristic is that the graph either heads
toward positive infinity on both sides of the vertical asymptote or heads toward negative infinity on both sides. See
Figure 18.

For example, the graph of             Figure 18
                           is shown in Figure 19.
500 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                                       Figure 19

· At the x-intercept             corresponding to the            factor of the numerator, the graph "bounces", consistent

with the quadratic nature of the factor.

· At the x-intercept             corresponding to the  factor of the numerator, the graph passes through the axis as

we would expect from a linear factor.

· At the vertical asymptote                corresponding to the   factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards

positive infinity on both sides of the asymptote, consistent with the behavior of the function

· At the vertical asymptote                corresponding to the   factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards

positive infinity on the left side of the asymptote and towards negative infinity on the right side.

...

     HOW TO

Given a rational function, sketch a graph.

 1. Evaluate the function at 0 to find the y-intercept.
 2. Factor the numerator and denominator.
 3. For factors in the numerator not common to the denominator, determine where each factor of the numerator is

      zero to find the x-intercepts.
 4. Find the multiplicities of the x-intercepts to determine the behavior of the graph at those points.
 5. For factors in the denominator, note the multiplicities of the zeros to determine the local behavior. For those

      factors not common to the numerator, find the vertical asymptotes by setting those factors equal to zero and
      then solve.
 6. For factors in the denominator common to factors in the numerator, find the removable discontinuities by
      setting those factors equal to 0 and then solve.
 7. Compare the degrees of the numerator and the denominator to determine the horizontal or slant asymptotes.
 8. Sketch the graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           5.6 · Rational Functions 501

  EXAMPLE 11

Graphing a Rational Function
Sketch a graph of

     Solution
We can start by noting that the function is already factored, saving us a step.
Next, we will find the intercepts. Evaluating the function at zero gives the y-intercept:

To find the x-intercepts, we determine when the numerator of the function is zero. Setting each factor equal to zero, we

find x-intercepts at      and  At each, the behavior will be linear (multiplicity 1), with the graph passing through

the intercept.

We have a y-intercept at       and x-intercepts at    and

To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine when the denominator is equal to zero. This occurs when  and

when            giving us vertical asymptotes at      and

There are no common factors in the numerator and denominator. This means there are no removable discontinuities.

Finally, the degree of denominator is larger than the degree of the numerator, telling us this graph has a horizontal
asymptote at

To sketch the graph, we might start by plotting the three intercepts. Since the graph has no x-intercepts between the
vertical asymptotes, and the y-intercept is positive, we know the function must remain positive between the asymptotes,
letting us fill in the middle portion of the graph as shown in Figure 20.

                                                      Figure 20

The factor associated with the vertical asymptote at       was squared, so we know the behavior will be the same on

both sides of the asymptote. The graph heads toward positive infinity as the inputs approach the asymptote on the right,

so the graph will head toward positive infinity on the left as well.

For the vertical asymptote at  the factor was not squared, so the graph will have opposite behavior on either side

of the asymptote. See Figure 21. After passing through the x-intercepts, the graph will then level off toward an output of

zero, as indicated by the horizontal asymptote.
502 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                            Figure 21

TRY IT #8  Given the function                              use the characteristics of polynomials and rational

           functions to describe its behavior and sketch the function.

Writing Rational Functions

Now that we have analyzed the equations for rational functions and how they relate to a graph of the function, we can
use information given by a graph to write the function. A rational function written in factored form will have an
x-intercept where each factor of the numerator is equal to zero. (An exception occurs in the case of a removable
discontinuity.) As a result, we can form a numerator of a function whose graph will pass through a set of x-intercepts by
introducing a corresponding set of factors. Likewise, because the function will have a vertical asymptote where each
factor of the denominator is equal to zero, we can form a denominator that will produce the vertical asymptotes by
introducing a corresponding set of factors.

Writing Rational Functions from Intercepts and Asymptotes

If a rational function has x-intercepts at     vertical asymptotes at   and no

then the function can be written in the form:

where the powers or on each factor can be determined by the behavior of the graph at the corresponding
intercept or asymptote, and the stretch factor can be determined given a value of the function other than the
x-intercept or by the horizontal asymptote if it is nonzero.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a graph of a rational function, write the function.
 1. Determine the factors of the numerator. Examine the behavior of the graph at the x-intercepts to determine the

      zeroes and their multiplicities. (This is easy to do when finding the "simplest" function with small
      multiplicities--such as 1 or 3--but may be difficult for larger multiplicities--such as 5 or 7, for example.)
 2. Determine the factors of the denominator. Examine the behavior on both sides of each vertical asymptote to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.6 · Rational Functions 503

        determine the factors and their powers.
   3. Use any clear point on the graph to find the stretch factor.

  EXAMPLE 12
Writing a Rational Function from Intercepts and Asymptotes
Write an equation for the rational function shown in Figure 22.

                                                  Figure 22

Solution

The graph appears to have x-intercepts at    and  At both, the graph passes through the intercept,

suggesting linear factors. The graph has two vertical asymptotes. The one at  seems to exhibit the basic behavior

similar to with the graph heading toward positive infinity on one side and heading toward negative infinity on the

other. The asymptote at  is exhibiting a behavior similar to with the graph heading toward negative infinity on

both sides of the asymptote. See Figure 23.

                                                                             Figure 23
We can use this information to write a function of the form

To find the stretch factor, we can use another clear point on the graph, such as the y-intercept
504 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

This gives us a final function of

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with rational functions.

     Graphing Rational Functions (http://openstax.org/l/graphrational)
     Find the Equation of a Rational Function (http://openstax.org/l/equatrational)
     Determining Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes (http://openstax.org/l/asymptote)
     Find the Intercepts, Asymptotes, and Hole of a Rational Function (http://openstax.org/l/interasymptote)

        5.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is the fundamental                 2. What is the fundamental       3. If the graph of a rational
    difference in the algebraic                difference in the graphs of      function has a removable
    representation of a                        polynomial functions and         discontinuity, what must be
    polynomial function and a                  rational functions?              true of the functional rule?
    rational function?

4. Can a graph of a rational               5. Can a graph of a rational
    function have no vertical                  function have no
    asymptote? If so, how?                     x-intercepts? If so, how?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the domain of the rational functions.

6.                                         7.                               8.

9.

For the following exercises, find the domain, vertical asymptotes, and horizontal asymptotes of the functions.

10.                                        11.                              12.

13.                                        14.                              15.

16.                                        17.                              18.

19.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        5.6 · Rational Functions 505

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts for the functions.

20.                            21.                                       22.

23.                            24.

For the following exercises, describe the local and end behavior of the functions.

25.                            26.                                       27.

28.                            29.

For the following exercises, find the slant asymptote of the functions.

30.                            31.                                       32.

33.                            34.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the given transformation to graph the function. Note the vertical and horizontal
asymptotes.

35. The reciprocal function    36. The reciprocal function               37. The reciprocal squared
      shifted up two units.          shifted down one unit and                 function shifted to the
                                     left three units.                         right 2 units.

38. The reciprocal squared
      function shifted down 2
      units and right 1 unit.

For the following exercises, find the horizontal intercepts, the vertical intercept, the vertical asymptotes, and the
horizontal or slant asymptote of the functions. Use that information to sketch a graph.

39.                            40.                                       41.

42.                            43.                                       44.

45.                            46.                                       47.

48.                            49.                                       50.
506 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, write an equation for a rational function with the given characteristics.

51. Vertical asymptotes at                 and                  52. Vertical asymptotes at       and
                                                y-intercept at                                    y-intercept at
     x-intercepts at  and                                       x-intercepts at       and

53. Vertical asymptotes at                 and                  54. Vertical asymptotes at       and
                                               Horizontal                                            Horizontal
     x-intercepts at  and                                       x-intercepts at             and
                                           Double zero at
     asymptote at                                               asymptote at

55. Vertical asymptote at                                       56. Vertical asymptote at        Double zero at
               y-intercept at                                         y-intercept at

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write an equation for the function.

57.                                        58.                                   59.

60.                                        61.                                   62.

63.                                        64.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.6 · Rational Functions 507

Numeric

For the following exercises, make tables to show the behavior of the function near the vertical asymptote and reflecting
the horizontal asymptote

65.                             66.                                 67.

68.                             69.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph      Use the graph to solve
                                                                           72.
70.                             71.

73.                             74.

Extensions

For the following exercises, identify the removable discontinuity.

75.                             76.                                 77.

78.                             79.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, express a rational function that describes the situation.

80. In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank       81. In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank
      currently contains 200 gallons of water, into which         currently contains 300 gallons of water, into which
      10 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap will              8 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap will
      open, pouring 10 gallons of water per minute into           open, pouring 20 gallons of water per minute into
      the tank at the same time sugar is poured into the          the tank at the same time sugar is poured into the
      tank at a rate of 3 pounds per minute. Find the             tank at a rate of 2 pounds per minute. Find the
      concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the           concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the
      tank after minutes.                                         tank after minutes.

For the following exercises, use the given rational function to answer the question.

82. The concentration of a drug in a patient's              83. The concentration of a drug in a patient's
      bloodstream hours after injection is given by               bloodstream hours after injection is given by
                         What happens to the concentration                              Use a calculator to approximate

     of the drug as increases?                              the time when the concentration is highest.
508 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, construct a rational function that will help solve the problem. Then, use a calculator to
answer the question.

84. An open box with a square              85. A rectangular box with a         86. A right circular cylinder has
      base is to have a volume of                square base is to have a             volume of 100 cubic inches.
      108 cubic inches. Find the                 volume of 20 cubic feet.             Find the radius and height
      dimensions of the box that                 The material for the base            that will yield minimum
      will have minimum surface                  costs 30 cents/ square foot.         surface area. Let =
      area. Let = length of the                  The material for the sides           radius.
      side of the base.                          costs 10 cents/square foot.
                                                 The material for the top
                                                 costs 20 cents/square foot.
                                                 Determine the dimensions
                                                 that will yield minimum
                                                 cost. Let = length of the
                                                 side of the base.

87. A right circular cylinder              88. A right circular cylinder is
      with no top has a volume                   to have a volume of 40
      of 50 cubic meters. Find the               cubic inches. It costs 4
      radius that will yield                     cents/square inch to
      minimum surface area. Let                  construct the top and
         = radius.                               bottom and 1 cent/square
                                                 inch to construct the rest of
                                                 the cylinder. Find the
                                                 radius to yield minimum
                                                 cost. Let = radius.

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the inverse of an invertible polynomial function.
           Restrict the domain to find the inverse of a polynomial function.

Park rangers and other trail managers may construct rock piles, stacks, or other arrangements, usually called cairns, to
mark trails or other landmarks. (Rangers and environmental scientists discourage hikers from doing the same, in order
to avoid confusion and preserve the habitats of plants and animals.) A cairn in the form of a mound of gravel is in the
shape of a cone with the height equal to twice the radius.

                                           Figure 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 509

The volume is found using a formula from elementary geometry.

We have written the volume in terms of the radius However, in some cases, we may start out with the volume and
want to find the radius. For example: A customer purchases 100 cubic feet of gravel to construct a cone shape mound
with a height twice the radius. What are the radius and height of the new cone? To answer this question, we use the
formula

This function is the inverse of the formula for in terms of

In this section, we will explore the inverses of polynomial and rational functions and in particular the radical functions we
encounter in the process.

Finding the Inverse of a Polynomial Function

Two functions and are inverse functions if for every coordinate pair in  there exists a corresponding

coordinate pair in the inverse function,  In other words, the coordinate pairs of the inverse functions have the

input and output interchanged. Only one-to-one functions have inverses. Recall that a one-to-one function has a unique

output value for each input value and passes the horizontal line test.

For example, suppose the Sustainability Club builds a water runoff collector in the shape of a parabolic trough as shown
in Figure 2. We can use the information in the figure to find the surface area of the water in the trough as a function of
the depth of the water.

                                                                              Figure 2

Because it will be helpful to have an equation for the parabolic cross-sectional shape, we will impose a coordinate system
at the cross section, with measured horizontally and measured vertically, with the origin at the vertex of the
parabola. See Figure 3.
510 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

                                           Figure 3

From this we find an equation for the parabolic shape. We placed the origin at the vertex of the parabola, so we know

the equation will have form                Our equation will need to pass through the point (6, 18), from which we can

solve for the stretch factor

Our parabolic cross section has the equation

We are interested in the surface area of the water, so we must determine the width at the top of the water as a function
of the water depth. For any depth the width will be given by so we need to solve the equation above for and find
the inverse function. However, notice that the original function is not one-to-one, and indeed, given any output there are
two inputs that produce the same output, one positive and one negative.
To find an inverse, we can restrict our original function to a limited domain on which it is one-to-one. In this case, it
makes sense to restrict ourselves to positive values. On this domain, we can find an inverse by solving for the input
variable:

This is not a function as written. We are limiting ourselves to positive values, so we eliminate the negative solution,
giving us the inverse function we're looking for.

Because is the distance from the center of the parabola to either side, the entire width of the water at the top will be
     The trough is 3 feet (36 inches) long, so the surface area will then be:

This example illustrates two important points:
 1. When finding the inverse of a quadratic, we have to limit ourselves to a domain on which the function is one-to-one.
 2. The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function. Both are toolkit functions and different types of power

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 511

     functions.

Functions involving roots are often called radical functions. While it is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial
functions, some basic polynomials do have inverses. Such functions are called invertible functions, and we use the
notation

Warning:         is not the same as the reciprocal of the function  This use of "-1" is reserved to denote inverse

functions. To denote the reciprocal of a function  we would need to write

An important relationship between inverse functions is that they "undo" each other. If   is the inverse of a function
                                                                                                 undoes it--and vice-
then is the inverse of the function       In other words, whatever the function does to

versa.

and

Note that the inverse switches the domain and range of the original function.
  Verifying Two Functions Are Inverses of One Another
  Two functions, and are inverses of one another if for all in the domain of and

        ...

             HOW TO

Given a polynomial function, find the inverse of the function by restricting the domain in such a way that the
new function is one-to-one.

1. Replace         with

2. Interchange and

3. Solve for and rename the function

EXAMPLE 1

Verifying Inverse Functions

Show that            and                  are inverses, for         .

Solution

We must show that                    and
512 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Therefore,            and                  are inverses.

TRY IT #1 Show that                        and                      are inverses.

  EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Inverse of a Cubic Function
Find the inverse of the function

     Solution
This is a transformation of the basic cubic toolkit function, and based on our knowledge of that function, we know it is
one-to-one. Solving for the inverse by solving for

Analysis

Look at the graph of and                   Notice that one graph is the reflection of the other about the line  This is always

the case when graphing a function and its inverse function.

Also, since the method involved interchanging and notice corresponding points. If       is on the graph of      then
                                                                                            Similarly, since        is
is on the graph of         Since           is on the graph of then  is on the graph of

on the graph of then       is on the graph of   See Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4

       TRY IT #2 Find the inverse function of

Restricting the Domain to Find the Inverse of a Polynomial Function

So far, we have been able to find the inverse functions of cubic functions without having to restrict their domains.
However, as we know, not all cubic polynomials are one-to-one. Some functions that are not one-to-one may have their
domain restricted so that they are one-to-one, but only over that domain. The function over the restricted domain would
then have an inverse function. Since quadratic functions are not one-to-one, we must restrict their domain in order to
find their inverses.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 513

Restricting the Domain

If a function is not one-to-one, it cannot have an inverse. If we restrict the domain of the function so that it becomes
one-to-one, thus creating a new function, this new function will have an inverse.

  ...

       HOW TO

Given a polynomial function, restrict the domain of a function that is not one-to-one and then find the inverse.

1. Restrict the domain by determining a domain on which the original function is one-to-one.

2. Replace  with

3. Interchange and

4. Solve for and rename the function or pair of function

5. Revise the formula for              by ensuring that the outputs of the inverse function correspond to the restricted

  domain of the original function.

EXAMPLE 3

Restricting the Domain to Find the Inverse of a Polynomial Function
Find the inverse function of

  Solution                   

The original function                    is not one-to-one, but the function is restricted to a domain of  or  on

which it is one-to-one. See Figure 5.

To find the inverse, start by replacing                   Figure 5
                                         with the simple variable

This is not a function as written. We need to examine the restrictions on the domain of the original function to determine

the inverse. Since we reversed the roles of and for the original    we looked at the domain: the values could

assume. When we reversed the roles of and this gave us the values could assume. For this function,             so for

the inverse, we should have    which is what our inverse function gives.

 The domain of the original function was restricted to    so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same,

              and we must use the + case:
514 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

 The domain of the original function was restricted to   so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same,

              and we must use the - case:

Analysis

On the graphs in Figure 6, we see the original function graphed on the same set of axes as its inverse function. Notice

that together the graphs show symmetry about the line   The coordinate pair               is on the graph of and the

coordinate pair  is on the graph of           For any coordinate pair, if    is on the graph of then    is on the

graph of  Finally, observe that the graph of intersects the graph of on the line          Points of intersection for

the graphs of and will always lie on the line

                                               Figure 6

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Inverse of a Quadratic Function When the Restriction Is Not Specified
Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of

Solution

We can see this is a parabola with vertex at   that opens upward. Because the graph will be decreasing on one side

of the vertex and increasing on the other side, we can restrict this function to a domain on which it will be one-to-one by

limiting the domain to

To find the inverse, we will use the vertex form of the quadratic. We start by replacing  with a simple variable, then
solve for

                                                         

                                                         

                                                         

                                                         

                                                         

Now we need to determine which case to use. Because we restricted our original function to a domain of  the

outputs of the inverse should be the same, telling us to utilize the + case

If the quadratic had not been given in vertex form, rewriting it into vertex form would be the first step. This way we may
easily observe the coordinates of the vertex to help us restrict the domain.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 515

    Analysis

Notice that we arbitrarily decided to restrict the domain on  We could just have easily opted to restrict the domain

on  in which case                            Observe the original function graphed on the same set of axes as its

inverse function in Figure 7. Notice that both graphs show symmetry about the line    The coordinate pair

is on the graph of and the coordinate pair        is on the graph of  Observe from the graph of both functions

on the same set of axes that

                                                                      

and

                                                                                    

Finally, observe that the graph of intersects the graph of along the line

                                                  Figure 7

    TRY IT #3 Find the inverse of the function                on the domain

Solving Applications of Radical Functions

Notice that the functions from previous examples were all polynomials, and their inverses were radical functions. If we
want to find the inverse of a radical function, we will need to restrict the domain of the answer because the range of the
original function is limited.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a radical function, find the inverse.

1. Determine the range of the original function.

2. Replace    with then solve for

3. If necessary, restrict the domain of the inverse function to the range of the original function.

  EXAMPLE 5                                       and then find the inverse.

Finding the Inverse of a Radical Function         Replace     with then solve for
Restrict the domain of the function

     Solution
Note that the original function has range
516 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Recall that the domain of this function must be limited to the range of the original function.

     Analysis                                                                                   Because the original function
Notice in Figure 8 that the inverse is a reflection of the original function over the line
has only positive outputs, the inverse function has only positive inputs.

                                                                              Figure 8

       TRY IT #4 Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of the function

Solving Applications of Radical Functions

Radical functions are common in physical models, as we saw in the section opener. We now have enough tools to be
able to solve the problem posed at the start of the section.

  EXAMPLE 6
Solving an Application with a Cubic Function
Park rangers construct a mound of gravel in the shape of a cone with the height equal to twice the radius. The volume of
the cone in terms of the radius is given by

Find the inverse of the function           that determines the volume of a cone and is a function of the radius

Then use the inverse function to calculate the radius of such a mound of gravel measuring 100 cubic feet. Use

Solution

Start with the given function for Notice that the meaningful domain for the function is         since negative radii

would not make sense in this context nor would a radius of 0. Also note the range of the function (hence, the domain of

the inverse function) is         Solve for in terms of using the method outlined previously. Note that in real-world

applications, we do not swap the variables when finding inverses. Instead, we change which variable is considered to be

the independent variable.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 517

This is the result stated in the section opener. Now evaluate this for  and

Therefore, the radius is about 3.63 ft.

Determining the Domain of a Radical Function Composed with Other Functions

When radical functions are composed with other functions, determining domain can become more complicated.

  EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Domain of a Radical Function Composed with a Rational Function
Find the domain of the function

     Solution
Because a square root is only defined when the quantity under the radical is non-negative, we need to determine where

                      The output of a rational function can change signs (change from positive to negative or vice versa) at
x-intercepts and at vertical asymptotes. For this equation, the graph could change signs at
To determine the intervals on which the rational expression is positive, we could test some values in the expression or
sketch a graph. While both approaches work equally well, for this example we will use a graph as shown in Figure 9.

                                                       Figure 9

This function has two x-intercepts, both of which exhibit linear behavior near the x-intercepts. There is one vertical
asymptote, corresponding to a linear factor; this behavior is similar to the basic reciprocal toolkit function, and there is
no horizontal asymptote because the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the denominator. There is a

y-intercept at

From the y-intercept and x-intercept at  we can sketch the left side of the graph. From the behavior at the

asymptote, we can sketch the right side of the graph.
518 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

From the graph, we can now tell on which intervals the outputs will be non-negative, so that we can be sure that the

original function  will be defined.        has domain  or in interval notation,                                         

Finding Inverses of Rational Functions

As with finding inverses of quadratic functions, it is sometimes desirable to find the inverse of a rational function,
particularly of rational functions that are the ratio of linear functions, such as in concentration applications.

EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Inverse of a Rational Function

The function                     represents the concentration of an acid solution after mL of 40% solution has been added

to 100 mL of a 20% solution. First, find the inverse of the function; that is, find an expression for in terms of Then
use your result to determine how much of the 40% solution should be added so that the final mixture is a 35% solution.

     Solution
We first want the inverse of the function in order to determine how many mL we need for a given concentration. We will
solve for in terms of

Now evaluate this function at 35%, which is

We can conclude that 300 mL of the 40% solution should be added.

       TRY IT #5 Find the inverse of the function

       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with inverses and radical functions.
      Graphing the Basic Square Root Function (http://openstax.org/l/graphsquareroot)
      Find the Inverse of a Square Root Function (http://openstax.org/l/inversesquare)
      Find the Inverse of a Rational Function (http://openstax.org/l/inverserational)
      Find the Inverse of a Rational Function and an Inverse Function Value (http://openstax.org/l/rationalinverse)
      Inverse Functions (http://openstax.org/l/inversefunction)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.7 · Inverses and Radical Functions 519

        5.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain why we cannot find  2. Why must we restrict the         3. When finding the inverse of
    inverse functions for all      domain of a quadratic               a radical function, what
    polynomial functions.          function when finding its           restriction will we need to
                                   inverse?                            make?

4. The inverse of a quadratic
    function will always take
    what form?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function on the given domain.

5.                             6.                                  7.                      
                                                                                    
8.                             9.                                  10.
                                                                                           
11.        

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions.

12.                            13.                                 14.

15.

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions.

16.                            17.                                 18.

19.                            20.                                 21.

22.                            23.                                 24.

25.                            26.                                       27.

28.                            29.                                  30.
520 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Graphical

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function and graph both the function and its inverse.

31.                                        32.                       33.

34.                                        35.                       36.

37.                                        38.                       39.

40.

For the following exercises, use a graph to help determine the domain of the functions.

41.                                        42.                       43.

44.                                        45.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the function. Then, using the graph, give three points on the graph
of the inverse with y-coordinates given.

46.                                        47.                            48.

49.                                             50.

Extensions

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions with   positive real numbers.
                                                                     53.
51.                                        52.

54.                                        55.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, determine the function described and then use it to answer the question.

56. An object dropped from a height of 200 meters           57. An object dropped from a height of 600 feet has a

     has a height,      in meters after seconds have        height,       in feet after seconds have elapsed,

     lapsed, such that                          Express as  such that                    Express as a

     a function of height, and find the time to reach       function of height and find the time to reach a

     a height of 50 meters.                                 height of 400 feet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.8 · Modeling Using Variation 521

58. The volume,       of a sphere in terms of its radius,    59. The surface area, of a sphere in terms of its
         is given by                  Express as a function
                                                             radius, is given by  Express as a

of and find the radius of a sphere with volume               function of and find the radius of a sphere with
of 200 cubic feet.
                                                             a surface area of 1000 square inches.

60. A container holds 100 mL of a solution that is 25        61. The period in seconds, of a simple pendulum as
      mL acid. If mL of a solution that is 60% acid is             a function of its length in feet, is given by

added, the function          gives the                                                     . Express as a function of and

concentration, as a function of the number of                      determine the length of a pendulum with period
mL added, Express as a function of and                             of 2 seconds.
determine the number of mL that need to be
added to have a solution that is 50% acid.

62. The volume of a cylinder , in terms of radius,           63. The surface area, of a cylinder in terms of its
                                                                   radius, and height, is given by
and height, is given by      If a cylinder                                                   If the height of the cylinder is 4
                                                                   feet, express the radius as a function of and find
has a height of 6 meters, express the radius as a                  the radius if the surface area is 200 square feet.

function of and find the radius of a cylinder with

volume of 300 cubic meters.

64. The volume of a right circular cone, in terms of         65. Consider a cone with height of 30 feet. Express the
      its radius, and its height, is given by                      radius, in terms of the volume, and find the
                        Express in terms of if the height          radius of a cone with volume of 1000 cubic feet.

      of the cone is 12 feet and find the radius of a cone
      with volume of 50 cubic inches.

5.8 Modeling Using Variation

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve direct variation problems.
           Solve inverse variation problems.
           Solve problems involving joint variation.

A pre-owned car dealer has just offered their best candidate, Nicole, a position in sales. The position offers 16%
commission on her sales. Her earnings depend on the amount of her sales. For instance, if she sells a vehicle for $4,600,
she will earn $736. As she considers the offer, she takes into account the typical price of the dealer's cars, the overall
market, and how many she can reasonably expect to sell. In this section, we will look at relationships, such as this one,
between earnings, sales, and commission rate.

Solving Direct Variation Problems

In the example above, Nicole's earnings can be found by multiplying her sales by her commission. The formula
tells us her earnings, come from the product of 0.16, her commission, and the sale price of the vehicle. If we create a
table, we observe that as the sales price increases, the earnings increase as well, which should be intuitive. See Table 1.

, sales price                                                Interpretation

$4,600                                                       A sale of a $4,600 vehicle results in $736 earnings.

$9,200                                                       A sale of a $9,200 vehicle results in $1472 earnings.

$18,400                                                      A sale of a $18,400 vehicle results in $2944 earnings.

Table 1

Notice that earnings are a multiple of sales. As sales increase, earnings increase in a predictable way. Double the sales of
522 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

the vehicle from $4,600 to $9,200, and we double the earnings from $736 to $1,472. As the input increases, the output
increases as a multiple of the input. A relationship in which one quantity is a constant multiplied by another quantity is
called direct variation. Each variable in this type of relationship varies directly with the other.

Figure 1 represents the data for Nicole's potential earnings. We say that earnings vary directly with the sales price of the

car. The formula  is used for direct variation. The value is a nonzero constant greater than zero and is called

the constant of variation. In this case,   and      We saw functions like this one when we discussed power

functions.

                                                    Figure 1

Direct Variation

If          are related by an equation of the form

then we say that the relationship is direct variation and varies directly with, or is proportional to, the th power of

    In direct variation relationships, there is a nonzero constant ratio  where is called the constant of

variation, which help defines the relationship between the variables.

    ...

         HOW TO

Given a description of a direct variation problem, solve for an unknown.                   to determine the

 1. Identify the input, and the output,
 2. Determine the constant of variation. You may need to divide by the specified power of

      constant of variation.
 3. Use the constant of variation to write an equation for the relationship.
 4. Substitute known values into the equation to find the unknown.

  EXAMPLE 1                                         when                  find when is 6.

Solving a Direct Variation Problem
The quantity varies directly with the cube of If

Access for free at openstax.org
     Solution                                                                                                 5.8 · Modeling Using Variation 523
The general formula for direct variation with a cube is
                                                         The constant can be found by dividing by the cube of

Now use the constant to write an equation that represents this relationship.

Substitute  and solve for

     Analysis
The graph of this equation is a simple cubic, as shown in Figure 2.

                                                         Figure 2

Q&A         Do the graphs of all direct variation equations look like Example 1?

            No. Direct variation equations are power functions--they may be linear, quadratic, cubic, quartic, radical,
            etc. But all of the graphs pass through

TRY IT #1 The quantity varies directly with the square of If                         when        find when is 4.

Solving Inverse Variation Problems

Water temperature in an ocean varies inversely to the water's depth. The formula           gives us the temperature

in degrees Fahrenheit at a depth in feet below Earth's surface. Consider the Atlantic Ocean, which covers 22% of Earth's
surface. At a certain location, at the depth of 500 feet, the temperature may be 28°F.

If we create Table 2, we observe that, as the depth increases, the water temperature decreases.

            depth                                                    Interpretation

            500 ft         At a depth of 500 ft, the water temperature is 28° F.

            Table 2
524 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

             depth                                                   Interpretation
           1000 ft                         At a depth of 1,000 ft, the water temperature is 14° F.

           2000 ft                         At a depth of 2,000 ft, the water temperature is 7° F.

           Table 2

We notice in the relationship between these variables that, as one quantity increases, the other decreases. The two
quantities are said to be inversely proportional and each term varies inversely with the other. Inversely proportional
relationships are also called inverse variations.

For our example, Figure 3 depicts the inverse variation. We say the water temperature varies inversely with the depth of

the water because, as the depth increases, the temperature decreases. The formula  for inverse variation in this

case uses

                                               Figure 3

Inverse Variation
If and are related by an equation of the form

where is a nonzero constant, then we say that varies inversely with the power of   In inversely
proportional relationships, or inverse variations, there is a constant multiple

EXAMPLE 2

Writing a Formula for an Inversely Proportional Relationship
A tourist plans to drive 100 miles. Find a formula for the time the trip will take as a function of the speed the tourist
drives.

Solution

Recall that multiplying speed by time gives distance. If we let represent the drive time in hours, and represent the

velocity (speed or rate) at which the tourist drives, then  Because the distance is fixed at 100 miles,

so         Because time is a function of velocity, we can write

We can see that the constant of variation is 100 and, although we can write the relationship using the negative exponent,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.8 · Modeling Using Variation 525

it is more common to see it written as a fraction. We say that time varies inversely with velocity.

...

     HOW TO

Given a description of an indirect variation problem, solve for an unknown.                          to determine the

 1. Identify the input, and the output,
 2. Determine the constant of variation. You may need to multiply by the specified power of

      constant of variation.
 3. Use the constant of variation to write an equation for the relationship.
 4. Substitute known values into the equation to find the unknown.

EXAMPLE 3

Solving an Inverse Variation Problem                      when            find when is 6.
A quantity varies inversely with the cube of If

     Solution                                                   The constant can be found by multiplying by the cube
The general formula for inverse variation with a cube is

of

Now we use the constant to write an equation that represents this relationship.

Substitute  and solve for

     Analysis
The graph of this equation is a rational function, as shown in Figure 4.

                                                 Figure 4

TRY IT #2 A quantity varies inversely with the square of If                      when      find when is 4.
526 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Solving Problems Involving Joint Variation

Many situations are more complicated than a basic direct variation or inverse variation model. One variable often
depends on multiple other variables. When a variable is dependent on the product or quotient of two or more variables,
this is called joint variation. For example, the cost of busing students for each school trip varies with the number of
students attending and the distance from the school. The variable cost, varies jointly with the number of students,
and the distance,

Joint Variation

Joint variation occurs when a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables.

For instance, if varies directly with both and we have                        If varies directly with and inversely with we

have          Notice that we only use one constant in a joint variation equation.

EXAMPLE 4

Solving Problems Involving Joint Variation

A quantity varies directly with the square of and inversely with the cube root of If             when  and        find

when        and

     Solution
Begin by writing an equation to show the relationship between the variables.

Substitute       and                       to find the value of the constant

Now we can substitute the value of the constant into the equation for the relationship.

To find when     and                       we will substitute values for and into our equation.

TRY IT #3        A quantity varies directly with the square of and inversely with If                   when  and

                                 find when  and

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with direct and inverse variation.

Direct Variation (http://openstax.org/l/directvariation)
Inverse Variation (http://openstax.org/l/inversevariatio)
Direct and Inverse Variation (http://openstax.org/l/directinverse)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.8 · Modeling Using Variation 527

        5.8 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is true of the          2. If two variables vary                  3. Is there a limit to the
    appearance of graphs that       inversely, what will an                   number of variables that
    reflect a direct variation      equation representing their               can vary jointly? Explain.
    between two variables?          relationship look like?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, write an equation describing the relationship of the given variables.

4. varies directly as and       5. varies directly as the                 6. varies directly as the
    when                            square of and when                        square root of and when

                                                     

7. varies directly as the cube  8. varies directly as the cube            9. varies directly as the
    of and when                     root of and when                          fourth power of and when

10. varies inversely as and     11. varies inversely as the               12. varies inversely as the
      when                            square of and when                        cube of and when

13. varies inversely as the     14. varies inversely as the               15. varies inversely as the
      fourth power of and             square root of and when                   cube root of and when
      when

16. varies jointly with and     17. varies jointly as      and 18. varies jointly as the
                                         and when
and when   and                                                            square of and the square
                                      then
                                                                          of and when               and

                                                                                then

19. varies jointly as and the   20. varies jointly as the                 21. varies jointly as and

square root of and when         square of the cube of                     and inversely as . When

and        then                 and the square root of                                , and               ,

                                When                   and                then

                                      then

22. varies jointly as the       23. varies jointly as and
      square of and the square        and inversely as the square
      root of and inversely as        root of and the square of
                                         When
     the cube of  When                                               and
                                               then
                         and
      then
528 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

Numeric

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the unknown value.

24. varies directly as  When                    then           25. varies directly as the square of   When
      Find wneh
                                                                       then        Find when

26. varies directly as the cube of         When                27. varies directly as the square root of When

then           Find when                                                     then        Find when

28. varies directly as the cube root of When                   29. varies inversely with        When       then
                                                                     Find when
         then                    Find when

30. varies inversely with the square of When                   31. varies inversely with the cube of  When

         then           Find when                                      then       Find when

32. varies inversely with the square root of When              33. varies inversely with the cube root of When

         then           Find when                                            then        Find when

34. varies jointly as            When            and           35. varies jointly as                When
                                                                                                Find when
then           Find when                   and                         and         then

                                                                             and

36. varies jointly as and the square of When                   37. varies jointly as the square of    and the square
                                                                                                      then
      and              then                Find when                   root of When       and

and                                                                    Find when         and

38. varies jointly as and and inversely as                     39. varies jointly as the square of and the cube of

When                    and                then       Find            and inversely as the square root of  When

when           and               and                                               and          then        Find
                                                                                           and
                                                                       when

40. varies jointly as the square of and of            and
                                                      When
inversely as the square root of and of
                                                         Find
                                 and       then

when                                       and

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the equation implied by the given variation.

41. varies directly with the               42. varies directly as the        43. varies directly as the
      square of and when                         cube of and when                  square root of and when

44. varies inversely with                  45. varies inversely as the
      and when                                   square of and when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.8 · Modeling Using Variation 529

Extensions

For the following exercises, use Kepler's Law, which states that the square of the time, required for a planet to orbit
the Sun varies directly with the cube of the mean distance, that the planet is from the Sun.

46. Using Earth's time of 1         47. Use the result from the            48. Using Earth's distance of
      year and mean distance of           previous exercise to                   150 million kilometers, find
      93 million miles, find the          determine the time                     the equation relating
      equation relating and               required for Mars to orbit             and
                                          the Sun if its mean distance
                                          is 142 million miles.

49. Use the result from the         50. Using Earth's distance of 1
      previous exercise to                astronomical unit (A.U.),
      determine the time                  determine the time for
      required for Venus to orbit         Saturn to orbit the Sun if its
      the Sun if its mean distance        mean distance is 9.54 A.U.
      is 108 million kilometers.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use the given information to answer the questions.

51. The distance that an            52. The velocity of a falling          53. The rate of vibration of a
      object falls varies directly        object varies directly to the          string under constant
      with the square of the              time, , of the fall. If after 2        tension varies inversely
      time, of the fall. If an            seconds, the velocity of the           with the length of the
      object falls 16 feet in one         object is 64 feet per                  string. If a string is 24
      second, how long for it to          second, what is the velocity           inches long and vibrates
      fall 144 feet?                      after 5 seconds?                       128 times per second, what
                                                                                 is the length of a string
                                                                                 that vibrates 64 times per
                                                                                 second?

54. The volume of a gas held at     55. The weight of an object            56. The intensity of light
      constant temperature                above the surface of Earth             measured in foot-candles
      varies indirectly as the            varies inversely with the              varies inversely with the
      pressure of the gas. If the         square of the distance                 square of the distance
      volume of a gas is 1200             from the center of Earth. If           from the light source.
      cubic centimeters when              a body weighs 50 pounds                Suppose the intensity of a
      the pressure is 200                 when it is 3960 miles from             light bulb is 0.08 foot-
      millimeters of mercury,             Earth's center, what would             candles at a distance of 3
      what is the volume when             it weigh it were 3970 miles            meters. Find the intensity
      the pressure is 300                 from Earth's center?                   level at 8 meters.
      millimeters of mercury?
530 5 · Polynomial and Rational Functions

57. The current in a circuit               58. The force exerted by the        59. The horsepower (hp) that a
      varies inversely with its                  wind on a plane surface             shaft can safely transmit
      resistance measured in                     varies jointly with the             varies jointly with its speed
      ohms. When the current in                  square of the velocity of           (in revolutions per minute
      a circuit is 40 amperes, the               the wind and with the area          (rpm) and the cube of the
      resistance is 10 ohms. Find                of the plane surface. If the        diameter. If the shaft of a
      the current if the resistance              area of the surface is 40           certain material 3 inches in
      is 12 ohms.                                square feet surface and the         diameter can transmit 45
                                                 wind velocity is 20 miles           hp at 100 rpm, what must
                                                 per hour, the resulting             the diameter be in order to
                                                 force is 15 pounds. Find the        transmit 60 hp at 150 rpm?
                                                 force on a surface of 65
                                                 square feet with a velocity
                                                 of 30 miles per hour.

60. The kinetic energy of a
      moving object varies jointly
      with its mass and the
      square of its velocity If
      an object weighing 40
      kilograms with a velocity of
      15 meters per second has a
      kinetic energy of 1000
      joules, find the kinetic
      energy if the velocity is
      increased to 20 meters per
      second.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5 · Chapter Review 531

Chapter Review

Key Terms

arrow notation a way to represent symbolically the local and end behavior of a function by using arrows to indicate
    that an input or output approaches a value

axis of symmetry a vertical line drawn through the vertex of a parabola, that opens up or down, around which the
    parabola is symmetric; it is defined by

coefficient a nonzero real number multiplied by a variable raised to an exponent

constant of variation the non-zero value that helps define the relationship between variables in direct or inverse

variation

continuous function a function whose graph can be drawn without lifting the pen from the paper because there are

no breaks in the graph

degree the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial

Descartes' Rule of Signs a rule that determines the maximum possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros

based on the number of sign changes of       and

direct variation the relationship between two variables that are a constant multiple of each other; as one quantity

increases, so does the other

Division Algorithm given a polynomial dividend         and a non-zero polynomial divisor      where the degree of

is less than or equal to the degree of    , there exist unique polynomials            and such that

                        where is the quotient and is the remainder. The remainder is either equal to zero or

has degree strictly less than

end behavior the behavior of the graph of a function as the input decreases without bound and increases without

bound

Factor Theorem is a zero of polynomial function          if and only if       is a factor of

Fundamental Theorem of Algebra a polynomial function with degree greater than 0 has at least one complex zero

general form of a quadratic function the function that describes a parabola, written in the form                       ,

where and are real numbers and

global maximum highest turning point on a graph;         where                for all

global minimum lowest turning point on a graph;          where                for all

horizontal asymptote a horizontal line       where the graph approaches the line as the inputs increase or decrease

without bound.

Intermediate Value Theorem for two numbers and in the domain of if                     and            then the

function takes on every value between        and         ; specifically, when a polynomial function changes from a

negative value to a positive value, the function must cross the axis

inverse variation the relationship between two variables in which the product of the variables is a constant

inversely proportional a relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by the other quantity; as one quantity

increases, the other decreases

invertible function any function that has an inverse function

joint variation a relationship where a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables

leading coefficient the coefficient of the leading term

leading term the term containing the highest power of the variable

Linear Factorization Theorem allowing for multiplicities, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors

as its degree, and each factor will be in the form       , where is a complex number

multiplicity the number of times a given factor appears in the factored form of the equation of a polynomial; if a

polynomial contains a factor of the form            ,      is a zero of multiplicity

polynomial function a function that consists of either zero or the sum of a finite number of non-zero terms, each of

which is a product of a number, called the coefficient of the term, and a variable raised to a non-negative integer

power.

power function a function that can be represented in the form                 where is a constant, the base is a

variable, and the exponent, , is a constant

rational function a function that can be written as the ratio of two polynomials

Rational Zero Theorem the possible rational zeros of a polynomial function have the form where is a factor of the

constant term and is a factor of the leading coefficient.

Remainder Theorem if a polynomial         is divided by        , then the remainder is equal to the value

removable discontinuity a single point at which a function is undefined that, if filled in, would make the function

continuous; it appears as a hole on the graph of a function

roots in a given function, the values of at which        , also called zeros
532 5 · Chapter Review

smooth curve a graph with no sharp corners

standard form of a quadratic function the function that describes a parabola, written in the form

                        , where       is the vertex

synthetic division a shortcut method that can be used to divide a polynomial by a binomial of the form

term of a polynomial function any      of a polynomial function in the form

turning point the location at which the graph of a function changes direction

varies directly a relationship where one quantity is a constant multiplied by the other quantity

varies inversely a relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by the other quantity

vertex the point at which a parabola changes direction, corresponding to the minimum or maximum value of the

quadratic function

vertex form of a quadratic function another name for the standard form of a quadratic function

vertical asymptote a vertical line     where the graph tends toward positive or negative infinity as the inputs

approach

zeros in a given function, the values of at which        , also called roots

Key Equations

general form of a quadratic function

standard form of a quadratic function

general form of a polynomial function

Division Algorithm

Rational Function

 Direct variation                is a nonzero constant.
Inverse variation                is a nonzero constant.

Key Concepts

5.1 Quadratic Functions

  · A polynomial function of degree two is called a quadratic function.
  · The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola. A parabola is a U-shaped curve that can open either up or down.
  · The axis of symmetry is the vertical line passing through the vertex. The zeros, or intercepts, are the points at

      which the parabola crosses the axis. The intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the axis. See
      Example 1, Example 7, and Example 8.
  · Quadratic functions are often written in general form. Standard or vertex form is useful to easily identify the vertex
      of a parabola. Either form can be written from a graph. See Example 2.
  · The vertex can be found from an equation representing a quadratic function. See Example 3.
  · The domain of a quadratic function is all real numbers. The range varies with the function. See Example 4.
  · A quadratic function's minimum or maximum value is given by the value of the vertex.
  · The minimum or maximum value of a quadratic function can be used to determine the range of the function and to
      solve many kinds of real-world problems, including problems involving area and revenue. See Example 5 and
      Example 6.
  · The vertex and the intercepts can be identified and interpreted to solve real-world problems. See Example 9.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5 · Chapter Review 533

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions

· A power function is a variable base raised to a number power. See Example 1.

· The behavior of a graph as the input decreases beyond bound and increases beyond bound is called the end

behavior.

· The end behavior depends on whether the power is even or odd. See Example 2 and Example 3.

· A polynomial function is the sum of terms, each of which consists of a transformed power function with positive

whole number power. See Example 4.

· The degree of a polynomial function is the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial. The term

containing the highest power of the variable is called the leading term. The coefficient of the leading term is called

the leading coefficient. See Example 5.

· The end behavior of a polynomial function is the same as the end behavior of the power function represented by

the leading term of the function. See Example 6 and Example 7.

· A polynomial of degree will have at most x-intercepts and at most            turning points. See Example 8, Example

9, Example 10, Example 11, and Example 12.

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions

· Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more are smooth, continuous functions. See Example 1.

· To find the zeros of a polynomial function, if it can be factored, factor the function and set each factor equal to zero.

See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4.

· Another way to find the intercepts of a polynomial function is to graph the function and identify the points at

which the graph crosses the axis. See Example 5.

· The multiplicity of a zero determines how the graph behaves at the intercepts. See Example 6.

· The graph of a polynomial will cross the horizontal axis at a zero with odd multiplicity.

· The graph of a polynomial will touch the horizontal axis at a zero with even multiplicity.

· The end behavior of a polynomial function depends on the leading term.

· The graph of a polynomial function changes direction at its turning points.

· A polynomial function of degree has at most      turning points. See Example 7.

· To graph polynomial functions, find the zeros and their multiplicities, determine the end behavior, and ensure that

the final graph has at most   turning points. See Example 8 and Example 10.

· Graphing a polynomial function helps to estimate local and global extremas. See Example 11.

· The Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that if           have opposite signs, then there exists at least one

value between and for which                 See Example 9.

5.4 Dividing Polynomials

· Polynomial long division can be used to divide a polynomial by any polynomial with equal or lower degree. See

Example 1 and Example 2.

· The Division Algorithm tells us that a polynomial dividend can be written as the product of the divisor and the

quotient added to the remainder.

· Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used to divide a polynomial by a binomial in the form    See Example

3, Example 4, and Example 5.

· Polynomial division can be used to solve application problems, including area and volume. See Example 6.

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions

· To find  determine the remainder of the polynomial        when it is divided by             This is known as the

Remainder Theorem. See Example 1.

· According to the Factor Theorem, is a zero of    if and only if         is a factor of      See Example 2.

· According to the Rational Zero Theorem, each rational zero of a polynomial function with integer coefficients will be

equal to a factor of the constant term divided by a factor of the leading coefficient. See Example 3 and Example 4.

· When the leading coefficient is 1, the possible rational zeros are the factors of the constant term.

· Synthetic division can be used to find the zeros of a polynomial function. See Example 5.

· According to the Fundamental Theorem, every polynomial function has at least one complex zero. See Example 6.

· Every polynomial function with degree greater than 0 has at least one complex zero.

· Allowing for multiplicities, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors as its degree. Each factor will

be in the form  where is a complex number. See Example 7.

· The number of positive real zeros of a polynomial function is either the number of sign changes of the function or

less than the number of sign changes by an even integer.

· The number of negative real zeros of a polynomial function is either the number of sign changes of        or less
534 5 · Chapter Review

    than the number of sign changes by an even integer. See Example 8.
· Polynomial equations model many real-world scenarios. Solving the equations is easiest done by synthetic division.

    See Example 9.

5.6 Rational Functions

· We can use arrow notation to describe local behavior and end behavior of the toolkit functions              and

                 See Example 1.

· A function that levels off at a horizontal value has a horizontal asymptote. A function can have more than one

vertical asymptote. See Example 2.

· Application problems involving rates and concentrations often involve rational functions. See Example 3.

· The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those that cause the denominator to equal zero.

See Example 4.

· The vertical asymptotes of a rational function will occur where the denominator of the function is equal to zero and

the numerator is not zero. See Example 5.

· A removable discontinuity might occur in the graph of a rational function if an input causes both numerator and

denominator to be zero. See Example 6.

· A rational function's end behavior will mirror that of the ratio of the leading terms of the numerator and

denominator functions. See Example 7, Example 8, Example 9, and Example 10.

· Graph rational functions by finding the intercepts, behavior at the intercepts and asymptotes, and end behavior. See

Example 11.

· If a rational function has x-intercepts at                   vertical asymptotes at             and no

                 then the function can be written in the form

See Example 12.

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions

· The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function.

· If is the inverse of a function then is the inverse of the function  See Example 1.

· While it is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial functions, some basic polynomials are invertible. See

Example 2.

· To find the inverse of certain functions, we must restrict the function to a domain on which it will be one-to-one. See

Example 3 and Example 4.

· When finding the inverse of a radical function, we need a restriction on the domain of the answer. See Example 5

and Example 7.

· Inverse and radical and functions can be used to solve application problems. See Example 6 and Example 8.

5.8 Modeling Using Variation

· A relationship where one quantity is a constant multiplied by another quantity is called direct variation. See Example
    1.

· Two variables that are directly proportional to one another will have a constant ratio.
· A relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by another quantity is called inverse variation. See Example

    2.
· Two variables that are inversely proportional to one another will have a constant multiple. See Example 3.
· In many problems, a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables. We call this type of relationship joint

    variation. See Example 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5 · Exercises 535

Exercises

Review Exercises

Quadratic Functions

For the following exercises, write the quadratic function in standard form. Then give the vertex and axes intercepts.
Finally, graph the function.

1.                              2.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the quadratic function using the given information.

3. The vertex is  and a         4. The vertex is           and a

     point on the graph is          point on the graph is

For the following exercises, complete the task.           6. An object projected from the ground at a 45 degree

5. A rectangular plot of land is to be enclosed by         angle with initial velocity of 120 feet per second has
    fencing. One side is along a river and so needs no
    fence. If the total fencing available is 600 meters,   height, in terms of horizontal distance traveled,
    find the dimensions of the plot to have maximum
    area.                                                  given by                             Find the

                                                           maximum height the object attains.

Power Functions and Polynomial Functions

For the following exercises, determine if the function is a polynomial function and, if so, give the degree and leading
coefficient.

7.                              8.                                9.

For the following exercises, determine end behavior of the polynomial function.

10.                             11.                               12.

Graphs of Polynomial Functions

For the following exercises, find all zeros of the polynomial function, noting multiplicities.

13.                                  14.                               15.
536 5 · Exercises

For the following exercises, based on the given graph, determine the zeros of the function and note multiplicity.

16.                                   17.       18. Use the Intermediate Value

                                                                                    Theorem to show that at

                                                                                    least one zero lies between

                                                                                    2 and 3 for the function

Dividing Polynomials
For the following exercises, use long division to find the quotient and remainder.

19.                              20.

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient. If the divisor is a factor, then write the factored
form.

21.                              22.       23.

24.

Zeros of Polynomial Functions

For the following exercises, use the Rational Zero Theorem to help you solve the polynomial equation.

25.                              26.       27.

28.

For the following exercises, use Descartes' Rule of Signs to find the possible number of positive and negative solutions.

29.                              30.

Rational Functions

For the following exercises, find the intercepts and the vertical and horizontal asymptotes, and then use them to sketch a
graph of the function.

31.                              32.       33.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5 · Exercises 537

34.

For the following exercises, find the slant asymptote.

35.                                  36.

Inverses and Radical Functions

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function with the domain given.

37.                                  38.                                  39.

40.                                  41.                                  42.

Modeling Using Variation

For the following exercises, find the unknown value.

43. varies directly as the           44. varies inversely as the          45. varies jointly as the cube
      square of If when                    square root of If when
                            find if                              find if       of and as If when

                                                                               and

                                                                               find if  and

46. varies jointly as and the
      square of and inversely
      as the cube of If when
                         and
                 find if
               and

For the following exercises, solve the application problem.

47. The weight of an object above the surface of the         48. The volume of an ideal gas varies directly with
      earth varies inversely with the distance from the            the temperature and inversely with the
      center of the earth. If a person weighs 150 pounds           pressure P. A cylinder contains oxygen at a
      when he is on the surface of the earth (3,960 miles          temperature of 310 degrees K and a pressure of
      from center), find the weight of the person if he is         18 atmospheres in a volume of 120 liters. Find the
      20 miles above the surface.                                  pressure if the volume is decreased to 100 liters
                                                                   and the temperature is increased to 320 degrees
                                                                   K.

Practice Test

Give the degree and leading coefficient of the following polynomial function.
1.

Determine the end behavior of the polynomial function.

2.                                   3.
538 5 · Exercises

Write the quadratic function in standard form. Determine the vertex and axes intercepts and graph the function.
4.

Given information about the graph of a quadratic function, find its equation.

5. Vertex          and point on
    graph

Solve the following application problem.

6. A rectangular field is to be
    enclosed by fencing. In
    addition to the enclosing
    fence, another fence is to
    divide the field into two
    parts, running parallel to
    two sides. If 1,200 feet of
    fencing is available, find the
    maximum area that can be
    enclosed.

Find all zeros of the following polynomial functions, noting multiplicities.

7.                                       8.

Based on the graph, determine the zeros of the function and multiplicities.
9.

Use long division to find the quotient.
10.

Use synthetic division to find the quotient. If the divisor is a factor, write the factored form.

11.                              12.

Use the Rational Zero Theorem to help you find the zeros of the polynomial functions.

13.                                          14.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   5 · Exercises 539

15.                                                      16.

Given the following information about a polynomial function, find the function.

17. It has a double zero at        18. It has a zero of multiplicity

          and zeros at                  3 at        and another

     and  . Its y-intercept             zero at     . It contains
                                        the point
     is

Use Descartes' Rule of Signs to determine the possible number of positive and negative solutions.
19.

For the following rational functions, find the intercepts and horizontal and vertical asymptotes, and sketch a graph.

20.                                21.

Find the slant asymptote of the rational function.
22.

Find the inverse of the function.

23.                                24.                                25.

Find the unknown value.            27. varies jointly with and

26. varies inversely as the             the cube root of If when
      square of and when
                         Find if              and

                                        find if     and

Solve the following application problem.

28. The distance a body falls
      varies directly as the
      square of the time it falls. If
      an object falls 64 feet in 2
      seconds, how long will it
      take to fall 256 feet?
540 5 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  6 · Introduction 541

6  EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

Electron micrograph of E.Coli bacteria (credit: "Mattosaurus," Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Exponential Functions
  6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions
  6.3 Logarithmic Functions
  6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions
  6.5 Logarithmic Properties
  6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations
  6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models
  6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data

      Introduction to Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Focus in on a square centimeter of your skin. Look closer. Closer still. If you could look closely enough, you would see
hundreds of thousands of microscopic organisms. They are bacteria, and they are not only on your skin, but in your
mouth, nose, and even your intestines. In fact, the bacterial cells in your body at any given moment outnumber your
own cells. But that is no reason to feel bad about yourself. While some bacteria can cause illness, many are healthy and
even essential to the body.

Bacteria commonly reproduce through a process called binary fission, during which one bacterial cell splits into two.
When conditions are right, bacteria can reproduce very quickly. Unlike humans and other complex organisms, the time
required to form a new generation of bacteria is often a matter of minutes or hours, as opposed to days or years.1

For simplicity's sake, suppose we begin with a culture of one bacterial cell that can divide every hour. Table 1 shows the
number of bacterial cells at the end of each subsequent hour. We see that the single bacterial cell leads to over one
thousand bacterial cells in just ten hours! And if we were to extrapolate the table to twenty-four hours, we would have
over 16 million!

   Hour 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                      8                                     9  10

   Bacteria 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024

                               Table 1

1 Todar, PhD, Kenneth. Todar's Online Textbook of Bacteriology. http://textbookofbacteriology.net/growth_3.html.
542 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

In this chapter, we will explore exponential functions, which can be used for, among other things, modeling growth
patterns such as those found in bacteria. We will also investigate logarithmic functions, which are closely related to
exponential functions. Both types of functions have numerous real-world applications when it comes to modeling and
interpreting data.

6.1 Exponential Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Evaluate exponential functions.
           Find the equation of an exponential function.
           Use compound interest formulas.
           Evaluate exponential functions with base .

India is the second most populous country in the world with a population of about  billion people in 2021. The

population is growing at a rate of about       each year2 . If this rate continues, the population of India will exceed

China's population by the year                 When populations grow rapidly, we often say that the growth is "exponential,"

meaning that something is growing very rapidly. To a mathematician, however, the term exponential growth has a very

specific meaning. In this section, we will take a look at exponential functions, which model this kind of rapid growth.

Identifying Exponential Functions

When exploring linear growth, we observed a constant rate of change--a constant number by which the output

increased for each unit increase in input. For example, in the equation            the slope tells us the output

increases by 3 each time the input increases by 1. The scenario in the India population example is different because we

have a percent change per unit time (rather than a constant change) in the number of people.

Defining an Exponential Function

A study found that the percent of the population who are vegans in the United States doubled from 2009 to 2011. In
2011, 2.5% of the population was vegan, adhering to a diet that does not include any animal products--no meat, poultry,
fish, dairy, or eggs. If this rate continues, vegans will make up 10% of the U.S. population in 2015, 40% in 2019, and 80%
in 2021.

What exactly does it mean to grow exponentially? What does the word double have in common with percent increase?
People toss these words around errantly. Are these words used correctly? The words certainly appear frequently in the
media.

· Percent change refers to a change based on a percent of the original amount.
· Exponential growth refers to an increase based on a constant multiplicative rate of change over equal increments

   of time, that is, a percent increase of the original amount over time.
· Exponential decay refers to a decrease based on a constant multiplicative rate of change over equal increments of

   time, that is, a percent decrease of the original amount over time.

For us to gain a clear understanding of exponential growth, let us contrast exponential growth with linear growth. We
will construct two functions. The first function is exponential. We will start with an input of 0, and increase each input by
1. We will double the corresponding consecutive outputs. The second function is linear. We will start with an input of 0,
and increase each input by 1. We will add 2 to the corresponding consecutive outputs. See Table 1.

                                               0        1                      0

                                               1        2                      2

                                               2        4                      4

                                               3        8                      6

                                               Table 1

2 http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/. Accessed February 24, 2014.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.1 · Exponential Functions 543

                             4                   16                 8

                             5                   32                 10

                             6                   64                 12

                             Table 1

From Table 1 we can infer that for these two functions, exponential growth dwarfs linear growth.

· Exponential growth refers to the original value from the range increases by the same percentage over equal
    increments found in the domain.

· Linear growth refers to the original value from the range increases by the same amount over equal increments
    found in the domain.

Apparently, the difference between "the same percentage" and "the same amount" is quite significant. For exponential
growth, over equal increments, the constant multiplicative rate of change resulted in doubling the output whenever the
input increased by one. For linear growth, the constant additive rate of change over equal increments resulted in adding
2 to the output whenever the input was increased by one.

The general form of the exponential function is      where is any nonzero number, is a positive real number
not equal to 1.

· If  the function grows at a rate proportional to its size.
· If        the function decays at a rate proportional to its size.

Let's look at the function   from our example. We will create a table (Table 2) to determine the corresponding

outputs over an interval in the domain from to

      Table 2

Let us examine the graph of  by plotting the ordered pairs we observe on the table in Figure 1, and then make a few
observations.

                                                 Figure 1

Let's define the behavior of the graph of the exponential function      and highlight some its key characteristics.

· the domain is   
· the range is   

· as                
544 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

· as         

·      is always increasing,

· the graph of      will never touch the x-axis because base two raised to any exponent never has the result of zero.

·      is the horizontal asymptote.

· the y-intercept is 1.

Exponential Function

For any real number an exponential function is a function with the form

where

   · is a non-zero real number called the initial value and

   · is any positive real number such that

   · The domain of is all real numbers.

   · The range of is all positive real numbers if

   · The range of is all negative real numbers if

   · The y-intercept is          and the horizontal asymptote is

EXAMPLE 1

Identifying Exponential Functions
Which of the following equations are not exponential functions?

·
·
·

·

   Solution

By definition, an exponential function has a constant as a base and an independent variable as an exponent. Thus,

       does not represent an exponential function because the base is an independent variable. In fact,                 is

a power function.

Recall that the base b of an exponential function is always a positive constant, and   Thus,             does not
represent an exponential function because the base, is less than

   TRY IT #1        Which of the following equations represent exponential functions?

                      ·
                      ·
                      ·
                      ·

Evaluating Exponential Functions

Recall that the base of an exponential function must be a positive real number other than Why do we limit the base
to positive values? To ensure that the outputs will be real numbers. Observe what happens if the base is not positive:

· Let          and               Then                                which is not a real number.
                                                         Because base results in the constant function. Observe what
Why do we limit the base to positive values other than
happens if the base is                                        we simply substitute with the given value, and calculate

· Let        Then                      for any value of

To evaluate an exponential function with the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.1 · Exponential Functions 545

the resulting power. For example:

Let        What is

To evaluate an exponential function with a form other than the basic form, it is important to follow the order of
operations. For example:

Let        What is

Note that if the order of operations were not followed, the result would be incorrect:

EXAMPLE 2

Evaluating Exponential Functions

Let        Evaluate                without using a calculator.

     Solution
Follow the order of operations. Be sure to pay attention to the parentheses.

     TRY IT #2 Let                 Evaluate  using a calculator. Round to four decimal places.

Defining Exponential Growth

Because the output of exponential functions increases very rapidly, the term "exponential growth" is often used in
everyday language to describe anything that grows or increases rapidly. However, exponential growth can be defined
more precisely in a mathematical sense. If the growth rate is proportional to the amount present, the function models
exponential growth.

Exponential Growth

A function that models exponential growth grows by a rate proportional to the amount present. For any real

number and any positive real numbers and such that              an exponential growth function has the form

where

  · is the initial or starting value of the function.
  · is the growth factor or growth multiplier per unit .

In more general terms, we have an exponential function, in which a constant base is raised to a variable exponent. To
differentiate between linear and exponential functions, let's consider two companies, A and B. Company A has 100
stores and expands by opening 50 new stores a year, so its growth can be represented by the function
546 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                   Company B has 100 stores and expands by increasing the number of stores by 50% each year, so its
       growth can be represented by the function
       A few years of growth for these companies are illustrated in Table 3.

                                                     Year, Stores, Company A Stores, Company B

                                                   Table 3
       The graphs comparing the number of stores for each company over a five-year period are shown in Figure 2. We can see
       that, with exponential growth, the number of stores increases much more rapidly than with linear growth.

                    Figure 2 The graph shows the numbers of stores Companies A and B opened over a five-year period.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6.1 · Exponential Functions 547

Notice that the domain for both functions is   and the range for both functions is      After year 1, Company B
always has more stores than Company A.

Now we will turn our attention to the function representing the number of stores for Company B,                  where
In this exponential function, 100 represents the initial number of stores, 0.50 represents the growth rate, and

                   represents the growth factor. Generalizing further, we can write this function as
100 is the initial value, is called the base, and is called the exponent.

EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating a Real-World Exponential Model

At the beginning of this section, we learned that the population of India was about  billion in the year 2013, with an

annual growth rate of about    This situation is represented by the growth function              where is

the number of years since    To the nearest thousandth, what will the population of India be in

     Solution                                                            because 2031 is years after 2013. Rounding to
To estimate the population in 2031, we evaluate the models for
the nearest thousandth,

There will be about 1.549 billion people in India in the year 2031.

TRY IT #3          The population of China was about 1.39 billion in the year 2013, with an annual growth rate of

                   about       This situation is represented by the growth function              where is

                   the number of years since    To the nearest thousandth, what will the population of China be

                   for the year 2031? How does this compare to the population prediction we made for India in

                   Example 3?

Finding Equations of Exponential Functions

In the previous examples, we were given an exponential function, which we then evaluated for a given input. Sometimes
we are given information about an exponential function without knowing the function explicitly. We must use the
information to first write the form of the function, then determine the constants and and evaluate the function.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given two data points, write an exponential model.

1. If one of the data points has the form       then is the initial value. Using substitute the second point into

the equation                 and solve for

2. If neither of the data points have the form  substitute both points into two equations with the form

                   Solve the resulting system of two equations in two unknowns to find and

3. Using the and found in the steps above, write the exponential function in the form

EXAMPLE 4

Writing an Exponential Model When the Initial Value Is Known

In 2006, 80 deer were introduced into a wildlife refuge. By 2012, the population had grown to 180 deer. The population

was growing exponentially. Write an exponential function        representing the population of deer over time

Solution

We let our independent variable be the number of years after 2006. Thus, the information given in the problem can be

written as input-output pairs: (0, 80) and (6, 180). Notice that by choosing our input variable to be measured as years

after 2006, we have given ourselves the initial value for the function,  We can now substitute the second point

into the equation            to find
548 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

NOTE: Unless otherwise stated, do not round any intermediate calculations. Then round the final answer to four places
for the remainder of this section.

The exponential model for the population of deer is                    (Note that this exponential function models

short-term growth. As the inputs gets large, the output will get increasingly larger, so much so that the model may not

be useful in the long term.)

We can graph our model to observe the population growth of deer in the refuge over time. Notice that the graph in

Figure 3 passes through the initial points given in the problem,  and  We can also see that the domain for

the function is  and the range for the function is 

Figure 3 Graph showing the population of deer over time,               years after 2006

TRY IT #4       A wolf population is growing exponentially. In 2011, wolves were counted. By     the

                population had reached 236 wolves. What two points can be used to derive an exponential

                equation modeling this situation? Write the equation representing the population of wolves

                over time

EXAMPLE 5

Writing an Exponential Model When the Initial Value is Not Known

Find an exponential function that passes through the points       and

     Solution                                                                                    and then
Because we don't have the initial value, we substitute both points into an equation of the form
solve the system for and

· Substituting    gives
· Substituting  gives

Use the first equation to solve for in terms of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.1 · Exponential Functions 549

Substitute in the second equation, and solve for

Use the value of in the first equation to solve for the value of

Thus, the equation is

We can graph our model to check our work. Notice that the graph in Figure 4 passes through the initial points given in

the problem,           and  The graph is an example of an exponential decay function.

                       Figure 4 The graph of                      models exponential decay.

TRY IT #5              Given the two points       and             find the equation of the exponential function that passes

                       through these two points.

Q&A           Do two points always determine a unique exponential function?

              Yes, provided the two points are either both above the x-axis or both below the x-axis and have different
              x-coordinates. But keep in mind that we also need to know that the graph is, in fact, an exponential
              function. Not every graph that looks exponential really is exponential. We need to know the graph is
              based on a model that shows the same percent growth with each unit increase in which in many real
              world cases involves time.
550 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given the graph of an exponential function, write its equation.

1. First, identify two points on the graph. Choose the y-intercept as one of the two points whenever possible. Try to

choose points that are as far apart as possible to reduce round-off error.

2. If one of the data points is the y-intercept               , then is the initial value. Using substitute the second point

into the equation                              and solve for

3. If neither of the data points have the form                substitute both points into two equations with the form

Solve the resulting system of two equations in two unknowns to find and

4. Write the exponential function,

  EXAMPLE 6

Writing an Exponential Function Given Its Graph
Find an equation for the exponential function graphed in Figure 5.

     Solution                                              Figure 5                                        Next, choose a
We can choose the y-intercept of the graph,
point on the curve some distance away from           as our first point. This gives us the initial value,
                                                     that has integer coordinates. One such point is

Because we restrict ourselves to positive values of           we will use  Substitute and into the standard form to yield
the equation

TRY IT #6 Find an equation for the exponential function graphed in Figure 6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             6.1 · Exponential Functions 551

                                          Figure 6

...

     HOW TO

Given two points on the curve of an exponential function, use a graphing calculator to find the equation.

1. Press [STAT].

2. Clear any existing entries in columns L1 or L2.

3. In L1, enter the x-coordinates given.

4. In L2, enter the corresponding y-coordinates.

5. Press [STAT] again. Cursor right to CALC, scroll down to ExpReg (Exponential Regression), and press [ENTER].

6. The screen displays the values of a and b in the exponential equation             .

EXAMPLE 7

Using a Graphing Calculator to Find an Exponential Function

Use a graphing calculator to find the exponential equation that includes the points     and

     Solution
Follow the guidelines above. First press [STAT], [EDIT], [1: Edit...], and clear the lists L1 and L2. Next, in the L1 column,
enter the x-coordinates, 2 and 5. Do the same in the L2 column for the y-coordinates, 24.8 and 198.4.

Now press [STAT], [CALC], [0: ExpReg] and press [ENTER]. The values       and           will be displayed. The
exponential equation is

TRY IT #7         Use a graphing calculator to find the exponential equation that includes the points (3, 75.98) and
                  (6, 481.07).

Applying the Compound-Interest Formula

Savings instruments in which earnings are continually reinvested, such as mutual funds and retirement accounts, use
compound interest. The term compounding refers to interest earned not only on the original value, but on the
accumulated value of the account.

The annual percentage rate (APR) of an account, also called the nominal rate, is the yearly interest rate earned by an
investment account. The term nominal is used when the compounding occurs a number of times other than once per
year. In fact, when interest is compounded more than once a year, the effective interest rate ends up being greater than
the nominal rate! This is a powerful tool for investing.
552 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       We can calculate the compound interest using the compound interest formula, which is an exponential function of the
       variables time principal APR and number of compounding periods in a year

For example, observe Table 4, which shows the result of investing $1,000 at 10% for one year. Notice how the value of the
account increases as the compounding frequency increases.

                                      Frequency Value after 1 year

                                      Annually          $1100

                                      Semiannually      $1102.50

                                      Quarterly         $1103.81

                                      Monthly           $1104.71

                                      Daily             $1105.16

                                      Table 4

The Compound Interest Formula
Compound interest can be calculated using the formula

where

·      is the account value,

· is measured in years,

· is the starting amount of the account, often called the principal, or more generally present value,

· is the annual percentage rate (APR) expressed as a decimal, and

· is the number of compounding periods in one year.

EXAMPLE 8

Calculating Compound Interest
If we invest $3,000 in an investment account paying 3% interest compounded quarterly, how much will the account be
worth in 10 years?

Solution

Because we are starting with $3,000,  Our interest rate is 3%, so   Because we are compounding

quarterly, we are compounding 4 times per year, so      We want to know the value of the account in 10 years, so we

are looking for  the value when

The account will be worth about $4,045.05 in 10 years.

   TRY IT #8     An initial investment of $100,000 at 12% interest is compounded weekly (use 52 weeks in a year).
                 What will the investment be worth in 30 years?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.1 · Exponential Functions 553

EXAMPLE 9

Using the Compound Interest Formula to Solve for the Principal
A 529 Plan is a college-savings plan that allows relatives to invest money to pay for a child's future college tuition; the
account grows tax-free. Lily wants to set up a 529 account for her new granddaughter and wants the account to grow to
$40,000 over 18 years. She believes the account will earn 6% compounded semi-annually (twice a year). To the nearest
dollar, how much will Lily need to invest in the account now?

     Solution                                 Interest is compounded twice a year, so
The nominal interest rate is 6%, so

We want to find the initial investment, needed so that the value of the account will be worth $40,000 in  years.
Substitute the given values into the compound interest formula, and solve for

Lily will need to invest $13,801 to have $40,000 in 18 years.

TRY IT #9  Refer to Example 9. To the nearest dollar, how much would Lily need to invest if the account is
           compounded quarterly?

Evaluating Functions with Base e

As we saw earlier, the amount earned on an account increases as the compounding frequency increases. Table 5 shows
that the increase from annual to semi-annual compounding is larger than the increase from monthly to daily
compounding. This might lead us to ask whether this pattern will continue.

Examine the value of $1 invested at 100% interest for 1 year, compounded at various frequencies, listed in Table 5.

                                     Frequency                 Value

                                     Annually                  $2

           Semiannually                                        $2.25

                                     Quarterly                 $2.441406

                                     Monthly                   $2.613035

                                     Daily                     $2.714567

                                     Hourly                    $2.718127

           Once per minute                                     $2.718279

           Once per second                                     $2.718282

           Table 5
554 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

These values appear to be approaching a limit as increases without bound. In fact, as gets larger and larger, the

expression      approaches a number used so frequently in mathematics that it has its own name: the letter This

value is an irrational number, which means that its decimal expansion goes on forever without repeating. Its

approximation to six decimal places is shown below.

The Number

The letter e represents the irrational number

The letter e is used as a base for many real-world exponential models. To work with base e, we use the

approximation,                   The constant was named by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) who

first investigated and discovered many of its properties.

EXAMPLE 10

Using a Calculator to Find Powers of e

Calculate     Round to five decimal places.

    Solution

On a calculator, press the button labeled      The window shows  Type               and then close parenthesis,

Press [ENTER]. Rounding to decimal places,                      Caution: Many scientific calculators have an "Exp"

button, which is used to enter numbers in scientific notation. It is not used to find powers of

    TRY IT #10 Use a calculator to find              Round to five decimal places.

Investigating Continuous Growth

So far we have worked with rational bases for exponential functions. For most real-world phenomena, however, e is used
as the base for exponential functions. Exponential models that use as the base are called continuous growth or decay
models. We see these models in finance, computer science, and most of the sciences, such as physics, toxicology, and
fluid dynamics.

  The Continuous Growth/Decay Formula

  For all real numbers and all positive numbers and continuous growth or decay is represented by the formula

where

    · is the initial value,
    · is the continuous growth rate per unit time,
    · and is the elapsed time.

If         , then the formula represents continuous growth. If   , then the formula represents continuous decay.

For business applications, the continuous growth formula is called the continuous compounding formula and takes
the form

where

  · is the principal or the initial invested,
  · is the growth or interest rate per unit time,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.1 · Exponential Functions 555

  · and is the period or term of the investment.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the initial value, rate of growth or decay, and time solve a continuous growth or decay function.
 1. Use the information in the problem to determine , the initial value of the function.
 2. Use the information in the problem to determine the growth rate

       a. If the problem refers to continuous growth, then
       b. If the problem refers to continuous decay, then
 3. Use the information in the problem to determine the time
 4. Substitute the given information into the continuous growth formula and solve for

EXAMPLE 11

Calculating Continuous Growth
A person invested $1,000 in an account earning a nominal 10% per year compounded continuously. How much was in
the account at the end of one year?

Solution

Since the account is growing in value, this is a continuous compounding problem with growth rate         The initial
                                                                                                              year:
investment was $1,000, so  We use the continuous compounding formula to find the value after

The account is worth $1,105.17 after one year.

TRY IT #11  A person invests $100,000 at a nominal 12% interest per year compounded continuously. What
            will be the value of the investment in 30 years?

EXAMPLE 12

Calculating Continuous Decay
Radon-222 decays at a continuous rate of 17.3% per day. How much will 100 mg of Radon-222 decay to in 3 days?

Solution

Since the substance is decaying, the rate,      , is negative. So,       The initial amount of radon-222 was

mg, so      We use the continuous decay formula to find the value after  days:

So 59.5115 mg of radon-222 will remain.

       TRY IT #12 Using the data in Example 12, how much radon-222 will remain after one year?
       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential functions.
556 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Exponential Growth Function (http://openstax.org/l/expgrowth)
Compound Interest (http://openstax.org/l/compoundint)

        6.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain why the values of an   2. Given a formula for an         3. The Oxford Dictionary
    increasing exponential            exponential function, is it       defines the word nominal as
    function will eventually          possible to determine             a value that is "stated or
    overtake the values of an         whether the function grows        expressed but not
    increasing linear function.       or decays exponentially just      necessarily corresponding
                                      by looking at the formula?        exactly to the real value."3
                                      Explain.                          Develop a reasonable
                                                                        argument for why the term
                                                                        nominal rate is used to
                                                                        describe the annual
                                                                        percentage rate of an
                                                                        investment account that
                                                                        compounds interest.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, identify whether the statement represents an exponential function. Explain.

4. The average annual             5. A population of bacteria       6. The value of a coin collection
    population increase of a          decreases by a factor of          has increased by
    pack of wolves is 25.             every hours.                      annually over the last
                                                                        years.

7. For each training session, a   8. The height of a projectile at
    personal trainer charges his      time is represented by the
    clients less than the             function
    previous training session.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: For each year the population of a forest of trees is represented by

the function                      In a neighboring forest, the population of the same type of tree is represented by the

function                      (Round answers to the nearest whole number.)

9. Which forest's population is   10. Which forest had a greater    11. Assuming the population
    growing at a faster rate?           number of trees initially?        growth models continue to
                                        By how many?                      represent the growth of
                                                                          the forests, which forest
                                                                          will have a greater number
                                                                          of trees after years? By
                                                                          how many?

3 Oxford Dictionary. http://oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/nomina.
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.1 · Exponential Functions 557

12. Assuming the population       13. Discuss the above results
      growth models continue to         from the previous four
      represent the growth of           exercises. Assuming the
      the forests, which forest         population growth models
      will have a greater number        continue to represent the
      of trees after years? By          growth of the forests,
      how many?                         which forest will have the
                                        greater number of trees in
                                        the long run? Why? What
                                        are some factors that
                                        might influence the long-
                                        term validity of the
                                        exponential growth model?

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation represents exponential growth, exponential decay, or
neither. Explain.

14.                               15.                               16.

17.

For the following exercises, find the formula for an exponential function that passes through the two points given.

18.  and                          19.          and                  20.       and

21.  and                          22.          and

For the following exercises, determine whether the table could represent a function that is linear, exponential, or
neither. If it appears to be exponential, find a function that passes through the points.

23.                                  24.

          123 4                                     12  3           4

          70 40 10 -20                              70 49 34.3 24.01

25.                                       26.                            27.

          12  3                   4                 1234                           1 23                              4

          80 61 42.9 25.61                          10 20 40 80                    -3.25 2 7.25 12.5
558 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, use the compound interest formula,

28. After a certain number of         29. What was the initial deposit     30. How many years had the
      years, the value of an                made to the account in the           account from the previous
      investment account is                 previous exercise?                   exercise been
      represented by the                                                         accumulating interest?
      equation

     What is the value of the
     account?

31. An account is opened with         32. How much more would the          33. Solve the compound
                                            account in the previous              interest formula for the
     an initial deposit of $6,500           exercise have been worth if          principal, .
                                            the interest were
     and earns           interest           compounding weekly?

     compounded semi-

     annually. What will the

     account be worth in

     years?

34. Use the formula found in          35. How much more would the          36. Use properties of rational
      the previous exercise to              account in the previous              exponents to solve the
      calculate the initial deposit         two exercises be worth if it         compound interest formula
      of an account that is worth           were earning interest for            for the interest rate,
                       after earning        more years?
              interest compounded
      monthly for years.
      (Round to the nearest
      dollar.)

37. Use the formula found in          38. Use the formula found in
      the previous exercise to              the previous exercise to
      calculate the interest rate           calculate the interest rate
      for an account that was               for an account that was
      compounded semi-                      compounded monthly, had
      annually, had an initial              an initial deposit of $5,500,
      deposit of $9,000 and was             and was worth $38,455
      worth $13,373.53 after 10             after 30 years.
      years.

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation represents continuous growth, continuous decay, or
neither. Explain.

39.                                   40.                                  41.

42. Suppose an investment             43. How much less would the
                                            account from Exercise 42
     account is opened with an              be worth after years if it
                                            were compounded
     initial deposit of                     monthly instead?

     earning    interest

     compounded continuously.

     How much will the account

     be worth after years?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.1 · Exponential Functions 559

Numeric

For the following exercises, evaluate each function. Round answers to four decimal places, if necessary.

44.            for                 45.            for                  46.              for

47.            for                 48.                                 49.                       for

                                        for

50.                 for

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find the equation of an exponential function given the points on
the curve.

51.  and                           52.       and                       53.              and

54.       and                      55.       and

Extensions                         57. Repeat the previous             58. Recall that an exponential
                                         exercise to find the formula
56. The annual percentage                for the APY of an account          function is any equation
      yield (APY) of an                  that compounds daily. Use
      investment account is a            the results from this and          written in the form
      representation of the              the previous exercise to
      actual interest rate earned        develop a function for                          such that
      on a compounding                   the APY of any account that
      account. It is based on a          compounds times per                and are positive
      compounding period of              year.
      one year. Show that the                                               numbers and           Any
      APY of an account that
      compounds monthly can                                                 positive number can be
      be found with the formula
                                                                            written as       for

                                                                            some value of . Use this

                                                                            fact to rewrite the formula

                                                                            for an exponential function

                                                                            that uses the number as

                                                                            a base.
560 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

59. In an exponential decay          60. The formula for the
                                           amount in an investment
function, the base of the                  account with a nominal
                                           interest rate at any time
exponent is a value                        is given by
                                           where is the amount of
between 0 and 1. Thus, for                 principal initially deposited
                                           into an account that
some number          the                   compounds continuously.
                                           Prove that the percentage
exponential decay function                 of interest earned to
                                           principal at any time can
can be written as                          be calculated with the
                                           formula
                   Use this

formula, along with the

fact that    to show

that an exponential decay

function takes the form

             for some

positive number .

Real-World Applications              62. A scientist begins with 100      63. In the year 1985, a house
                                           milligrams of a radioactive          was valued at $110,000. By
61. The fox population in a                substance that decays                the year 2005, the value
      certain region has an                exponentially. After 35              had appreciated to
      annual growth rate of 9%             hours, 50mg of the                   $145,000. What was the
      per year. In the year 2012,          substance remains. How               annual growth rate
      there were 23,900 fox                many milligrams will                 between 1985 and 2005?
      counted in the area. What            remain after 54 hours?               Assume that the value
      is the fox population                                                     continued to grow by the
      predicted to be in the year                                               same percentage. What
      2020?                                                                     was the value of the house
                                                                                in the year 2010?

64. A car was valued at $38,000      65. Jaylen wants to save             66. Kyoko has $10,000 that she
      in the year 2007. By 2013,           $54,000 for a down                   wants to invest. Her bank
      the value had depreciated            payment on a home. How               has several investment
      to $11,000 If the car's value        much will he need to invest          accounts to choose from,
      continues to drop by the             in an account with 8.2%              all compounding daily. Her
      same percentage, what will           APR, compounding daily, in           goal is to have $15,000 by
      it be worth by 2017?                 order to reach his goal in 5         the time she finishes
                                           years?                               graduate school in 6 years.
                                                                                To the nearest hundredth
                                                                                of a percent, what should
                                                                                her minimum annual
                                                                                interest rate be in order to
                                                                                reach her goal? (Hint: solve
                                                                                the compound interest
                                                                                formula for the interest
                                                                                rate.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 561

67. Alyssa opened a retirement    68. An investment account
      account with 7.25% APR in         with an annual interest
      the year 2000. Her initial        rate of 7% was opened with
      deposit was $13,500. How          an initial deposit of $4,000
      much will the account be          Compare the values of the
      worth in 2025 if interest         account after 9 years when
      compounds monthly? How            the interest is compounded
      much more would she               annually, quarterly,
      make if interest                  monthly, and continuously.
      compounded
      continuously?

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions

Learning Objectives

           Graph exponential functions.
           Graph exponential functions using transformations.

As we discussed in the previous section, exponential functions are used for many real-world applications such as finance,
forensics, computer science, and most of the life sciences. Working with an equation that describes a real-world situation
gives us a method for making predictions. Most of the time, however, the equation itself is not enough. We learn a lot
about things by seeing their pictorial representations, and that is exactly why graphing exponential equations is a
powerful tool. It gives us another layer of insight for predicting future events.

Graphing Exponential Functions

Before we begin graphing, it is helpful to review the behavior of exponential growth. Recall the table of values for a

function of the form        whose base is greater than one. We'll use the function  Observe how the

output values in Table 1 change as the input increases by

                                  Table 1

Each output value is the product of the previous output and the base, We call the base the constant ratio. In fact, for

any exponential function with the form          is the constant ratio of the function. This means that as the input

increases by 1, the output value will be the product of the base and the previous output, regardless of the value of

Notice from the table that

· the output values are positive for all values of
· as increases, the output values increase without bound; and
· as decreases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero.

Figure 1 shows the exponential growth function
562 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

The domain of  Figure 1 Notice that the graph gets close to the x-axis, but never touches it.

                   is all real numbers, the range is  and the horizontal asymptote is

To get a sense of the behavior of exponential decay, we can create a table of values for a function of the form

whose base is between zero and one. We'll use the function  Observe how the output values in

Table 2 change as the input increases by

                                              Table 2

Again, because the input is increasing by 1, each output value is the product of the previous output and the base, or
constant ratio

Notice from the table that
  · the output values are positive for all values of
  · as increases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero; and
  · as decreases, the output values grow without bound.

Figure 2 shows the exponential decay function,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 563

The domain of                                                 Figure 2  and the horizontal asymptote is

                         is all real numbers, the range is 

Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function

An exponential function with the form                          has these characteristics:

· one-to-one function
· horizontal asymptote:

· domain:  

· range: 

· x-intercept: none
· y-intercept:
· increasing if
· decreasing if

Figure 3 compares the graphs of exponential growth and decay functions.

                                                     Figure 3
564 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given an exponential function of the form                  graph the function.

1. Create a table of points.
2. Plot at least point from the table, including the y-intercept
3. Draw a smooth curve through the points.

4. State the domain,   the range,  and the horizontal asymptote,

EXAMPLE 1

Sketching the Graph of an Exponential Function of the Form f(x) = bx

Sketch a graph of                State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution
Before graphing, identify the behavior and create a table of points for the graph.

· Since            is between zero and one, we know the function is decreasing. The left tail of the graph will increase

without bound, and the right tail will approach the asymptote

· Create a table of points as in Table 3.

                                 Table 3

· Plot the y-intercept,          along with two other points. We can use        and

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points as in Figure 4.

The domain is   the range is                                     Figure 4

                                                the horizontal asymptote is

TRY IT #1 Sketch the graph of                  State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing Transformations of Exponential Functions

Transformations of exponential graphs behave similarly to those of other functions. Just as with other parent functions,
we can apply the four types of transformations--shifts, reflections, stretches, and compressions--to the parent function

               without loss of shape. For instance, just as the quadratic function maintains its parabolic shape when shifted,
reflected, stretched, or compressed, the exponential function also maintains its general shape regardless of the
transformations applied.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 565

Graphing a Vertical Shift

The first transformation occurs when we add a constant to the parent function         giving us a vertical shift

units in the same direction as the sign. For example, if we begin by graphing a parent function,  we can then

graph two vertical shifts alongside it, using  the upward shift,               and the downward shift,

        Both vertical shifts are shown in Figure 5.

                                                    Figure 5

Observe the results of shifting      vertically:

· The domain,   remains unchanged.

· When the function is shifted up units to
     The y-intercept shifts up units to
     The asymptote shifts up units to

    The range becomes 

· When the function is shifted down units to

 The y-intercept shifts down units to

 The asymptote also shifts down units to

 The range becomes               

Graphing a Horizontal Shift

The next transformation occurs when we add a constant to the input of the parent function         giving us a

horizontal shift units in the opposite direction of the sign. For example, if we begin by graphing the parent function

        we can then graph two horizontal shifts alongside it, using  the shift left,              and the shift

right,  Both horizontal shifts are shown in Figure 6.

                                                    Figure 6

Observe the results of shifting      horizontally:

· The domain,   remains unchanged.

· The asymptote,  remains unchanged.

· The y-intercept shifts such that:

 When the function is shifted left units to                the y-intercept becomes                This is because
                                                             the y-intercept becomes                  Again, see that
                  so the initial value of the function is

 When the function is shifted right units to

                  so the initial value of the function is
566 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Shifts of the Parent Function f(x) = b x

For any constants and the function                               shifts the parent function

· vertically units, in the same direction of the sign of
· horizontally units, in the opposite direction of the sign of
· The y-intercept becomes
· The horizontal asymptote becomes

· The range becomes 

· The domain,   remains unchanged.

       ...

            HOW TO

Given an exponential function with the form                      graph the translation.

1. Draw the horizontal asymptote

2. Identify the shift as         Shift the graph of              left units if is positive, and right units if is

negative.

3. Shift the graph of            up units if is positive, and down units if is negative.

4. State the domain,   the range,  and the horizontal asymptote

EXAMPLE 2

Graphing a Shift of an Exponential Function

Graph                  State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution                                                    with           and
We have an exponential equation of the form

Draw the horizontal asymptote                  , so draw

Identify the shift as            so the shift is

Shift the graph of               left 1 units and down 3 units.

The domain is   the range is                                      Figure 7

                                                   the horizontal asymptote is

TRY IT #2 Graph                                           State domain, range, and asymptote.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 567

       ...

            HOW TO

Given an equation of the form                     for use a graphing calculator to approximate the solution.

· Press [Y=]. Enter the given exponential equation in the line headed "Y1=".

· Enter the given value for    in the line headed "Y2=".

· Press [WINDOW]. Adjust the y-axis so that it includes the value entered for "Y2=".

· Press [GRAPH] to observe the graph of the exponential function along with the line for the specified value of

· To find the value of we compute the point of intersection. Press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select "intersect" and
   press [ENTER] three times. The point of intersection gives the value of x for the indicated value of the function.

EXAMPLE 3

Approximating the Solution of an Exponential Equation

Solve                 graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Solution

Press [Y=] and enter           next to Y1=. Then enter 42 next to Y2=. For a window, use the values -3 to 3 for and

-5 to 55 for Press [GRAPH]. The graphs should intersect somewhere near

For a better approximation, press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select [5: intersect] and press [ENTER] three times. The
x-coordinate of the point of intersection is displayed as 2.1661943. (Your answer may be different if you use a different
window or use a different value for Guess?) To the nearest thousandth,

TRY IT #3 Solve                                   graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Graphing a Stretch or Compression

While horizontal and vertical shifts involve adding constants to the input or to the function itself, a stretch or

compression occurs when we multiply the parent function   by a constant                 For example, if we begin by

graphing the parent function   we can then graph the stretch, using           to get             as shown on

the left in Figure 8, and the compression, using  to get             as shown on the right in Figure 8.

Figure 8 (a)            stretches the graph of           vertically by a factor of (b)           compresses the
graph of      vertically by a factor of
568 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function

For any factor     the function

· is stretched vertically by a factor of if
· is compressed vertically by a factor of if
· has a y-intercept of

· has a horizontal asymptote at                a range of   and a domain of   which are unchanged from

the parent function.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing the Stretch of an Exponential Function

Sketch a graph of                State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution
Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points on the graph.

· Since         is between zero and one, the left tail of the graph will increase without bound as  decreases, and the

right tail will approach the x-axis as increases.

· Since         the graph of                   will be stretched by a factor of

· Create a table of points as shown in Table 4.

                                 Table 4

· Plot the y-intercept,          along with two other points. We can use         and

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points, as shown in Figure 9.

The domain is   the range is                                     Figure 9

                                                the horizontal asymptote is

TRY IT #4 Sketch the graph of                              State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing Reflections

In addition to shifting, compressing, and stretching a graph, we can also reflect it about the x-axis or the y-axis. When we

multiply the parent function                   by we get a reflection about the x-axis. When we multiply the input by we

get a reflection about the y-axis. For example, if we begin by graphing the parent function         we can then graph

the two reflections alongside it. The reflection about the x-axis,               is shown on the left side of Figure 10, and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 569

the reflection about the y-axis     is shown on the right side of Figure 10.

Figure 10 (a)           reflects the graph of               about the x-axis. (b)  reflects the graph of

about the y-axis.

Reflections of the Parent Function

The function                          about the x-axis.

  · reflects the parent function    and domain of   which are unchanged from the parent function.
  · has a y-intercept of

 · has a range of 

  · has a horizontal asymptote at

The function

· reflects the parent function               about the y-axis.

· has a y-intercept of           a horizontal asymptote at      a range of          and a domain of   which

are unchanged from the parent function.

EXAMPLE 5

Writing and Graphing the Reflection of an Exponential Function

Find and graph the equation for a function,      that reflects           about the x-axis. State its domain, range, and

asymptote.

     Solution                                    about the x-axis, we multiply     by to get,
Since we want to reflect the parent function
Next we create a table of points as in Table 5.

                       Table 5

Plot the y-intercept,           along with two other points. We can use     and

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points:
570 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

The domain is   the range is                              Figure 11
                                                   the horizontal asymptote is

TRY IT #5  Find and graph the equation for a function,                    that reflects   about the y-axis. State
           its domain, range, and asymptote.

Summarizing Translations of the Exponential Function

Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the exponential function, we can summarize them in Table 6
to arrive at the general equation for translating exponential functions.

                                               Translations of the Parent Function

                                               Translation                          Form

                                                      Shift
                                 · Horizontally units to the left

                                       · Vertically units up

                                        Stretch and Compress
                                        · Stretch if
                                 · Compression if

                                               Reflect about the x-axis
                                               Reflect about the y-axis

                                   General equation for all translations
                                 Table 6

Translations of Exponential Functions
A translation of an exponential function has the form

Where the parent function,                     is

· shifted horizontally units to the left.
· stretched vertically by a factor of if

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 571

  · compressed vertically by a factor of if
  · shifted vertically units.
  · reflected about the x-axis when

Note the order of the shifts, transformations, and reflections follow the order of operations.

EXAMPLE 6

Writing a Function from a Description

Write the equation for the function described below. Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and the range.

·          is vertically stretched by a factor of , reflected across the y-axis, and then shifted up units.

     Solution                                                     We use the description provided to find          and
We want to find an equation of the general form

· We are given the parent function               so

· The function is stretched by a factor of , so

· The function is reflected about the y-axis. We replace  with    to get:

· The graph is shifted vertically 4 units, so

Substituting in the general form we get,

The domain is   the range is  the horizontal asymptote is

   TRY IT #6  Write the equation for function described below. Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and
              the range.

              ·                     is compressed vertically by a factor of  reflected across the x-axis and then

                 shifted down units.

   MEDIA
   Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphing exponential functions.
   Graph Exponential Functions (http://openstax.org/l/graphexpfunc)

        6.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What role does the             2. What is the advantage of
    horizontal asymptote of an        knowing how to recognize
    exponential function play in      transformations of the
    telling us about the end          graph of a parent function
    behavior of the graph?            algebraically?
572 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Algebraic

3. The graph of                  is  4. The graph of                          5. The graph of                is

     reflected about the y-axis                is reflected about the y-axis       reflected about the x-axis
                                               and compressed vertically
     and stretched vertically by a             by a factor of What is the          and shifted upward units.

     factor of What is the                                                         What is the equation of the

     equation of the new                       equation of the new                 new function,  State its

     function,   State its                     function,  State its                y-intercept, domain, and

     y-intercept, domain, and                  y-intercept, domain, and            range.

     range.                                    range.

6. The graph of                      7. The graph of

     is shifted right units,                                        is

     stretched vertically by a                 shifted downward units,

     factor of reflected about                 and then shifted left units,

     the x-axis, and then shifted              stretched vertically by a

     downward units. What is                   factor of and reflected

     the equation of the new                   about the x-axis. What is the

     function,   State its                     equation of the new

     y-intercept (to the nearest               function,  State its

     thousandth), domain, and                  y-intercept, domain, and

     range.                                    range.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about the y-axis on the same axes, and give the
y-intercept.

8.                                   9.                                       10.

For the following exercises, graph each set of functions on the same axes.

11.                                  12.                                      and

                 and

For the following exercises, match each function with one of the graphs in Figure 12.

                                                          Figure 12

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.2 · Graphs of Exponential Functions 573

13.                        14.                                   15.

16.                        17.                                   18.

For the following exercises, use the graphs shown in Figure 13. All have the form

19. Which graph has the                              Figure 13   21. Which graph has the
      largest value for                                                largest value for
                           20. Which graph has the
22. Which graph has the          smallest value for
      smallest value for

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about the x-axis on the same axes.

23.                        24.                                   25.

For the following exercises, graph the transformation of         Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and the
range.                                                               28.

26.                        27.

For the following exercises, describe the end behavior of the graphs of the functions.

29.                        30.                                   31.

For the following exercises, start with the graph of             Then write a function that results from the given
transformation.

32. Shift  4 units upward  33. Shift                  3 units    34. Shift              2 units left

                                downward

35. Shift  5 units right   36. Reflect                about the  37. Reflect            about the
                                 x-axis                                y-axis
574 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, each graph is a transformation of  Write an equation describing the transformation.
                                                                            40.
38.                                            39.

For the following exercises, find an exponential equation for the graph.

41.                                            42.

Numeric

For the following exercises, evaluate the exponential functions for the indicated value of

43.         for                  44.                for                   45.               for

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to approximate the solutions of the equation. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

46.                              47.                                      48.

49.                              50.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.3 · Logarithmic Functions 575

Extensions

51. Explore and discuss the graphs of                     52. Prove the conjecture made in the previous
                                                                exercise.
and              Then make a conjecture about

the relationship between the graphs of the

functions and    for any real number

53. Explore and discuss the graphs of                     54. Prove the conjecture made in the previous
                                                                exercise.
            and                        Then make a

conjecture about the relationship between the

graphs of the functions and            for any

real number n and real number

6.3 Logarithmic Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Convert from logarithmic to exponential form.
           Convert from exponential to logarithmic form.
           Evaluate logarithms.
           Use common logarithms.
           Use natural logarithms.

                   Figure 1 Devastation of March 11, 2011 earthquake in Honshu, Japan. (credit: Daniel Pierce)

In 2010, a major earthquake struck Haiti, destroying or damaging over 285,000 homes4 . One year later, another,
stronger earthquake devastated Honshu, Japan, destroying or damaging over 332,000 buildings,5 like those shown in
Figure 1. Even though both caused substantial damage, the earthquake in 2011 was 100 times stronger than the
earthquake in Haiti. How do we know? The magnitudes of earthquakes are measured on a scale known as the Richter
Scale. The Haitian earthquake registered a 7.0 on the Richter Scale6 whereas the Japanese earthquake registered a 9.0.7

The Richter Scale is a base-ten logarithmic scale. In other words, an earthquake of magnitude 8 is not twice as great as

an earthquake of magnitude 4. It is                       times as great! In this lesson, we will investigate the nature of

the Richter Scale and the base-ten function upon which it depends.

Converting from Logarithmic to Exponential Form

In order to analyze the magnitude of earthquakes or compare the magnitudes of two different earthquakes, we need to
be able to convert between logarithmic and exponential form. For example, suppose the amount of energy released

4 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/#summary. Accessed 3/4/2013.
5 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#summary. Accessed 3/4/2013.
6 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/. Accessed 3/4/2013.
7 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#details. Accessed 3/4/2013.
576 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

from one earthquake were 500 times greater than the amount of energy released from another. We want to calculate

the difference in magnitude. The equation that represents this problem is  where represents the difference

in magnitudes on the Richter Scale. How would we solve for

We have not yet learned a method for solving exponential equations. None of the algebraic tools discussed so far is

sufficient to solve    We know that                       and        so it is clear that must be some value between

2 and 3, since         is increasing. We can examine a graph, as in Figure 2, to better estimate the solution.

                                                          Figure 2

Estimating from a graph, however, is imprecise. To find an algebraic solution, we must introduce a new function.

Observe that the graph in Figure 2 passes the horizontal line test. The exponential function  is one-to-one, so its

inverse,        is also a function. As is the case with all inverse functions, we simply interchange and and solve for

to find the inverse function. To represent as a function of we use a logarithmic function of the form

The base logarithm of a number is the exponent by which we must raise to get that number.

We read a logarithmic expression as, "The logarithm with base of is equal to " or, simplified, "log base of is "

We can also say, " raised to the power of is " because logs are exponents. For example, the base 2 logarithm of 32

is 5, because 5 is the exponent we must apply to 2 to get 32. Since        we can write       We read this as "log

base 2 of 32 is 5."

We can express the relationship between logarithmic form and its corresponding exponential form as follows:

Note that the base is always positive.

Because logarithm is a function, it is most correctly written as     using parentheses to denote function evaluation,

just as we would with  However, when the input is a single variable or number, it is common to see the parentheses

dropped and the expression written without parentheses, as           Note that many calculators require parentheses

around the

We can illustrate the notation of logarithms as follows:

Notice that, comparing the logarithm function and the exponential function, the input and the output are switched. This

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             6.3 · Logarithmic Functions 577

means             and              are inverse functions.

Definition of the Logarithmic Function

A logarithm base    of a positive number  satisfies the following definition.
For

where,

  · we read         as, "the logarithm with base of " or the "log base of

  · the logarithm is the exponent to which must be raised to get

Also, since the logarithmic and exponential functions switch the and values, the domain and range of the
exponential function are interchanged for the logarithmic function. Therefore,

  · the domain of the logarithm function with base            
  · the range of the logarithm function with base           

  Q&A        Can we take the logarithm of a negative number?

             No. Because the base of an exponential function is always positive, no power of that base can ever be
             negative. We can never take the logarithm of a negative number. Also, we cannot take the logarithm of
             zero. Calculators may output a log of a negative number when in complex mode, but the log of a negative
             number is not a real number.

       ...

            HOW TO

Given an equation in logarithmic form                       convert it to exponential form.

1. Examine the equation                 and identify

2. Rewrite                     as

EXAMPLE 1

Converting from Logarithmic Form to Exponential Form
Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form.

                       

  Solution

First, identify the values of      Then, write the equation in the form

                                   Therefore, the equation               is equivalent to

Here,

                                   Therefore, the equation      is equivalent to

Here,

  TRY IT #1         Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form.

                                          
578 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Converting from Exponential to Logarithmic Form

To convert from exponents to logarithms, we follow the same steps in reverse. We identify the base exponent and
output Then we write

EXAMPLE 2

Converting from Exponential Form to Logarithmic Form
Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form.

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution                                  Then, write the equation in the form
First, identify the values of

a.

    Here,             and             Therefore, the equation           is equivalent to

b.

    Here,             and                      Therefore, the equation    is equivalent to

c.

    Here,                        and             Therefore, the equation                  is equivalent to

    TRY IT #2 Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form.

                                                            

Evaluating Logarithms

Knowing the squares, cubes, and roots of numbers allows us to evaluate many logarithms mentally. For example,

consider        We ask, "To what exponent must be raised in order to get 8?" Because we already know            it

follows that

Now consider solving             and             mentally.

· We ask, "To what exponent must 7 be raised in order to get 49?" We know                   Therefore,
· We ask, "To what exponent must 3 be raised in order to get 27?" We know                   Therefore,

Even some seemingly more complicated logarithms can be evaluated without a calculator. For example, let's evaluate
          mentally.

· We ask, "To what exponent must be raised in order to get " We know                        and             so

    Therefore,

    ...

         HOW TO

Given a logarithm of the form                    evaluate it mentally.

1. Rewrite the argument as a power of
2. Use previous knowledge of powers of identify by asking, "To what exponent should be raised in order to get

         "

Access for free at openstax.org
EXAMPLE 3                                                                                                           6.3 · Logarithmic Functions 579

Solving Logarithms Mentally                          Next, we ask, "To what exponent must 4 be raised in order

Solve           without using a calculator.

     Solution
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:
to get 64?"

We know

Therefore,

TRY IT #3 Solve                           without using a calculator.

EXAMPLE 4

Evaluating the Logarithm of a Reciprocal

Evaluate        without using a calculator.

     Solution                                        Next, we ask, "To what exponent must 3 be raised in order
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:
to get "

We know         but what must we do to get the reciprocal,       Recall from working with exponents that

We use this information to write

Therefore,

TRY IT #4 Evaluate                           without using a calculator.

Using Common Logarithms

Sometimes we may see a logarithm written without a base. In this case, we assume that the base is 10. In other words,

the expression  means               We call a base-10 logarithm a common logarithm. Common logarithms are

used to measure the Richter Scale mentioned at the beginning of the section. Scales for measuring the brightness of

stars and the pH of acids and bases also use common logarithms.

Definition of the Common Logarithm

A common logarithm is a logarithm with base We write                   simply as  The common logarithm of a
positive number satisfies the following definition.

For

We read         as, "the logarithm with base of " or "log base 10 of "

The logarithm is the exponent to which must be raised to get
580 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given a common logarithm of the form                       evaluate it mentally.                be raised in order to
                                               to identify by asking, "To what exponent must
 1. Rewrite the argument as a power of
 2. Use previous knowledge of powers of

      get "

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Value of a Common Logarithm Mentally

Evaluate          without using a calculator.

     Solution                                                 Next, we ask, "To what exponent must be raised in
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:
order to get 1000?" We know

Therefore,

TRY IT #5 Evaluate

...

     HOW TO

Given a common logarithm with the form                evaluate it using a calculator.

1. Press [LOG].                   followed by [ ) ].
2. Enter the value given for
3. Press [ENTER].

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Value of a Common Logarithm Using a Calculator

Evaluate          to four decimal places using a calculator.

  Solution
· Press [LOG].
· Enter 321, followed by [ ) ].
· Press [ENTER].

Rounding to four decimal places,

     Analysis     and that                     Since 321 is between 100 and 1000, we know that  must be between
Note that
                  This gives us the following:
             and

TRY IT #6 Evaluate                             to four decimal places using a calculator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.3 · Logarithmic Functions 581

EXAMPLE 7

Rewriting and Solving a Real-World Exponential Model

The amount of energy released from one earthquake was 500 times greater than the amount of energy released from

another. The equation               represents this situation, where is the difference in magnitudes on the Richter Scale.

To the nearest thousandth, what was the difference in magnitudes?

     Solution
We begin by rewriting the exponential equation in logarithmic form.

Next we evaluate the logarithm using a calculator:

· Press [LOG].

· Enter         followed by [ ) ].

· Press [ENTER].

· To the nearest thousandth,

The difference in magnitudes was about

TRY IT #7              The amount of energy released from one earthquake was      times greater than the amount of

                       energy released from another. The equation             represents this situation, where is the

                       difference in magnitudes on the Richter Scale. To the nearest thousandth, what was the difference

                       in magnitudes?

Using Natural Logarithms

The most frequently used base for logarithms is Base logarithms are important in calculus and some scientific

applications; they are called natural logarithms. The base logarithm,         has its own notation,

Most values of         can be found only using a calculator. The major exception is that, because the logarithm of 1 is

always 0 in any base,  For other natural logarithms, we can use the key that can be found on most scientific

calculators. We can also find the natural logarithm of any power of using the inverse property of logarithms.

Definition of the Natural Logarithm

A natural logarithm is a logarithm with base  We write             simply as      The natural logarithm of a positive
number satisfies the following definition.

For

We read         as, "the logarithm with base of " or "the natural logarithm of "

The logarithm is the exponent to which must be raised to get

Since the functions    and              are inverse functions,         for all and       for

...

     HOW TO

Given a natural logarithm with the form                 evaluate it using a calculator.

1. Press [LN].                      followed by [ ) ].
2. Enter the value given for
3. Press [ENTER].
582 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 8

Evaluating a Natural Logarithm Using a Calculator

Evaluate                to four decimal places using a calculator.

     Solution

    · Press [LN].

    · Enter    followed by [ ) ].

    · Press [ENTER].

Rounding to four decimal places,

     TRY IT #8 Evaluate

     MEDIA
     Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with logarithms.
     Introduction to Logarithms (http://openstax.org/l/intrologarithms)

        6.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is a base logarithm?        2. How is the logarithmic              3. How can the logarithmic

     Discuss the meaning by                    function                         equation   be

     interpreting each part of the             related to the exponential       solved for using the

     equivalent equations                      function  What is                properties of exponents?

     and           for                         the result of composing

                                               these two functions?

4. Discuss the meaning of the       5. Discuss the meaning of the
    common logarithm. What is           natural logarithm. What is
    its relationship to a               its relationship to a
    logarithm with base and             logarithm with base and
    how does the notation               how does the notation
    differ?                             differ?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in exponential form.

6.                                  7.                                     8.

9.                                  10.                                    11.

12.                                 13.                                    14.

15.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.3 · Logarithmic Functions 583

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in logarithmic form.

16.      17.                                                             18.

19.      20.                                                             21.

22.      23.                                                             24.

25.

For the following exercises, solve for by converting the logarithmic equation to exponential form.

26.      27.                                                             28.

29.      30.                                                             31.

32.      33.                                                             34.

35.

For the following exercises, use the definition of common and natural logarithms to simplify.

36.      37.                                                             38.

39.      40.                                                             41.

Numeric

For the following exercises, evaluate the base logarithmic expression without using a calculator.

42.      43.                                                             44.

45.

For the following exercises, evaluate the common logarithmic expression without using a calculator.

46.      47.                                                             48.

49.

For the following exercises, evaluate the natural logarithmic expression without using a calculator.

50.      51.                                                             52.

53.
584 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Technology

For the following exercises, evaluate each expression using a calculator. Round to the nearest thousandth.

54.                                        55.                                56.

57.                                        58.

Extensions

59. Is  in the domain of                   60. Is            in the range of  61. Is there a number such

     the function                               the function                       that     If so, what is

     If so, what is the value of                If so, for what value of           that number? Verify the

     the function when                          Verify the result.                 result.

     Verify the result.

62. Is the following true:                 63. Is the following true:
                               Verify the
                                                                    Verify
      result.
                                                the result.

Real-World Applications

64. The exposure index for                 65. Refer to the previous          66. The intensity levels I of two
      a camera is a                              exercise. Suppose the light        earthquakes measured on
      measurement of the                         meter on a camera                  a seismograph can be
      amount of light that hits                  indicates an of and                compared by the formula
      the image receptor. It is                  the desired exposure time
      determined by the                          is 16 seconds. What should                                      where
      equation                                   the f-stop setting be?
                                                                                        is the magnitude given
                                  where                                             by the Richter Scale. In
                                                                                    August 2009, an
         is the "f-stop" setting on                                                 earthquake of magnitude
      the camera, and is the                                                        6.1 hit Honshu, Japan. In
      exposure time in seconds.                                                     March 2011, that same
      Suppose the f-stop setting                                                    region experienced yet
      is and the desired                                                            another, more devastating
      exposure time is seconds.                                                     earthquake, this time with
      What will the resulting                                                       a magnitude of 9.0.8 How
      exposure index be?                                                            many times greater was
                                                                                    the intensity of the 2011
                                                                                    earthquake? Round to the
                                                                                    nearest whole number.

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Identify the domain of a logarithmic function.
           Graph logarithmic functions.

8 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/world/historical.php. Accessed 3/4/2014.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 585

In Graphs of Exponential Functions, we saw how creating a graphical representation of an exponential model gives us
another layer of insight for predicting future events. How do logarithmic graphs give us insight into situations? Because
every logarithmic function is the inverse function of an exponential function, we can think of every output on a
logarithmic graph as the input for the corresponding inverse exponential equation. In other words, logarithms give the
cause for an effect.

To illustrate, suppose we invest  in an account that offers an annual interest rate of compounded

continuously. We already know that the balance in our account for any year can be found with the equation

But what if we wanted to know the year for any balance? We would need to create a corresponding new function by
interchanging the input and the output; thus we would need to create a logarithmic model for this situation. By
graphing the model, we can see the output (year) for any input (account balance). For instance, what if we wanted to
know how many years it would take for our initial investment to double? Figure 1 shows this point on the logarithmic
graph.

                                                    Figure 1

In this section we will discuss the values for which a logarithmic function is defined, and then turn our attention to
graphing the family of logarithmic functions.

Finding the Domain of a Logarithmic Function

Before working with graphs, we will take a look at the domain (the set of input values) for which the logarithmic function
is defined.

Recall that the exponential function is defined as  for any real number and constant            where

· The domain of is   
· The range of is   

In the last section we learned that the logarithmic function             is the inverse of the exponential function
So, as inverse functions:

· The domain of                   is the range of             

· The range of      is the domain of                          

Transformations of the parent function              behave similarly to those of other functions. Just as with other

parent functions, we can apply the four types of transformations--shifts, stretches, compressions, and reflections--to

the parent function without loss of shape.

In Graphs of Exponential Functions we saw that certain transformations can change the range of  Similarly,

applying transformations to the parent function               can change the domain. When finding the domain of a

logarithmic function, therefore, it is important to remember that the domain consists only of positive real numbers. That

is, the argument of the logarithmic function must be greater than zero.
586 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For example, consider                            This function is defined for any values of such that the argument, in this

case  is greater than zero. To find the domain, we set up an inequality and solve for

In interval notation, the domain of              is  

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function, identify the domain.

 1. Set up an inequality showing the argument greater than zero.
 2. Solve for
 3. Write the domain in interval notation.

  EXAMPLE 1                                                                                            Solving
                                                                                                       Solving
Identifying the Domain of a Logarithmic Shift
What is the domain of

     Solution
The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so this function is defined when
this inequality,

The domain of                        is        

       TRY IT #1 What is the domain of

  EXAMPLE 2

Identifying the Domain of a Logarithmic Shift and Reflection
What is the domain of

     Solution
The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so this function is defined when
this inequality,

The domain of                        is 

      TRY IT #2 What is the domain of

Graphing Logarithmic Functions

Now that we have a feel for the set of values for which a logarithmic function is defined, we move on to graphing

logarithmic functions. The family of logarithmic functions includes the parent function                along with all its

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 587

transformations: shifts, stretches, compressions, and reflections.

We begin with the parent function              Because every logarithmic function of this form is the inverse of an

exponential function with the form        their graphs will be reflections of each other across the line  To

illustrate this, we can observe the relationship between the input and output values of  and its equivalent

   in Table 1.

                                 Table 1

Using the inputs and outputs from Table 1, we can build another table to observe the relationship between points on the

graphs of the inverse functions           and              See Table 2.

                       Table 2
As we'd expect, the x- and y-coordinates are reversed for the inverse functions. Figure 2 shows the graph of and

   Figure 2 Notice that the graphs of                 and                are reflections about the line

Observe the following from the graph:

·  has a y-intercept at                and                 has an x- intercept at

· The domain of                      is the same as the range of

· The range of                    is the same as the domain of

Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function,

For any real number and constant               we can see the following characteristics in the graph of
588 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

· one-to-one function
· vertical asymptote:

· domain: 

· range:  

· x-intercept:       and key point

· y-intercept: none

· increasing if

· decreasing if

See Figure 3.

                                               Figure 3

Figure 4 shows how changing the base in        can affect the graphs. Observe that the graphs compress

vertically as the value of the base increases. (Note: recall that the function  has base

               Figure 4 The graphs of three logarithmic functions with different bases, all greater than 1.

           ...                                           graph the function.

              HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function with the form
 1. Draw and label the vertical asymptote,
 2. Plot the x-intercept,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 589

3. Plot the key point                       and the vertical asymptote,
4. Draw a smooth curve through the points.

5. State the domain,  the range,  

EXAMPLE 3

Graphing a Logarithmic Function with the Form f(x) = logb(x).

Graph                 State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution
Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points for the graph.

· Since        is greater than one, we know the function is increasing. The left tail of the graph will approach the

vertical asymptote    and the right tail will increase slowly without bound.

· The x-intercept is

· The key point       is on the graph.

· We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a smooth curve through the points (see

Figure 5).

The domain is                                                        Figure 5

                  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

TRY IT #3 Graph                         State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing Transformations of Logarithmic Functions

As we mentioned in the beginning of the section, transformations of logarithmic graphs behave similarly to those of

other parent functions. We can shift, stretch, compress, and reflect the parent function  without loss of

shape.

Graphing a Horizontal Shift of f(x) = logb(x)                                  the result is a horizontal shift units in

When a constant is added to the input of the parent function

the opposite direction of the sign on To visualize horizontal shifts, we can observe the general graph of the parent

function              and for   alongside the shift left,                      and the shift right,

                 See Figure 6.
590 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                               Figure 6

Horizontal Shifts of the Parent Function

For any constant the function

· shifts the parent function                   left units if
                                               right units if
· shifts the parent function

· has the vertical asymptote

· has domain      

· has range  

...

     HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function with the form                     graph the translation.

1. Identify the horizontal shift:

a. If         shift the graph of               left units.
                                               right units.
b. If         shift the graph of

2. Draw the vertical asymptote

3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by subtracting

from the coordinate.

4. Label the three points.

5. The Domain is                  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 591

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing a Horizontal Shift of the Parent Function y = logb(x)

Sketch the horizontal shift                 alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptotes on

the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution                               we notice
Since the function is

Thus       so            This means we will shift the function       right 2 units.

The vertical asymptote is    or

Consider the three key points from the parent function,              and

The new coordinates are found by adding 2 to the       coordinates.

Label the points             and

The domain is  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

                                                       Figure 7

      TRY IT #4          Sketch a graph of                      alongside its parent function. Include the key points and

                         asymptotes on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing a Vertical Shift of y = logb(x)                             the result is a vertical shift units in the direction of

When a constant is added to the parent function

the sign on To visualize vertical shifts, we can observe the general graph of the parent function

alongside the shift up,                     and the shift down,           See Figure 8.
592 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Vertical Shifts of the Parent Function                       Figure 8

For any constant the function                  up units if
                                               down units if
  · shifts the parent function
  · shifts the parent function
  · has the vertical asymptote

 · has domain 
 · has range  

...

     HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function with the form                             graph the translation.

1. Identify the vertical shift:

 If  shift the graph of                        up units.
                                               down units.
 If  shift the graph of

2. Draw the vertical asymptote
3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by adding to

     the coordinate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 593

4. Label the three points.

5. The domain is  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

EXAMPLE 5

Graphing a Vertical Shift of the Parent Function y = logb(x)

Sketch a graph of                      alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph.

State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution                             we will notice      Thus
Since the function is

This means we will shift the function     down 2 units.

The vertical asymptote is

Consider the three key points from the parent function,                 and

The new coordinates are found by subtracting 2 from the y coordinates.

Label the points           and

The domain is  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

The domain is                                                          Figure 9

                    the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

TRY IT #5              Sketch a graph of                  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and

                       asymptote on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing Stretches and Compressions of y = logb(x)

When the parent function                  is multiplied by a constant   the result is a vertical stretch or compression
                                                                        and observe the general graph of the parent
of the original graph. To visualize stretches and compressions, we set
594 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

function          alongside the vertical stretch,             and the vertical compression,
See Figure 10.

                                                   Figure 10

Vertical Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function

For any constant  the function

· stretches the parent function                vertically by a factor of if
· compresses the parent function                  vertically by a factor of if
· has the vertical asymptote
· has the x-intercept

· has domain 

· has range  

...

     HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function with the form                    graph the translation.

1. Identify the vertical stretch or compressions:

 If               the graph of                 is stretched by a factor of units.

 If               the graph of                 is compressed by a factor of units.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 595

2. Draw the vertical asymptote
3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by multiplying

     the coordinates by
4. Label the three points.

5. The domain is  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

EXAMPLE 6

Graphing a Stretch or Compression of the Parent Function y = logb(x)

Sketch a graph of                alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph.

State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution                    we will notice
Since the function is

This means we will stretch the function          by a factor of 2.

The vertical asymptote is

Consider the three key points from the parent function,             and

The new coordinates are found by multiplying the coordinates by 2.

Label the points                 and

The domain is  the range is   and the vertical asymptote is                      See Figure 11.

The domain is                                                         Figure 11

                    the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

TRY IT #6              Sketch a graph of                 alongside its parent function. Include the key points and

                       asymptote on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote.

  EXAMPLE 7                           State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Combining a Shift and a Stretch
Sketch a graph of
596 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Solution

Remember: what happens inside parentheses happens first. First, we move the graph left 2 units, then stretch the

function vertically by a factor of 5, as in Figure 12. The vertical asymptote will be shifted to       The x-intercept will be

The domain will be                Two points will help give the shape of the graph:               and  We chose

as the x-coordinate of one point to graph because when                     the base of the common logarithm.

The domain is                                                   Figure 12

                the range is   and the vertical asymptote is

TRY IT #7 Sketch a graph of the function                                   State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Graphing Reflections of f(x) = logb(x)

When the parent function                       is multiplied by  the result is a reflection about the x-axis. When the input is

multiplied by the result is a reflection about the y-axis. To visualize reflections, we restrict       and observe the

general graph of the parent function           alongside the reflection about the x-axis,              and the

reflection about the y-axis,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 597

                                        Figure 13

Reflections of the Parent Function

The function                          about the x-axis.        which are unchanged from the parent
                                      and vertical asymptote,
  · reflects the parent function

 · has domain,  range,

      function.

The function

· reflects the parent function        about the y-axis.

· has domain 

· has range,   and vertical asymptote,                 which are unchanged from the parent function.

           ...                                                 graph a translation.

              HOW TO

Given a logarithmic function with the parent function
598 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

1. Draw the vertical asymptote,                        1. Draw the vertical asymptote,

2. Plot the x-intercept,                               2. Plot the x-intercept,

3. Reflect the graph of the parent function            3. Reflect the graph of the parent function
                      about the x-axis.                                      about the y-axis.

4. Draw a smooth curve through the points.             4. Draw a smooth curve through the points.

5. State the domain, (0, ), the range, (-, ), and the  5. State the domain, (-, 0) the range, (-, ) and the
                                                       vertical asymptote
vertical asymptote               .

Table 3

EXAMPLE 8

Graphing a Reflection of a Logarithmic Function

Sketch a graph of                   alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph.

State the domain, range, and asymptote.

     Solution                       identify the behavior and key points for the graph.
Before graphing

· Since            is greater than one, we know that the parent function is increasing. Since the input value is multiplied

by         is a reflection of the parent graph about the y-axis. Thus,                   will be decreasing as moves

from negative infinity to zero, and the right tail of the graph will approach the vertical asymptote

· The x-intercept is

· We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a smooth curve through the points.

The domain is             the range is                  Figure 14
                                                 and the vertical asymptote is

TRY IT #8 Graph                                  State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                     6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 599

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a logarithmic equation, use a graphing calculator to approximate solutions.
 1. Press [Y=]. Enter the given logarithm equation or equations as Y1= and, if needed, Y2=.
 2. Press [GRAPH] to observe the graphs of the curves and use [WINDOW] to find an appropriate view of the

      graphs, including their point(s) of intersection.
 3. To find the value of we compute the point of intersection. Press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select "intersect" and

      press [ENTER] three times. The point of intersection gives the value of for the point(s) of intersection.

EXAMPLE 9

Approximating the Solution of a Logarithmic Equation

Solve                 graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Solution

Press [Y=] and enter  next to Y1=. Then enter                  next to Y2=. For a window, use the values 0 to 5 for

and -10 to 10 for Press [GRAPH]. The graphs should intersect somewhere a little to right of

For a better approximation, press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select [5: intersect] and press [ENTER] three times. The
x-coordinate of the point of intersection is displayed as 1.3385297. (Your answer may be different if you use a different
window or use a different value for Guess?) So, to the nearest thousandth,

TRY IT #9 Solve                    graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Summarizing Translations of the Logarithmic Function

Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the logarithmic function, we can summarize each in Table 4 to
arrive at the general equation for translating exponential functions.

                      Translations of the Parent Function

                      Translation                              Form

                                           Shift
                      · Horizontally units to the left

                            · Vertically units up

                          Stretch and Compress
                          · Stretch if
                      · Compression if

                                 Reflect about the x-axis
                                 Reflect about the y-axis
                        General equation for all translations
                      Table 4
600 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Translations of Logarithmic Functions                            have the form
All translations of the parent logarithmic function,

where the parent function,                     is

· shifted vertically up units.
· shifted horizontally to the left units.
· stretched vertically by a factor of if
· compressed vertically by a factor of if
· reflected about the x-axis when

For       the graph of the parent function is reflected about the y-axis.

  EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Vertical Asymptote of a Logarithm Graph
What is the vertical asymptote of

     Solution
The vertical asymptote is at

     Analysis
The coefficient, the base, and the upward translation do not affect the asymptote. The shift of the curve 4 units to the left
shifts the vertical asymptote to

       TRY IT #10 What is the vertical asymptote of

  EXAMPLE 11

Finding the Equation from a Graph
Find a possible equation for the common logarithmic function graphed in Figure 15.

                                                      Figure 15

Solution

This graph has a vertical asymptote at         and has been vertically reflected. We do not know yet the vertical shift or

the vertical stretch. We know so far that the equation will have form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 601

It appears the graph passes through the points     and         Substituting

Next, substituting in  ,

This gives us the equation

     Analysis
We can verify this answer by comparing the function values in Table 5 with the points on the graph in Figure 15.

                                   -1           0          1         2       3

                                   1            0          -0.58496  -1      -1.3219

                                   4            5          6         7       8

                                   -1.5850 -1.8074         -2        -2.1699 -2.3219

                          Table 5

TRY IT #11 Give the equation of the natural logarithm graphed in Figure 16.

                                                Figure 16

Q&A  Is it possible to tell the domain and range and describe the end behavior of a function just by
     looking at the graph?

     Yes, if we know the function is a general logarithmic function. For example, look at the graph in Figure 16.

     The graph approaches              (or thereabouts) more and more closely, so     is, or is very close to,

     the vertical asymptote. It approaches from the right, so the domain is all points to the right,
602 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                       The range, as with all general logarithmic functions, is all real numbers. And we can see

           the end behavior because the graph goes down as it goes left and up as it goes right. The end behavior is

           that as                              and as                     

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphing logarithms.

     Graph an Exponential Function and Logarithmic Function (http://openstax.org/l/graphexplog)
     Match Graphs with Exponential and Logarithmic Functions (http://openstax.org/l/matchexplog)
     Find the Domain of Logarithmic Functions (http://openstax.org/l/domainlog)

        6.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. The inverse of every                2. What type(s) of                    3. What type(s) of
    logarithmic function is an             translation(s), if any, affect        translation(s), if any, affect
    exponential function and               the range of a logarithmic            the domain of a logarithmic
    vice-versa. What does this             function?                             function?
    tell us about the relationship
    between the coordinates of
    the points on the graphs of
    each?

4. Consider the general                5. Does the graph of a general
    logarithmic function                   logarithmic function have a
                            Why can't      horizontal asymptote?
    be zero?                               Explain.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, state the domain and range of the function.

6.                                     7.                                    8.

9.                                     10.

For the following exercises, state the domain and the vertical asymptote of the function.

11.                                    12.                                   13.

14.                                    15.

For the following exercises, state the domain, vertical asymptote, and end behavior of the function.

16.                                    17.                                   18.

19.                                    20.

Access for free at openstax.org
                          6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 603

For the following exercises, state the domain, range, and x- and y-intercepts, if they exist. If they do not exist, write DNE.

21.  22.             23.

24.  25.

Graphical

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 17 with the letter corresponding to its graph.

          Figure 17

26.  27.             28.

29.  30.

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 18 with the letter corresponding to its graph.

          Figure 18
604 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

31.                              32.                                      33.

For the following exercises, sketch the graphs of each pair of functions on the same axis.

34.  and                         35.           and                        36.               and

37.  and

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 19 with the letter corresponding to its graph.

                                               Figure 19

38.                              39.                                      40.

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the indicated function.

41.                              42.                                      43.

44.                              45.                                      46.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    6.4 · Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 605

For the following exercises, write a logarithmic equation corresponding to the graph shown.

47. Use          as the parent        48. Use          as the parent 49. Use                            as the parent
      function.                             function.                             function.

50. Use                as the parent
      function.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find approximate solutions to each equation.

51.                                   52.

53.                             54.                            55.

Extensions

56. Let be any positive real    57. Explore and discuss the    58. Prove the conjecture made
                                      graphs of                      in the previous exercise.
     number such that
                                      and
     What must   be equal             Make a conjecture based
                                      on the result.
     to? Verify the result.
606 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

59. What is the domain of the    60. Use properties of
      function                         exponents to find the
      Discuss the result.              x-intercepts of the function

                                       algebraically. Show the
                                       steps for solving, and then
                                       verify the result by
                                       graphing the function.

6.5 Logarithmic Properties

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use the product rule for logarithms.
           Use the quotient rule for logarithms.
           Use the power rule for logarithms.
           Expand logarithmic expressions.
           Condense logarithmic expressions.
           Use the change-of-base formula for logarithms.

                     Figure 1 The pH of hydrochloric acid is tested with litmus paper. (credit: David Berardan)

In chemistry, pH is used as a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance. The pH scale runs from 0 to 14.
Substances with a pH less than 7 are considered acidic, and substances with a pH greater than 7 are said to be basic. Our
bodies, for instance, must maintain a pH close to 7.35 in order for enzymes to work properly. To get a feel for what is
acidic and what is basic, consider the following pH levels of some common substances:

  · Battery acid: 0.8
  · Stomach acid: 2.7
  · Orange juice: 3.3
  · Pure water: 7 (at 25° C)
  · Human blood: 7.35
  · Fresh coconut: 7.8
  · Sodium hydroxide (lye): 14

To determine whether a solution is acidic or basic, we find its pH, which is a measure of the number of active positive
hydrogen ions in the solution. The pH is defined by the following formula, where is the concentration of hydrogen
ion in the solution

The equivalence of               and           is one of the logarithm properties we will examine in this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 607

Using the Product Rule for Logarithms

Recall that the logarithmic and exponential functions "undo" each other. This means that logarithms have similar
properties to exponents. Some important properties of logarithms are given here. First, the following properties are easy
to prove.

For example,       since             And         since

Next, we have the inverse property.

For example, to evaluate             we can rewrite the logarithm as   and then apply the inverse property
                   to get

To evaluate   we can rewrite the logarithm as    and then apply the inverse property  to get

Finally, we have the one-to-one property.

We can use the one-to-one property to solve the equation               for           Since the bases are the same,

we can apply the one-to-one property by setting the arguments equal and solving for

But what about the equation                               The one-to-one property does not help us in this instance.

Before we can solve an equation like this, we need a method for combining terms on the left side of the equation.

Recall that we use the product rule of exponents to combine the product of powers by adding exponents:
We have a similar property for logarithms, called the product rule for logarithms, which says that the logarithm of a
product is equal to a sum of logarithms. Because logs are exponents, and we multiply like bases, we can add the
exponents. We will use the inverse property to derive the product rule below.

Given any real number and positive real numbers           and where    we will show

Let           and            In exponential form, these equations are  and            It follows that

Note that repeated applications of the product rule for logarithms allow us to simplify the logarithm of the product of

any number of factors. For example, consider              Using the product rule for logarithms, we can rewrite this

logarithm of a product as the sum of logarithms of its factors:

The Product Rule for Logarithms

The product rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm of a product by rewriting it as a sum of
individual logarithms.
608 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Given the logarithm of a product, use the product rule of logarithms to write an equivalent sum of logarithms.
          1. Factor the argument completely, expressing each whole number factor as a product of primes.
          2. Write the equivalent expression by summing the logarithms of each factor.

  EXAMPLE 1                                                as a product of primes.

Using the Product Rule for Logarithms
Expand

     Solution
We begin by factoring the argument completely, expressing

Next we write the equivalent equation by summing the logarithms of each factor.

     TRY IT #1 Expand

Using the Quotient Rule for Logarithms

For quotients, we have a similar rule for logarithms. Recall that we use the quotient rule of exponents to combine the

quotient of exponents by subtracting:  The quotient rule for logarithms says that the logarithm of a

quotient is equal to a difference of logarithms. Just as with the product rule, we can use the inverse property to derive
the quotient rule.

Given any real number and positive real numbers  and where                 we will show

Let  and                         In exponential form, these equations are        and     It follows that

For example, to expand                 we must first express the quotient in lowest terms. Factoring and canceling we
get,

Next we apply the quotient rule by subtracting the logarithm of the denominator from the logarithm of the numerator.
Then we apply the product rule.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 609

The Quotient Rule for Logarithms
The quotient rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm or a quotient by rewriting it as the difference of
individual logarithms.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the logarithm of a quotient, use the quotient rule of logarithms to write an equivalent difference of
  logarithms.
   1. Express the argument in lowest terms by factoring the numerator and denominator and canceling common

        terms.
   2. Write the equivalent expression by subtracting the logarithm of the denominator from the logarithm of the

        numerator.
   3. Check to see that each term is fully expanded. If not, apply the product rule for logarithms to expand completely.

  EXAMPLE 2

Using the Quotient Rule for Logarithms
Expand

     Solution
First we note that the quotient is factored and in lowest terms, so we apply the quotient rule.

Notice that the resulting terms are logarithms of products. To expand completely, we apply the product rule, noting that
the prime factors of the factor 15 are 3 and 5.

Analysis

There are exceptions to consider in this and later examples. First, because denominators must never be zero, this

expression is not defined for  and    Also, since the argument of a logarithm must be positive, we note as we

observe the expanded logarithm, that  and  Combining these conditions is beyond the

scope of this section, and we will not consider them here or in subsequent exercises.

       TRY IT #2 Expand

Using the Power Rule for Logarithms

We've explored the product rule and the quotient rule, but how can we take the logarithm of a power, such as One
method is as follows:

Notice that we used the product rule for logarithms to find a solution for the example above. By doing so, we have
610 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       derived the power rule for logarithms, which says that the log of a power is equal to the exponent times the log of the
       base. Keep in mind that, although the input to a logarithm may not be written as a power, we may be able to change it to
       a power. For example,

         The Power Rule for Logarithms
         The power rule for logarithms can be used to simplify the logarithm of a power by rewriting it as the product of the
         exponent times the logarithm of the base.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the logarithm of a power, use the power rule of logarithms to write an equivalent product of a factor
and a logarithm.

 1. Express the argument as a power, if needed.
 2. Write the equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent times the logarithm of the base.

EXAMPLE 3

Expanding a Logarithm with Powers                                                          and rewrite the equivalent
Expand

     Solution
The argument is already written as a power, so we identify the exponent, 5, and the base,
expression by multiplying the exponent times the logarithm of the base.

TRY IT #3 Expand

EXAMPLE 4

Rewriting an Expression as a Power before Using the Power Rule

Expand     using the power rule for logs.

     Solution
Expressing the argument as a power, we get

Next we identify the exponent, 2, and the base, 5, and rewrite the equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent
times the logarithm of the base.

TRY IT #4 Expand

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 611

EXAMPLE 5

Using the Power Rule in Reverse

Rewrite    using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm with a leading coefficient of 1.

Solution

Because the logarithm of a power is the product of the exponent times the logarithm of the base, it follows that the

product of a number and a logarithm can be written as a power. For the expression    we identify the factor, 4, as

the exponent and the argument, as the base, and rewrite the product as a logarithm of a power:

TRY IT #5 Rewrite                using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm with a leading coefficient of 1.

Expanding Logarithmic Expressions

Taken together, the product rule, quotient rule, and power rule are often called "laws of logs." Sometimes we apply
more than one rule in order to simplify an expression. For example:

We can use the power rule to expand logarithmic expressions involving negative and fractional exponents. Here is an
alternate proof of the quotient rule for logarithms using the fact that a reciprocal is a negative power:

We can also apply the product rule to express a sum or difference of logarithms as the logarithm of a product.

With practice, we can look at a logarithmic expression and expand it mentally, writing the final answer. Remember,
however, that we can only do this with products, quotients, powers, and roots--never with addition or subtraction inside
the argument of the logarithm.

EXAMPLE 6

Expanding Logarithms Using Product, Quotient, and Power Rules

Rewrite    as a sum or difference of logs.

     Solution
First, because we have a quotient of two expressions, we can use the quotient rule:

Then seeing the product in the first term, we use the product rule:
Finally, we use the power rule on the first term:

TRY IT #6 Expand
612 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

         EXAMPLE 7
       Using the Power Rule for Logarithms to Simplify the Logarithm of a Radical Expression
       Expand

            Solution

TRY IT #7 Expand

Q&A  Can we expand
     No. There is no way to expand the logarithm of a sum or difference inside the argument of the logarithm.

  EXAMPLE 8

Expanding Complex Logarithmic Expressions
Expand

     Solution
We can expand by applying the Product and Quotient Rules.

       TRY IT #8 Expand

Condensing Logarithmic Expressions

We can use the rules of logarithms we just learned to condense sums, differences, and products with the same base as a
single logarithm. It is important to remember that the logarithms must have the same base to be combined. We will
learn later how to change the base of any logarithm before condensing.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a sum, difference, or product of logarithms with the same base, write an equivalent expression as a
  single logarithm.
   1. Apply the power property first. Identify terms that are products of factors and a logarithm, and rewrite each as

        the logarithm of a power.
   2. Next apply the product property. Rewrite sums of logarithms as the logarithm of a product.
   3. Apply the quotient property last. Rewrite differences of logarithms as the logarithm of a quotient.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 613

EXAMPLE 9

Using the Product and Quotient Rules to Combine Logarithms

Write                            as a single logarithm.

     Solution
Using the product and quotient rules

This reduces our original expression to

Then, using the quotient rule

       TRY IT #9 Condense

  EXAMPLE 10
Condensing Complex Logarithmic Expressions
Condense

     Solution
We apply the power rule first:

Next we apply the product rule to the sum:

Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference:

       TRY IT #10 Rewrite                                        as a single logarithm.

  EXAMPLE 11                             as a single logarithm.
Rewriting as a Single Logarithm
Rewrite

     Solution
We apply the power rule first:

Next we rearrange and apply the product rule to the sum:
614 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference:

      TRY IT #11 Condense

EXAMPLE 12

Applying of the Laws of Logs               If the concentration of hydrogen ions in a liquid is doubled, what is the effect
Recall that, in chemistry,
on pH?

     Solution                                                                                        If the
Suppose is the original concentration of hydrogen ions, and is the original pH of the liquid. Then
concentration is doubled, the new concentration is Then the pH of the new liquid is

Using the product rule of logs

Since       the new pH is

When the concentration of hydrogen ions is doubled, the pH decreases by about 0.301.

      TRY IT #12 How does the pH change when the concentration of positive hydrogen ions is decreased by half?

Using the Change-of-Base Formula for Logarithms

Most calculators can evaluate only common and natural logs. In order to evaluate logarithms with a base other than 10
or we use the change-of-base formula to rewrite the logarithm as the quotient of logarithms of any other base; when
using a calculator, we would change them to common or natural logs.

To derive the change-of-base formula, we use the one-to-one property and power rule for logarithms.

Given any positive real numbers  and where                     and  we show

Let         By exponentiating both sides with base , we arrive at an exponential form, namely        It follows

that

For example, to evaluate         using a calculator, we must first rewrite the expression as a quotient of common or

natural logs. We will use the common log.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 615

The Change-of-Base Formula

The change-of-base formula can be used to evaluate a logarithm with any base.

For any positive real numbers    and where        and

It follows that the change-of-base formula can be used to rewrite a logarithm with any base as the quotient of
common or natural logs.

and

        ...

             HOW TO

Given a logarithm with the form  use the change-of-base formula to rewrite it as a quotient of logs with
any positive base where

1. Determine the new base remembering that the common log,             has base 10, and the natural log,

has base

2. Rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula

a. The numerator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base and argument

b. The denominator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base and argument

EXAMPLE 13

Changing Logarithmic Expressions to Expressions Involving Only Natural Logs

Change      to a quotient of natural logarithms.

     Solution                    as a quotient of natural logarithms, the new base,
Because we will be expressing

We rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula. The numerator of the quotient will be the natural log
with argument 3. The denominator of the quotient will be the natural log with argument 5.

TRY IT #13 Change                to a quotient of natural logarithms.

Q&A         Can we change common logarithms to natural logarithms?

            Yes. Remember that   means            So,
616 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 14

Using the Change-of-Base Formula with a Calculator

Evaluate    using the change-of-base formula with a calculator.

     Solution
According to the change-of-base formula, we can rewrite the log base 2 as a logarithm of any other base. Since our
calculators can evaluate the natural log, we might choose to use the natural logarithm, which is the log base

     TRY IT #14 Evaluate                       using the change-of-base formula.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with laws of logarithms.

     The Properties of Logarithms (http://openstax.org/l/proplog)
     Expand Logarithmic Expressions (http://openstax.org/l/expandlog)
     Evaluate a Natural Logarithmic Expression (http://openstax.org/l/evaluatelog)

        6.5 SECTION EXERCISES                        2. What does the change-of-base formula do? Why is
                                                         it useful when using a calculator?
Verbal

1. How does the power rule for logarithms help when
    solving logarithms with the form

Algebraic

For the following exercises, expand each logarithm as much as possible. Rewrite each expression as a sum, difference, or
product of logs.

3.                               4.                                       5.

6.                               7.                                       8.

For the following exercises, condense to a single logarithm if possible.

9.                               10.

11.                              12.                                      13.

14.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.5 · Logarithmic Properties 617

For the following exercises, use the properties of logarithms to expand each logarithm as much as possible. Rewrite
each expression as a sum, difference, or product of logs.

15.               16.                                                            17.

18.               19.

For the following exercises, condense each expression to a single logarithm using the properties of logarithms.

20.               21.                                                            22.

23.               24.

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression as an equivalent ratio of logs using the indicated base.

25.      to base  26.                                                   to base

For the following exercises, suppose  and                                        Use the change-of-base formula along with

properties of logarithms to rewrite each expression in terms of and Show the steps for solving.

27.               28.                                                            29.

Numeric

For the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to evaluate without using a calculator.

30.               31.                                                            32.

For the following exercises, use the change-of-base formula to evaluate each expression as a quotient of natural logs.
Use a calculator to approximate each to five decimal places.

33.               34.                                                            35.

36.               37.

Extensions                                                              39. Use the quotient rule for logarithms to find all
                                                                              values such that
38. Use the product rule for logarithms to find all                           Show the steps for solving.
      values such that
                                                        Show the steps
      for solving.
618 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

40. Can the power property of        41. Prove that                        42. Does

logarithms be derived from                                        for any        Verify the claim
                                                                                 algebraically.
the power property of                          positive integers  and

exponents using the

equation     If not,

explain why. If so, show the

derivation.

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use like bases to solve exponential equations.
           Use logarithms to solve exponential equations.
           Use the definition of a logarithm to solve logarithmic equations.
           Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve logarithmic equations.
           Solve applied problems involving exponential and logarithmic equations.

Figure 1 Wild rabbits in Australia. The rabbit population grew so quickly in Australia that the event became known as
the "rabbit plague." (credit: Richard Taylor, Flickr)

In 1859, an Australian landowner named Thomas Austin released 24 rabbits into the wild for hunting. Because Australia
had few predators and ample food, the rabbit population exploded. In fewer than ten years, the rabbit population
numbered in the millions.

Uncontrolled population growth, as in the wild rabbits in Australia, can be modeled with exponential functions.
Equations resulting from those exponential functions can be solved to analyze and make predictions about exponential
growth. In this section, we will learn techniques for solving exponential functions.

Using Like Bases to Solve Exponential Equations

The first technique involves two functions with like bases. Recall that the one-to-one property of exponential functions

tells us that, for any real numbers            and where                   if and only if

In other words, when an exponential equation has the same base on each side, the exponents must be equal. This also
applies when the exponents are algebraic expressions. Therefore, we can solve many exponential equations by using the
rules of exponents to rewrite each side as a power with the same base. Then, we use the fact that exponential functions
are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to one another, and solve for the unknown.

For example, consider the equation             To solve for we use the division property of exponents to rewrite

the right side so that both sides have the common base, Then we apply the one-to-one property of exponents by
setting the exponents equal to one another and solving for :

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 619

Using the One-to-One Property of Exponential Functions to Solve Exponential Equations

For any algebraic expressions       and any positive real number

...

     HOW TO

Given an exponential equation with the form         where and are algebraic expressions with an
unknown, solve for the unknown.

1. Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form

2. Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal.

3. Solve the resulting equation,    for the unknown.

  EXAMPLE 1

Solving an Exponential Equation with a Common Base
Solve

     Solution

TRY IT #1 Solve

Rewriting Equations So All Powers Have the Same Base

Sometimes the common base for an exponential equation is not explicitly shown. In these cases, we simply rewrite the
terms in the equation as powers with a common base, and solve using the one-to-one property.

For example, consider the equation  We can rewrite both sides of this equation as a power of          Then we

apply the rules of exponents, along with the one-to-one property, to solve for
620 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given an exponential equation with unlike bases, use the one-to-one property to solve it.

1. Rewrite each side in the equation as a power with a common base.

2. Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form

3. Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal.

4. Solve the resulting equation,               for the unknown.

  EXAMPLE 2

Solving Equations by Rewriting Them to Have a Common Base
Solve

     Solution

       TRY IT #2 Solve

  EXAMPLE 3
Solving Equations by Rewriting Roots with Fractional Exponents to Have a Common Base
Solve

     Solution

TRY IT #3 Solve

Q&A        Do all exponential equations have a solution? If not, how can we tell if there is a solution during the
           problem-solving process?

           No. Recall that the range of an exponential function is always positive. While solving the equation, we may
           obtain an expression that is undefined.

EXAMPLE 4

Solving an Equation with Positive and Negative Powers
Solve

     Solution                                             that will make the equation a true statement because any
This equation has no solution. There is no real value of
power of a positive number is positive.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 621

     Analysis
Figure 2 shows that the two graphs do not cross so the left side is never equal to the right side. Thus the equation has no
solution.

                                                     Figure 2

TRY IT #4 Solve

Solving Exponential Equations Using Logarithms

Sometimes the terms of an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with a common base. In these cases, we solve by

taking the logarithm of each side. Recall, since          is equivalent to  we may apply logarithms with the

same base on both sides of an exponential equation.

...

     HOW TO

Given an exponential equation in which a common base cannot be found, solve for the unknown.

 1. Apply the logarithm of both sides of the equation.
       a. If one of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the common logarithm.
       b. If none of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the natural logarithm.

 2. Use the rules of logarithms to solve for the unknown.

  EXAMPLE 5

Solving an Equation Containing Powers of Different Bases
Solve

     Solution
622 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

TRY IT #5 Solve

Q&A  Is there any way to solve
     Yes. The solution is

Equations Containing e

One common type of exponential equations are those with base This constant occurs again and again in nature, in
mathematics, in science, in engineering, and in finance. When we have an equation with a base on either side, we can
use the natural logarithm to solve it.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given an equation of the form                  solve for

1. Divide both sides of the equation by
2. Apply the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation.
3. Divide both sides of the equation by

  EXAMPLE 6

Solve an Equation of the Form y = Aekt
Solve

     Solution

     Analysis                                                    If we want a decimal approximation of the
Using laws of logs, we can also write this answer in the form
answer, we use a calculator.

TRY IT #6 Solve

Q&A  Does every equation of the form                           have a solution?

     No. There is a solution when              and when and are either both 0 or neither 0, and they have the

     same sign. An example of an equation with this form that has no solution is

  EXAMPLE 7

Solving an Equation That Can Be Simplified to the Form y = Aekt
Solve

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 623

Solution

       TRY IT #7 Solve

Extraneous Solutions

Sometimes the methods used to solve an equation introduce an extraneous solution, which is a solution that is correct
algebraically but does not satisfy the conditions of the original equation. One such situation arises in solving when the
logarithm is taken on both sides of the equation. In such cases, remember that the argument of the logarithm must be
positive. If the number we are evaluating in a logarithm function is negative, there is no output.

  EXAMPLE 8

Solving Exponential Functions in Quadratic Form
Solve

     Solution

Analysis

When we plan to use factoring to solve a problem, we always get zero on one side of the equation, because zero has the

unique property that when a product is zero, one or both of the factors must be zero. We reject the equation

because a positive number never equals a negative number. The solution  is not a real number, and in the real

number system this solution is rejected as an extraneous solution.

TRY IT #8 Solve

Q&A          Does every logarithmic equation have a solution?

             No. Keep in mind that we can only apply the logarithm to a positive number. Always check for extraneous
             solutions.

Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations

We have already seen that every logarithmic equation                is equivalent to the exponential equation  We

can use this fact, along with the rules of logarithms, to solve logarithmic equations where the argument is an algebraic

expression.

For example, consider the equation                    To solve this equation, we can use rules of logarithms

to rewrite the left side in compact form and then apply the definition of logs to solve for
624 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

         Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations
         For any algebraic expression and real numbers and where

         EXAMPLE 9
       Using Algebra to Solve a Logarithmic Equation
       Solve

            Solution

              TRY IT #9 Solve
         EXAMPLE 10
       Using Algebra Before and After Using the Definition of the Natural Logarithm
       Solve

            Solution

              TRY IT #10 Solve
         EXAMPLE 11
       Using a Graph to Understand the Solution to a Logarithmic Equation
       Solve

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 625

Figure 3 represents the graph of the equation. On the graph, the x-coordinate of the point at which the two graphs

intersect is close to 20. In other words        A calculator gives a better approximation:

        Figure 3 The graphs of            and   cross at the point     which is approximately (20.0855, 3).

        TRY IT #11  Use a graphing calculator to estimate the approximate solution to the logarithmic equation
                                   to 2 decimal places.

Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic Equations

As with exponential equations, we can use the one-to-one property to solve logarithmic equations. The one-to-one

property of logarithmic functions tells us that, for any real numbers        and any positive real number

where

For example,

So, if        then we can solve for and we get  To check, we can substitute                 into the original equation:

                    In other words, when a logarithmic equation has the same base on each side, the arguments

must be equal. This also applies when the arguments are algebraic expressions. Therefore, when given an equation with

logs of the same base on each side, we can use rules of logarithms to rewrite each side as a single logarithm. Then we

use the fact that logarithmic functions are one-to-one to set the arguments equal to one another and solve for the

unknown.

For example, consider the equation                                     To solve this equation, we can use the rules of

logarithms to rewrite the left side as a single logarithm, and then apply the one-to-one property to solve for

To check the result, substitute           into

Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic Equations
For any algebraic expressions and and any positive real number where
626 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Note, when solving an equation involving logarithms, always check to see if the answer is correct or if it is an
extraneous solution.

...

     HOW TO

Given an equation containing logarithms, solve it using the one-to-one property.
 1. Use the rules of logarithms to combine like terms, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form

2. Use the one-to-one property to set the arguments equal.

3. Solve the resulting equation,               for the unknown.

  EXAMPLE 12

Solving an Equation Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms
Solve

     Solution

     Analysis
There are two solutions: or The solution is negative, but it checks when substituted into the original equation
because the argument of the logarithm functions is still positive.

TRY IT #12 Solve

Solving Applied Problems Using Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

In previous sections, we learned the properties and rules for both exponential and logarithmic functions. We have seen
that any exponential function can be written as a logarithmic function and vice versa. We have used exponents to solve
logarithmic equations and logarithms to solve exponential equations. We are now ready to combine our skills to solve
equations that model real-world situations, whether the unknown is in an exponent or in the argument of a logarithm.

One such application is in science, in calculating the time it takes for half of the unstable material in a sample of a
radioactive substance to decay, called its half-life. Table 1 lists the half-life for several of the more common radioactive
substances.

                                 Substance     Use                Half-life

                                 gallium-67    nuclear medicine   80 hours

                                 cobalt-60     manufacturing      5.3 years

                                 technetium-99m nuclear medicine  6 hours

                                 Table 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 627

               Substance                Use                   Half-life

               americium-241            construction          432 years

               carbon-14                archeological dating  5,715 years

               uranium-235              atomic power          703,800,000 years

               Table 1

We can see how widely the half-lives for these substances vary. Knowing the half-life of a substance allows us to
calculate the amount remaining after a specified time. We can use the formula for radioactive decay:

where

·      is the amount initially present

· is the half-life of the substance

· is the time period over which the substance is studied

·      is the amount of the substance present after time

EXAMPLE 13

Using the Formula for Radioactive Decay to Find the Quantity of a Substance
How long will it take for ten percent of a 1000-gram sample of uranium-235 to decay?

     Solution

     Analysis
Ten percent of 1000 grams is 100 grams. If 100 grams decay, the amount of uranium-235 remaining is 900 grams.

   TRY IT #13  How long will it take before twenty percent of our 1000-gram sample of uranium-235 has
               decayed?

   MEDIA
   Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential and logarithmic equations.
   Solving Logarithmic Equations (http://openstax.org/l/solvelogeq)
628 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

     Solving Exponential Equations with Logarithms (http://openstax.org/l/solveexplog)

        6.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How can an exponential        2. When does an extraneous      3. When can the one-to-one
    equation be solved?              solution occur? How can an      property of logarithms be
                                     extraneous solution be          used to solve an equation?
                                     recognized?                     When can it not be used?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use like bases to solve the exponential equation.

4.                               5.                              6.

7.                               8.                              9.

10.

For the following exercises, use logarithms to solve.

11.                              12.                             13.

14.                              15.                             16.

17.                              18.                             19.

20.                              21.                             22.

23.                              24.                             25.

26.                              27.                             28.

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to rewrite the equation as an exponential equation.

29.                              30.

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to solve the equation.

31.                              32.                             33.

34.                              35.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 629

For the following exercises, use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve.

36.                             37.                                          38.

39.                             40.                                     41.

42.                                                     43.

For the following exercises, solve each equation for

44.                                  45.                                     46.
                                                                                     49.
47.                                  48.

50.

Graphical

For the following exercises, solve the equation for if there is a solution. Then graph both sides of the equation, and
observe the point of intersection (if it exists) to verify the solution.

51.                             52.                                     53.

54.                             55.                                     56.

57.                             58.                                     59.

60.                             61.                                     62.

63.                                  64.

For the following exercises, solve for the indicated value, and graph the situation showing the solution point.

65. An account with an initial  66. The formula for measuring           67. The population of a small
                                      sound intensity in decibels             town is modeled by the
     deposit of  earns                   is defined by the                    equation
                                      equation                                where is measured in
     annual interest,                                                         years. In approximately
                                                                 where        how many years will the
     compounded continuously.                                                 town's population reach

     How much will the account

     be worth after 20 years?        is the intensity of the

                                     sound in watts per square

                                     meter and                is

                                     the lowest level of sound

                                     that the average person

                                     can hear. How many

                                     decibels are emitted from a

                                     jet plane with a sound

                                     intensity of        watts

                                     per square meter?
630 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Technology

For the following exercises, solve each equation by rewriting the exponential expression using the indicated logarithm.
Then use a calculator to approximate the variable to 3 decimal places.

68.                    using         69.                  using the natural  70.              using the
      the common log.                      log
                                                                                  common log

71.               using the          72.                    using the
                                           natural log
     common log

For the following exercises, use a calculator to solve the equation. Unless indicated otherwise, round all answers to the
nearest ten-thousandth.

73.                                  74.                                     75.

76. Atmospheric pressure in pounds per square               77. The magnitude M of an earthquake is represented

     inch is represented by the formula                          by the equation              where is the

                       where is the number of miles              amount of energy released by the earthquake in

     above sea level. To the nearest foot, how high is           joules and       is the assigned minimal

     the peak of a mountain with an atmospheric                  measure released by an earthquake. To the

     pressure of       pounds per square inch? (Hint:            nearest hundredth, what would the magnitude be

     there are 5280 feet in a mile)                              of an earthquake releasing              joules of

                                                                 energy?

Extensions                           79. Recall the formula for              80. Recall the compound
                                                                                   interest formula
78. Use the definition of a                    continually compounding
      logarithm along with the                                                                              Use the
      one-to-one property of                   interest,    Use the
      logarithms to prove that                                                     definition of a logarithm
                                               definition of a logarithm           along with properties of
                                                                                   logarithms to solve the
                                               along with properties of            formula for time

                                               logarithms to solve the

                                               formula for time such

                                               that is equal to a single

                                               logarithm.

81. Newton's Law of Cooling states that the
      temperature of an object at any time t can be
      described by the equation
                                          where is the
      temperature of the surrounding environment,
      is the initial temperature of the object, and is the
      cooling rate. Use the definition of a logarithm
      along with properties of logarithms to solve the
      formula for time such that is equal to a single
      logarithm.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 631

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Model exponential growth and decay.
           Use Newton's Law of Cooling.
           Use logistic-growth models.
           Choose an appropriate model for data.
           Express an exponential model in base .

Figure 1 A nuclear research reactor inside the Neely Nuclear Research Center on the Georgia Institute of Technology
campus (credit: Georgia Tech Research Institute)

We have already explored some basic applications of exponential and logarithmic functions. In this section, we explore
some important applications in more depth, including radioactive isotopes and Newton's Law of Cooling.

Modeling Exponential Growth and Decay

In real-world applications, we need to model the behavior of a function. In mathematical modeling, we choose a familiar
general function with properties that suggest that it will model the real-world phenomenon we wish to analyze. In the
case of rapid growth, we may choose the exponential growth function:

where is equal to the value at time zero, is Euler's constant, and is a positive constant that determines the rate
(percentage) of growth. We may use the exponential growth function in applications involving doubling time, the time it
takes for a quantity to double. Such phenomena as wildlife populations, financial investments, biological samples, and
natural resources may exhibit growth based on a doubling time. In some applications, however, as we will see when we
discuss the logistic equation, the logistic model sometimes fits the data better than the exponential model.

On the other hand, if a quantity is falling rapidly toward zero, without ever reaching zero, then we should probably

choose the exponential decay model. Again, we have the form                 where is the starting value, and is

Euler's constant. Now is a negative constant that determines the rate of decay. We may use the exponential decay

model when we are calculating half-life, or the time it takes for a substance to exponentially decay to half of its original

quantity. We use half-life in applications involving radioactive isotopes.

In our choice of a function to serve as a mathematical model, we often use data points gathered by careful observation
and measurement to construct points on a graph and hope we can recognize the shape of the graph. Exponential
growth and decay graphs have a distinctive shape, as we can see in Figure 2 and Figure 3. It is important to remember
that, although parts of each of the two graphs seem to lie on the x-axis, they are really a tiny distance above the x-axis.
632 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                        Figure 2 A graph showing exponential growth. The equation is

                     Figure 3 A graph showing exponential decay. The equation is

Exponential growth and decay often involve very large or very small numbers. To describe these numbers, we often use

orders of magnitude. The order of magnitude is the power of ten, when the number is expressed in scientific notation,

with one digit to the left of the decimal. For example, the distance to the nearest star, Proxima Centauri, measured in

kilometers, is 40,113,497,200,000 kilometers. Expressed in scientific notation, this is               So, we could

describe this number as having order of magnitude

Characteristics of the Exponential Function,

An exponential function with the form         has the following characteristics:

· one-to-one function
· horizontal asymptote:

· domain:  

· range: 

· x intercept: none

· y-intercept:

· increasing if      (see Figure 4)

· decreasing if      (see Figure 4)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 633

    Figure 4 An exponential function models exponential growth when    and exponential decay when

EXAMPLE 1

Graphing Exponential Growth
A population of bacteria doubles every hour. If the culture started with 10 bacteria, graph the population as a function of
time.

    Solution

When an amount grows at a fixed percent per unit time, the growth is exponential. To find we use the fact that is

the amount at time zero, so  To find use the fact that after one hour  the population doubles from

to The formula is derived as follows

so            Thus the equation we want to graph is                    The graph is shown in Figure 5.

                                      Figure 5 The graph of

    Analysis

The population of bacteria after ten hours is 10,240. We could describe this amount is being of the order of magnitude

    The population of bacteria after twenty hours is 10,485,760 which is of the order of magnitude  so we could say
634 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       that the population has increased by three orders of magnitude in ten hours.

      Half-Life

       We now turn to exponential decay. One of the common terms associated with exponential decay, as stated above, is
       half-life, the length of time it takes an exponentially decaying quantity to decrease to half its original amount. Every
       radioactive isotope has a half-life, and the process describing the exponential decay of an isotope is called radioactive
       decay.
       To find the half-life of a function describing exponential decay, solve the following equation:

We find that the half-life depends only on the constant  and not on the starting quantity
The formula is derived as follows

Since the time, is positive, must, as expected, be negative. This gives us the half-life formula

...

     HOW TO

Given the half-life, find the decay rate.

1. Write

2. Replace by  and replace by the given half-life.

3. Solve to find Express as an exact value (do not round).

Note: It is also possible to find the decay rate using

  EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Function that Describes Radioactive Decay
The half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years. Express the amount of carbon-14 remaining as a function of time,

     Solution
This formula is derived as follows.

The function that describes this continuous decay is        We observe that the coefficient of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 635

              is negative, as expected in the case of exponential decay.

   TRY IT #1  The half-life of plutonium-244 is 80,000,000 years. Find a function that gives the amount of
              plutonium-244 remaining as a function of time, measured in years.

Radiocarbon Dating

The formula for radioactive decay is important in radiocarbon dating, which is used to calculate the approximate date a
plant or animal died. Radiocarbon dating was discovered in 1949 by Willard Libby, who won a Nobel Prize for his
discovery. It compares the difference between the ratio of two isotopes of carbon in an organic artifact or fossil to the
ratio of those two isotopes in the air. It is believed to be accurate to within about 1% error for plants or animals that died
within the last 60,000 years.

Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon that has a half-life of 5,730 years. It occurs in small quantities in the carbon
dioxide in the air we breathe. Most of the carbon on Earth is carbon-12, which has an atomic weight of 12 and is not
radioactive. Scientists have determined the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the air for the last 60,000 years, using tree
rings and other organic samples of known dates--although the ratio has changed slightly over the centuries.

As long as a plant or animal is alive, the ratio of the two isotopes of carbon in its body is close to the ratio in the
atmosphere. When it dies, the carbon-14 in its body decays and is not replaced. By comparing the ratio of carbon-14 to
carbon-12 in a decaying sample to the known ratio in the atmosphere, the date the plant or animal died can be
approximated.

Since the half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years, the formula for the amount of carbon-14 remaining after years is

where

· is the amount of carbon-14 remaining

·      is the amount of carbon-14 when the plant or animal began decaying.

This formula is derived as follows:

To find the age of an object, we solve this equation for

Out of necessity, we neglect here the many details that a scientist takes into consideration when doing carbon-14 dating,

and we only look at the basic formula. The ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the atmosphere is approximately

0.0000000001%. Let be the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the organic artifact or fossil to be dated, determined by a

method called liquid scintillation. From the equation     we know the ratio of the percentage of

carbon-14 in the object we are dating to the initial amount of carbon-14 in the object when it was formed is

              We solve this equation for to get
636 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...

     HOW TO

Given the percentage of carbon-14 in an object, determine its age.

1. Express the given percentage of carbon-14 as an equivalent decimal,

2. Substitute for k in the equation            and solve for the age,

EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Age of a Bone
A bone fragment is found that contains 20% of its original carbon-14. To the nearest year, how old is the bone?

     Solution  for in the equation and solve for
We substitute

The bone fragment is about 13,301 years old.

     Analysis
The instruments that measure the percentage of carbon-14 are extremely sensitive and, as we mention above, a scientist
will need to do much more work than we did in order to be satisfied. Even so, carbon dating is only accurate to about 1%,
so this age should be given as

TRY IT #2      Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. If we begin with 200 mg of cesium-137, will it take
               more or less than 230 years until only 1 milligram remains?

Calculating Doubling Time

For decaying quantities, we determined how long it took for half of a substance to decay. For growing quantities, we
might want to find out how long it takes for a quantity to double. As we mentioned above, the time it takes for a quantity
to double is called the doubling time.

Given the basic exponential growth equation    doubling time can be found by solving for when the original
quantity has doubled, that is, by solving

The formula is derived as follows:

Thus the doubling time is

  EXAMPLE 4
Finding a Function That Describes Exponential Growth
According to Moore's Law, the doubling time for the number of transistors that can be put on a computer chip is
approximately two years. Give a function that describes this behavior.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 637

     Solution
The formula is derived as follows:

The function is

TRY IT #3        Recent data suggests that, as of 2013, the rate of growth predicted by Moore's Law no longer
                 holds. Growth has slowed to a doubling time of approximately three years. Find the new function
                 that takes that longer doubling time into account.

Using Newton's Law of Cooling

Exponential decay can also be applied to temperature. When a hot object is left in surrounding air that is at a lower
temperature, the object's temperature will decrease exponentially, leveling off as it approaches the surrounding air
temperature. On a graph of the temperature function, the leveling off will correspond to a horizontal asymptote at the
temperature of the surrounding air. Unless the room temperature is zero, this will correspond to a vertical shift of the
generic exponential decay function. This translation leads to Newton's Law of Cooling, the scientific formula for
temperature as a function of time as an object's temperature is equalized with the ambient temperature

This formula is derived as follows:

Newton's Law of Cooling
The temperature of an object, in surrounding air with temperature will behave according to the formula

where

  · is time
  · is the difference between the initial temperature of the object and the surroundings
  · is a constant, the continuous rate of cooling of the object

...

     HOW TO

Given a set of conditions, apply Newton's Law of Cooling.

1. Set equal to the y-coordinate of the horizontal asymptote (usually the ambient temperature).

2. Substitute the given values into the continuous growth formula  to find the parameters and

3. Substitute in the desired time to find the temperature or the desired temperature to find the time.
638 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 5

Using Newton's Law of Cooling

A cheesecake is taken out of the oven with an ideal internal temperature of      and is placed into a  refrigerator.
                                                                                                           before we
After 10 minutes, the cheesecake has cooled to    If we must wait until the cheesecake has cooled to

eat it, how long will we have to wait?

     Solution
Because the surrounding air temperature in the refrigerator is 35 degrees, the cheesecake's temperature will decay
exponentially toward 35, following the equation

We know the initial temperature was 165, so

We were given another data point,               which we can use to solve for

This gives us the equation for the cooling of the cheesecake:
Now we can solve for the time it will take for the temperature to cool to 70 degrees.

It will take about 107 minutes, or one hour and 47 minutes, for the cheesecake to cool to

TRY IT #4  A pitcher of water at 40 degrees Fahrenheit is placed into a 70 degree room. One hour later, the
           temperature has risen to 45 degrees. How long will it take for the temperature to rise to 60
           degrees?

Using Logistic Growth Models

Exponential growth cannot continue forever. Exponential models, while they may be useful in the short term, tend to fall
apart the longer they continue. Consider an aspiring writer who writes a single line on day one and plans to double the
number of lines she writes each day for a month. By the end of the month, she must write over 17 billion lines, or one-
half-billion pages. It is impractical, if not impossible, for anyone to write that much in such a short period of time.
Eventually, an exponential model must begin to approach some limiting value, and then the growth is forced to slow. For
this reason, it is often better to use a model with an upper bound instead of an exponential growth model, though the
exponential growth model is still useful over a short term, before approaching the limiting value.

The logistic growth model is approximately exponential at first, but it has a reduced rate of growth as the output

approaches the model's upper bound, called the carrying capacity. For constants        and the logistic growth of a

population over time is represented by the model

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 639

The graph in Figure 6 shows how the growth rate changes over time. The graph increases from left to right, but the
growth rate only increases until it reaches its point of maximum growth rate, at which point the rate of increase
decreases.

                                                       Figure 6

Logistic Growth
The logistic growth model is

where

    ·  is the initial value

    · is the carrying capacity, or limiting value
    · is a constant determined by the rate of growth.

EXAMPLE 6

Using the Logistic-Growth Model
An influenza epidemic spreads through a population rapidly, at a rate that depends on two factors: The more people
who have the flu, the more rapidly it spreads, and also the more uninfected people there are, the more rapidly it
spreads. These two factors make the logistic model a good one to study the spread of communicable diseases. And,
clearly, there is a maximum value for the number of people infected: the entire population.

For example, at time  there is one person in a community of 1,000 people who has the flu. So, in that community, at

most 1,000 people can have the flu. Researchers find that for this particular strain of the flu, the logistic growth constant

is         Estimate the number of people in this community who will have had this flu after ten days. Predict how

many people in this community will have had this flu after a long period of time has passed.

     Solution
We substitute the given data into the logistic growth model

Because at most 1,000 people, the entire population of the community, can get the flu, we know the limiting value is

       To find we use the formula that the number of cases at time  is  from which it follows that

       This model predicts that, after ten days, the number of people who have had the flu is
                                       Because the actual number must be a whole number (a person has either had the flu or
640 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       not) we round to 294. In the long term, the number of people who will contract the flu is the limiting value,
            Analysis

       Remember that, because we are dealing with a virus, we cannot predict with certainty the number of people infected.
       The model only approximates the number of people infected and will not give us exact or actual values.
       The graph in Figure 7 gives a good picture of how this model fits the data.

                                                            Figure 7 The graph of

              TRY IT #5 Using the model in Example 6, estimate the number of cases of flu on day 15.

     Choosing an Appropriate Model for Data

       Now that we have discussed various mathematical models, we need to learn how to choose the appropriate model for
       the raw data we have. Many factors influence the choice of a mathematical model, among which are experience,
       scientific laws, and patterns in the data itself. Not all data can be described by elementary functions. Sometimes, a
       function is chosen that approximates the data over a given interval. For instance, suppose data were gathered on the
       number of homes bought in the United States from the years 1960 to 2013. After plotting these data in a scatter plot, we
       notice that the shape of the data from the years 2000 to 2013 follow a logarithmic curve. We could restrict the interval
       from 2000 to 2010, apply regression analysis using a logarithmic model, and use it to predict the number of home buyers
       for the year 2015.
       Three kinds of functions that are often useful in mathematical models are linear functions, exponential functions, and
       logarithmic functions. If the data lies on a straight line, or seems to lie approximately along a straight line, a linear model
       may be best. If the data is non-linear, we often consider an exponential or logarithmic model, though other models, such
       as quadratic models, may also be considered.
       In choosing between an exponential model and a logarithmic model, we look at the way the data curves. This is called
       the concavity. If we draw a line between two data points, and all (or most) of the data between those two points lies
       above that line, we say the curve is concave down. We can think of it as a bowl that bends downward and therefore
       cannot hold water. If all (or most) of the data between those two points lies below the line, we say the curve is concave
       up. In this case, we can think of a bowl that bends upward and can therefore hold water. An exponential curve, whether
       rising or falling, whether representing growth or decay, is always concave up away from its horizontal asymptote. A
       logarithmic curve is always concave away from its vertical asymptote. In the case of positive data, which is the most
       common case, an exponential curve is always concave up, and a logarithmic curve always concave down.
       A logistic curve changes concavity. It starts out concave up and then changes to concave down beyond a certain point,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 641

called a point of inflection.
After using the graph to help us choose a type of function to use as a model, we substitute points, and solve to find the
parameters. We reduce round-off error by choosing points as far apart as possible.

  EXAMPLE 7

Choosing a Mathematical Model
Does a linear, exponential, logarithmic, or logistic model best fit the values listed in Table 1? Find the model, and use a
graph to check your choice.

                       1        2  3  4           5                6  7      8  9

                       0 1.386 2.197 2.773 3.219 3.584 3.892 4.159 4.394

                       Table 1

     Solution
First, plot the data on a graph as in Figure 8. For the purpose of graphing, round the data to two decimal places.

                                                  Figure 8

Clearly, the points do not lie on a straight line, so we reject a linear model. If we draw a line between any two of the

points, most or all of the points between those two points lie above the line, so the graph is concave down, suggesting a

logarithmic model. We can try      Plugging in the first point,       gives     We reject the case that

(if it were, all outputs would be 0), so we know             Thus     and       Next we can use the point

         to solve for

Because                an appropriate model for the data is

To check the accuracy of the model, we graph the function together with the given points as in Figure 9.
642 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                               Figure 9 The graph of

We can conclude that the model is a good fit to the data.

Compare Figure 9 to the graph of               shown in Figure 10.

                                               Figure 10 The graph of

The graphs appear to be identical when         A quick check confirms this conclusion:  for

However, if  the graph of                      includes a "extra" branch, as shown in Figure 11. This occurs because, while

             cannot have negative values in the domain (as such values would force the argument to be negative), the

function     can have negative domain values.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 643

                                                     Figure 11

TRY IT #6            Does a linear, exponential, or logarithmic model best fit the data in Table 2? Find the model.

                              1    2  3              4          5  6                  7  8  9

                          3.297 5.437 8.963 14.778 24.365 40.172 66.231 109.196 180.034

                     Table 2

Expressing an Exponential Model in Base

While powers and logarithms of any base can be used in modeling, the two most common bases are and In science
and mathematics, the base is often preferred. We can use laws of exponents and laws of logarithms to change any
base to base

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a model with the form           change it to the form

1. Rewrite           as

2. Use the power rule of logarithms to rewrite y as

3. Note that         and           in the equation

EXAMPLE 8

Changing to base e                 so that this same function is written in the form
Change the function

     Solution
The formula is derived as follows

TRY IT #7 Change the function                        to one having as the base.

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential and logarithmic models.
644 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Logarithm Application - pH (http://openstax.org/l/logph)
Exponential Model - Age Using Half-Life (http://openstax.org/l/expmodelhalf)
Newton's Law of Cooling (http://openstax.org/l/newtoncooling)
Exponential Growth Given Doubling Time (http://openstax.org/l/expgrowthdbl)
Exponential Growth - Find Initial Amount Given Doubling Time (http://openstax.org/l/initialdouble)

        6.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. With what kind of                        2. What is carbon dating? Why    3. With what kind of
    exponential model would                     does it work? Give an            exponential model would
    half-life be associated? What               example in which carbon          doubling time be
    role does half-life play in                 dating would be useful.          associated? What role does
    these models?                                                                doubling time play in these
                                                                                 models?

4. Define Newton's Law of                   5. What is an order of
    Cooling. Then name at least                 magnitude? Why are orders
    three real-world situations                 of magnitude useful? Give
    where Newton's Law of                       an example to explain.
    Cooling would be applied.

Numeric

6. The temperature of an
    object in degrees Fahrenheit
    after t minutes is
    represented by the equation
                                        To
    the nearest degree, what is
    the temperature of the
    object after one and a half
    hours?

For the following exercises, use the logistic growth model

7. Find and interpret                       8. Find and interpret            9. Find the carrying capacity.
    Round to the nearest tenth.                 Round to the nearest tenth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 645

10. Graph the model.  11. Determine whether the        12. Rewrite
                            data from the table could        as an exponential equation
                            best be represented as a         with base to five decimal
                            function that is linear,         places.
                            exponential, or
                            logarithmic. Then write a
                            formula for a model that
                            represents the data.

                      -2 0.694

                      -1 0.833

                      0  1

                      1 1.2

                      2 1.44

                      3 1.728

                      4 2.074

                      5 2.488
646 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Technology

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter
plots. Determine whether the data from the table could represent a function that is linear, exponential, or logarithmic.

13.                              14.                      15.

     1  2                                      1  2.4          4 9.429
                                                               5 9.972
     2 4.079                                   2 2.88          6 10.415
                                                               7 10.79
     3 5.296                                   3 3.456         8 11.115
                                                               9 11.401
     4 6.159                                   4 4.147         10 11.657
                                                               11 11.889
     5 6.828                                   5 4.977         12 12.101
                                                               13 12.295
     6 7.375                                   6 5.972

     7 7.838                                   7 7.166

     8 8.238                                   8  8.6

     9 8.592                                   9 10.32

     10 8.908                                  10 12.383

16.

        1.25 5.75
        2.25 8.75
        3.56 12.68
         4.2 14.6
        5.65 18.95
        6.75 22.25
        7.25 23.75
         8.6 27.8
        9.25 29.75
        10.5 33.5

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 647

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator and this scenario: the population of a fish farm in years is
modeled by the equation

17. Graph the function.              18. What is the initial            19. To the nearest tenth, what
                                           population of fish?                is the doubling time for the
                                                                              fish population?

20. To the nearest whole             21. To the nearest tenth, how      22. What is the carrying
      number, what will the fish           long will it take for the          capacity for the fish
      population be after                  population to reach                population? Justify your
      years?                                                                  answer using the graph of

Extensions                           24. The formula for an             25. Recall the formula for
                                           increasing population is           calculating the magnitude
23. A substance has a half-life            given by                           of an earthquake,
      of 2.045 minutes. If the             where is the initial
      initial amount of the                population and                                                Show
      substance was 132.8                  Derive a general formula
      grams, how many half-lives           for the time t it takes for        each step for solving this
      will have passed before the          the population to increase         equation algebraically for
      substance decays to 8.3              by a factor of M.                  the seismic moment
      grams? What is the total
      time of decay?

26. What is the y-intercept of       27. Prove that             for

the logistic growth model            positive

Show the

steps for calculation. What
does this point tell us
about the population?

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes 125 milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by
about 30% each hour.

28. To the nearest hour, what        29. Write an exponential           30. Using the model found in
      is the half-life of the drug?        model representing the             the previous exercise, find
                                           amount of the drug                          and interpret the
                                           remaining in the patient's         result. Round to the
                                           system after hours. Then           nearest hundredth.
                                           use the formula to find the
                                           amount of the drug that
                                           would remain in the
                                           patient's system after 3
                                           hours. Round to the
                                           nearest milligram.
648 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A tumor is injected with    grams of Iodine-125, which has a decay rate of
         per day.

31. To the nearest day, how          32. Write an exponential               33. A scientist begins with
      long will it take for half of        model representing the                 grams of a radioactive
      the Iodine-125 to decay?             amount of Iodine-125                   substance. After
                                           remaining in the tumor                 minutes, the sample has
                                           after days. Then use the               decayed to grams.
                                           formula to find the amount             Rounding to five decimal
                                           of Iodine-125 that would               places, write an
                                           remain in the tumor after              exponential equation
                                           60 days. Round to the                  representing this situation.
                                           nearest tenth of a gram.               To the nearest minute,
                                                                                  what is the half-life of this
                                                                                  substance?

34. The half-life of Radium-226      35. The half-life of Erbium-165        36. A wooden artifact from an

is       years. What is the                    is       hours. What is the  archeological dig contains

annual decay rate? Express                     hourly decay rate? Express   60 percent of the

the decimal result to four                     the decimal result to four   carbon-14 that is present in

decimal places and the                         decimal places and the       living trees. To the nearest

percentage to two decimal                      percentage to two decimal    year, about how many

places.                                        places.                      years old is the artifact?

                                                                            (The half-life of carbon-14

                                                                            is   years.)

37. A research student is

working with a culture of

bacteria that doubles in

size every twenty minutes.

The initial population count

was      bacteria.

Rounding to five decimal

places, write an

exponential equation

representing this situation.

To the nearest whole

number, what is the

population size after

hours?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A biologist recorded a count of  bacteria present in a culture after 5
minutes and 1000 bacteria present after 20 minutes.

38. To the nearest whole             39. Rounding to six decimal
      number, what was the                 places, write an
      initial population in the            exponential equation
      culture?                             representing this situation.
                                           To the nearest minute, how
                                           long did it take the
                                           population to double?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.7 · Exponential and Logarithmic Models 649

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A pot of warm soup with an internal temperature of          Fahrenheit was

taken off the stove to cool in a   room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of the soup was

40. Use Newton's Law of            41. To the nearest minute, how       42. To the nearest degree,
      Cooling to write a formula         long will it take the soup to        what will the temperature
      that models this situation.        cool to                              be after and a half hours?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A turkey is taken out of the oven with an internal temperature of

and is allowed to cool in a        room. After half an hour, the internal temperature of the turkey is

43. Write a formula that           44. To the nearest degree,           45. To the nearest minute, how
      models this situation.             what will the temperature            long will it take the turkey
                                         be after 50 minutes?                 to cool to

For the following exercises, find the value of the number shown on each logarithmic scale. Round all answers to the
nearest thousandth.

46.                                                        47.

48. Plot each set of approximate values of intensity of    49. Recall the formula for calculating the magnitude

     sounds on a logarithmic scale: Whisper:                    of an earthquake,                       One

       Vacuum:                     Jet:                         earthquake has magnitude on the MMS scale.
                                                                If a second earthquake has times as much
                                                                energy as the first, find the magnitude of the
                                                                second quake. Round to the nearest hundredth.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation                      models the number of people in a town

who have heard a rumor after t days.                                    52. As increases without
                                                                              bound, what value does
50. How many people started        51. To the nearest whole                           approach? Interpret
      the rumor?                         number, how many people              your answer.
                                         will have heard the rumor
                                         after 3 days?

For the following exercise, choose the correct answer choice.

53. A doctor injects a patient with 13 milligrams of
      radioactive dye that decays exponentially. After 12
      minutes, there are 4.75 milligrams of dye
      remaining in the patient's system. Which is an
      appropriate model for this situation?

                              
     
     
650 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Build an exponential model from data.
           Build a logarithmic model from data.
           Build a logistic model from data.

In previous sections of this chapter, we were either given a function explicitly to graph or evaluate, or we were given a
set of points that were guaranteed to lie on the curve. Then we used algebra to find the equation that fit the points
exactly. In this section, we use a modeling technique called regression analysis to find a curve that models data collected
from real-world observations. With regression analysis, we don't expect all the points to lie perfectly on the curve. The
idea is to find a model that best fits the data. Then we use the model to make predictions about future events.

Do not be confused by the word model. In mathematics, we often use the terms function, equation, and model
interchangeably, even though they each have their own formal definition. The term model is typically used to indicate
that the equation or function approximates a real-world situation.

We will concentrate on three types of regression models in this section: exponential, logarithmic, and logistic. Having
already worked with each of these functions gives us an advantage. Knowing their formal definitions, the behavior of
their graphs, and some of their real-world applications gives us the opportunity to deepen our understanding. As each
regression model is presented, key features and definitions of its associated function are included for review. Take a
moment to rethink each of these functions, reflect on the work we've done so far, and then explore the ways regression
is used to model real-world phenomena.

Building an Exponential Model from Data

As we've learned, there are a multitude of situations that can be modeled by exponential functions, such as investment
growth, radioactive decay, atmospheric pressure changes, and temperatures of a cooling object. What do these
phenomena have in common? For one thing, all the models either increase or decrease as time moves forward. But
that's not the whole story. It's the way data increase or decrease that helps us determine whether it is best modeled by
an exponential equation. Knowing the behavior of exponential functions in general allows us to recognize when to use
exponential regression, so let's review exponential growth and decay.

Recall that exponential functions have the form    or           When performing regression analysis, we use the

form most commonly used on graphing utilities,            Take a moment to reflect on the characteristics we've already

learned about the exponential function           (assume

· must be greater than zero and not equal to one.

· The initial value of the model is

 If         the function models exponential growth. As increases, the outputs of the model increase slowly at

first, but then increase more and more rapidly, without bound.

 If         the function models exponential decay. As increases, the outputs for the model decrease rapidly

at first and then level off to become asymptotic to the x-axis. In other words, the outputs never become equal to

or less than zero.

As part of the results, your calculator will display a number known as the correlation coefficient, labeled by the variable
or (You may have to change the calculator's settings for these to be shown.) The values are an indication of the
"goodness of fit" of the regression equation to the data. We more commonly use the value of instead of but the
closer either value is to 1, the better the regression equation approximates the data.

Exponential Regression

Exponential regression is used to model situations in which growth begins slowly and then accelerates rapidly
without bound, or where decay begins rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero. We use the
command "ExpReg" on a graphing utility to fit an exponential function to a set of data points. This returns an
equation of the form,

Note that:

· must be non-negative.

· when      we have an exponential growth model.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 651

· when  we have an exponential decay model.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a set of data, perform exponential regression using a graphing utility.

 1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data.
       a. Clear any existing data from the lists.
       b. List the input values in the L1 column.
        c. List the output values in the L2 column.

 2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature.
       a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data.
       b. Verify the data follow an exponential pattern.

 3. Find the equation that models the data.
       a. Select "ExpReg" from the STAT then CALC menu.
       b. Use the values returned for a and b to record the model,

 4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data.

  EXAMPLE 1

Using Exponential Regression to Fit a Model to Data
In 2007, a university study was published investigating the crash risk of alcohol impaired driving. Data from 2,871
crashes were used to measure the association of a person's blood alcohol level (BAC) with the risk of being in an
accident. Table 1 shows results from the study 9 . The relative risk is a measure of how many times more likely a person is
to crash. So, for example, a person with a BAC of 0.09 is 3.54 times as likely to crash as a person who has not been
drinking alcohol.

                      BAC  0 0.01 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09

        Relative Risk of Crashing 1 1.03 1.06 1.38 2.09 3.54

                      BAC  0.11 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21

        Relative Risk of Crashing 6.41 12.6 22.1 39.05 65.32 99.78

        Table 1

a. Let represent the BAC level, and let represent the corresponding relative risk. Use exponential regression to fit a

model to these data.

b. After 6 drinks, a person weighing 160 pounds will have a BAC of about  How many times more likely is a person

with this weight to crash if they drive after having a 6-pack of beer? Round to the nearest hundredth.

    Solution
a. Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the BAC values in L1 and the relative risk values in L2.

     Then use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows the exponential pattern shown in Figure 1:

9 Source: Indiana University Center for Studies of Law in Action, 2007
652 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                                                           Figure 1
Use the "ExpReg" command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the exponential model,

Converting from scientific notation, we have:

Notice that                      which indicates the model is a good fit to the data. To see this, graph the model in the same

window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit as shown in Figure 2:

                                                                                Figure 2  Substitute  for in the model and solve for
b. Use the model to estimate the risk associated with a BAC of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 653

If a 160-pound person drives after having 6 drinks, they are about 26.35 times more likely to crash than if driving
while sober.

TRY IT #1    Table 2 shows a recent graduate's credit card balance each month after graduation.

                        Month  1            2   3               4  5  6                               7               8

             Debt ($) 620.00 761.88 899.80 1039.93 1270.63 1589.04 1851.31 2154.92

              Table 2

              Use exponential regression to fit a model to these data.
              If spending continues at this rate, what will the graduate's credit card debt be one year after

             graduating?

Q&A          Is it reasonable to assume that an exponential regression model will represent a situation
             indefinitely?

             No. Remember that models are formed by real-world data gathered for regression. It is usually
             reasonable to make estimates within the interval of original observation (interpolation). However, when a
             model is used to make predictions, it is important to use reasoning skills to determine whether the model
             makes sense for inputs far beyond the original observation interval (extrapolation).

Building a Logarithmic Model from Data

Just as with exponential functions, there are many real-world applications for logarithmic functions: intensity of sound,
pH levels of solutions, yields of chemical reactions, production of goods, and growth of infants. As with exponential
models, data modeled by logarithmic functions are either always increasing or always decreasing as time moves
forward. Again, it is the way they increase or decrease that helps us determine whether a logarithmic model is best.

Recall that logarithmic functions increase or decrease rapidly at first, but then steadily slow as time moves on. By

reflecting on the characteristics we've already learned about this function, we can better analyze real world situations

that reflect this type of growth or decay. When performing logarithmic regression analysis, we use the form of the

logarithmic function most commonly used on graphing utilities,     For this function

· All input values, must be greater than zero.

· The point  is on the graph of the model.

· If       the model is increasing. Growth increases rapidly at first and then steadily slows over time.

· If       the model is decreasing. Decay occurs rapidly at first and then steadily slows over time.

Logarithmic Regression

Logarithmic regression is used to model situations where growth or decay accelerates rapidly at first and then slows
over time. We use the command "LnReg" on a graphing utility to fit a logarithmic function to a set of data points. This
returns an equation of the form,

Note that

· all input values, must be non-negative.

· when       the model is increasing.

· when       the model is decreasing.
654 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Given a set of data, perform logarithmic regression using a graphing utility.
          1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data.

                 a. Clear any existing data from the lists.
                 b. List the input values in the L1 column.
                 c. List the output values in the L2 column.
          2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature.
                 a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data.
                 b. Verify the data follow a logarithmic pattern.
          3. Find the equation that models the data.
                 a. Select "LnReg" from the STAT then CALC menu.
                b. Use the values returned for a and b to record the model,
          4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data.

  EXAMPLE 2

Using Logarithmic Regression to Fit a Model to Data
Due to advances in medicine and higher standards of living, life expectancy has been increasing in most developed
countries since the beginning of the 20th century.
Table 3 shows the average life expectancies, in years, of Americans from 1900-201010 .

         Year                                               1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950

Life Expectancy(Years) 47.3 50.0 54.1 59.7 62.9 68.2

         Year                                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Life Expectancy(Years) 69.7 70.8 73.7 75.4 76.8 78.7

Table 3

 Let represent time in decades starting with                for the year 1900,  for the year 1910, and so on. Let

represent the corresponding life expectancy. Use logarithmic regression to fit a model to these data.

 Use the model to predict the average American life expectancy for the year 2030.

10 Source: Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                     6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 655

     Solution

 Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 1-12 in L1 and the

corresponding life expectancy in L2. Then use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a
logarithmic pattern as shown in Figure 3:

                                                                            Figure 3
Use the "LnReg" command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the logarithmic model,
Next, graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit as shown in Figure 4:

                                                                            Figure 4  for the in the model and solve

 To predict the life expectancy of an American in the year 2030, substitute

for

If life expectancy continues to increase at this pace, the average life expectancy of an American will be 79.1 by the
year 2030.
656 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

   TRY IT #2         Sales of a video game released in the year 2000 took off at first, but then steadily slowed as time
                     moved on. Table 4 shows the number of games sold, in thousands, from the years 2000-2010.

                                               Year        2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

                                 Number Sold (thousands) 142 149 154 155 159 161

                                               Year        2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                    -

                                 Number Sold (thousands) 163 164 164 166 167                           -

                                 Table 4

                      Let represent time in years starting with  for the year 2000. Let represent the

                     number of games sold in thousands. Use logarithmic regression to fit a model to these data.

                      If games continue to sell at this rate, how many games will sell in 2015? Round to the nearest

                     thousand.

Building a Logistic Model from Data

Like exponential and logarithmic growth, logistic growth increases over time. One of the most notable differences with
logistic growth models is that, at a certain point, growth steadily slows and the function approaches an upper bound, or
limiting value. Because of this, logistic regression is best for modeling phenomena where there are limits in expansion,
such as availability of living space or nutrients.

It is worth pointing out that logistic functions actually model resource-limited exponential growth. There are many
examples of this type of growth in real-world situations, including population growth and spread of disease, rumors, and
even stains in fabric. When performing logistic regression analysis, we use the form most commonly used on graphing
utilities:

Recall that:

·  is the initial value of the model.

· when        the model increases rapidly at first until it reaches its point of maximum growth rate,     At

    that point, growth steadily slows and the function becomes asymptotic to the upper bound
· is the limiting value, sometimes called the carrying capacity, of the model.

Logistic Regression

Logistic regression is used to model situations where growth accelerates rapidly at first and then steadily slows to an
upper limit. We use the command "Logistic" on a graphing utility to fit a logistic function to a set of data points. This
returns an equation of the form

Note that                                                  as time increases.

  · The initial value of the model is
  · Output values for the model grow closer and closer to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 657

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a set of data, perform logistic regression using a graphing utility.
 1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data.

       a. Clear any existing data from the lists.
       b. List the input values in the L1 column.
        c. List the output values in the L2 column.
 2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature.
       a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data.
       b. Verify the data follow a logistic pattern.
 3. Find the equation that models the data.
       a. Select "Logistic" from the STAT then CALC menu.
       b. Use the values returned for and to record the model,

 4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data.

  EXAMPLE 3

Using Logistic Regression to Fit a Model to Data
Mobile telephone service has increased rapidly in America since the mid 1990s. Today, almost all residents have cellular
service. Table 5 shows the percentage of Americans with cellular service between the years 1995 and 2012 11 .

Year Americans with Cellular Service (%) Year Americans with Cellular Service (%)

1995                             12.69      2004                                        62.852

1996                             16.35      2005                                        68.63

1997                             20.29      2006                                        76.64

1998                             25.08      2007                                        82.47

1999                             30.81      2008                                        85.68

2000                             38.75      2009                                        89.14

2001                             45.00      2010                                        91.86

2002                             49.16      2011                                        95.28

2003                             55.15      2012                                        98.17

Table 5

 Let represent time in years starting with  for the year 1995. Let represent the corresponding percentage of

residents with cellular service. Use logistic regression to fit a model to these data.

 Use the model to calculate the percentage of Americans with cell service in the year 2013. Round to the nearest

tenth of a percent.

 Discuss the value returned for the upper limit, What does this tell you about the model? What would the limiting

11 Source: The World Bank, 2013
658 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       value be if the model were exact?
            Solution

     Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 0-15 in L1 and the corresponding

       percentage in L2. Then use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a logistic pattern as shown in
       Figure 5:

                                                                                     Figure 5
       Use the "Logistic" command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the logistic model,
       Next, graph the model in the same window as shown in Figure 6 the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit:

                                                                              Figure 6         for the in the model



To approximate the percentage of Americans with cellular service in the year 2013, substitute

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 659

and solve for

According to the model, about 99.3% of Americans had cellular service in 2013.



The model gives a limiting value of about 105. This means that the maximum possible percentage of Americans with

cellular service would be 105%, which is impossible. (How could over 100% of a population have cellular service?) If the

model were exact, the limiting value would be  and the model's outputs would get very close to, but never

actually reach 100%. After all, there will always be someone out there without cellular service!

TRY IT #3      Table 6 shows the population, in thousands, of harbor seals in the Wadden Sea over the years
               1997 to 2012.

               Year Seal Population (Thousands) Year Seal Population (Thousands)

               1997                            3.493       2005                 19.590

               1998                            5.282       2006                 21.955

               1999                            6.357       2007                 22.862

               2000                            9.201       2008                 23.869

               2001                            11.224      2009                 24.243

               2002                            12.964      2010                 24.344

               2003                            16.226      2011                 24.919

               2004                            18.137      2012                 25.108

               Table 6

                Let represent time in years starting with  for the year 1997. Let represent the

               number of seals in thousands. Use logistic regression to fit a model to these data.

                Use the model to predict the seal population for the year 2020.
                To the nearest whole number, what is the limiting value of this model?

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with exponential function models.
Exponential Regression on a Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/pregresscalc)
660 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

        6.8 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What situations are best       2. What is a carrying capacity?   3. What is regression analysis?
    modeled by a logistic             What kind of model has a          Describe the process of
    equation? Give an example,        carrying capacity built into      performing regression
    and state a case for why the      its formula? Why does this        analysis on a graphing
    example is a good fit.            make sense?                       utility.

4. What might a scatterplot of    5. What does the y-intercept
    data points look like if it       on the graph of a logistic
    were best described by a          equation correspond to for
    logarithmic model?                a population modeled by
                                      that equation?

Graphical

For the following exercises, match the given function of best fit with the appropriate scatterplot in Figure 7 through
Figure 11. Answer using the letter beneath the matching graph.

                                               Figure 7

                                               Figure 8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 661

Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
662 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

6.                                       7.                                         8.

9.                                       10.

Numeric                                  12. Rewrite the exponential                13. A logarithmic model is given
                                               model                                      by the equation
11. To the nearest whole                                                     as an
      number, what is the initial              equivalent model with base                 To the nearest hundredth,
      value of a population                       Express the exponent to                 for what value of does
      modeled by the logistic                  four significant digits.
      equation

      What is the carrying
      capacity?

14. A logistic model is given by         15. What is the y-intercept on
      the equation                             the graph of the logistic
                                 To the        model given in the
                                               previous exercise?
      nearest hundredth, for
      what value of t does

Technology

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population of a koi pond over months is modeled by the function

16. Graph the population                 17. What was the initial                   18. How many koi will the
      model to show the                        population of koi?                         pond have after one and a
      population over a span of                                                           half years?
      years.
                                         20. Use the intersect feature to
19. How many months will it                    approximate the number
      take before there are                    of months it will take
      koi in the pond?                         before the population of
                                               the pond reaches half its
                                               carrying capacity.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population of an endangered species habitat for wolves is modeled

by the function                                where is given in years.

21. Graph the population                 22. What was the initial                   23. How many wolves will the
      model to show the                        population of wolves                       habitat have after years?
      population over a span of                transported to the habitat?
          years.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 663

24. How many years will it take    25. Use the intersect feature to
      before there are                   approximate the number
      wolves in the habitat?             of years it will take before
                                         the population of the
                                         habitat reaches half its
                                         carrying capacity.

For the following exercises, refer to Table 7.

                                   x           1        2     3        4     5        6

                                   f(x) 1125 1495 2310 3294 4650 6361

                                   Table 7

26. Use a graphing calculator      27. Use the regression feature         28. Write the exponential
      to create a scatter diagram        to find an exponential                 function as an exponential
      of the data.                       function that best fits the            equation with base
                                         data in the table.

29. Graph the exponential          30. Use the intersect feature to
      equation on the scatter            find the value of for
      diagram.                           which

For the following exercises, refer to Table 8.

                                      x           1        2  3       4   5        6

                                      f(x) 555 383 307 210 158 122

                                   Table 8

31. Use a graphing calculator      32. Use the regression feature         33. Write the exponential
      to create a scatter diagram        to find an exponential                 function as an exponential
      of the data.                       function that best fits the            equation with base
                                         data in the table.

34. Graph the exponential          35. Use the intersect feature to
      equation on the scatter            find the value of for
      diagram.                           which

For the following exercises, refer to Table 9.

                                            x        1     2  3       4   5     6

                                      f(x) 5.1 6.3 7.3 7.7 8.1 8.6

                                      Table 9
664 6 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

36. Use a graphing calculator       37. Use the LOGarithm option                   38. Use the logarithmic
      to create a scatter diagram         of the REGression feature                      function to find the value
      of the data.                        to find a logarithmic                          of the function when
                                          function of the form
                                                                that best
                                          fits the data in the table.

39. Graph the logarithmic           40. Use the intersect feature to
      equation on the scatter             find the value of for
      diagram.                            which

For the following exercises, refer to Table 10.

                                    x             123          4             5     6     7     8

                                    f(x) 7.5 6 5.2 4.3 3.9 3.4 3.1 2.9

                                    Table 10

41. Use a graphing calculator       42. Use the LOGarithm option                   43. Use the logarithmic
      to create a scatter diagram         of the REGression feature                      function to find the value
      of the data.                        to find a logarithmic                          of the function when
                                          function of the form
                                                                that best
                                          fits the data in the table.

44. Graph the logarithmic           45. Use the intersect feature to
      equation on the scatter             find the value of for
      diagram.                            which

For the following exercises, refer to Table 11.

x                                1             2  3         4  5                6     7     8     9  10

f(x) 8.7 12.3 15.4 18.5 20.7 22.5 23.3 24 24.6 24.8

Table 11

46. Use a graphing calculator       47. Use the LOGISTIC                           48. Graph the logistic equation
      to create a scatter diagram                                                        on the scatter diagram.
      of the data.                                regression option to find a

                                                  logistic growth model of

                                                  the form        that

                                                  best fits the data in the
                                                  table.

49. To the nearest whole            50. Use the intersect feature to
      number, what is the                 find the value of for
      predicted carrying capacity         which the model reaches
      of the model?                       half its carrying capacity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.8 · Fitting Exponential Models to Data 665

For the following exercises, refer to Table 12.

                      0            2  4          5       7       8         10  11          15  17

                      12 28.6 52.8 70.3 99.9 112.5 125.8 127.9 135.1 135.9

            Table 12

51. Use a graphing calculator      52. Use the LOGISTIC               53. Graph the logistic equation
      to create a scatter diagram                                           on the scatter diagram.
      of the data.                    regression option to find a

                                      logistic growth model of

                                      the form              that

                                      best fits the data in the
                                      table.

54. To the nearest whole           55. Use the intersect feature to
      number, what is the                find the value of for
      predicted carrying capacity        which the model reaches
      of the model?                      half its carrying capacity.

Extensions

56. Recall that the general form of a logistic equation     57. Use a graphing utility to find an exponential

for a population is given by                     such       regression formula     and a logarithmic

that the initial population at time      is                 regression formula     for the points

            Show algebraically that                         and                Round all numbers to 6 decimal

                                                            places. Graph the points and both formulas along

                                                            with the line      on the same axis. Make a

                                                            conjecture about the relationship of the

                                                            regression formulas.

58. Verify the conjecture made in the previous              59. Find the inverse function      for the logistic
      exercise. Round all numbers to six decimal places
      when necessary.                                            function                  Show all steps.

60. Use the result from the previous exercise to graph

the logistic model                    along with its

inverse on the same axis. What are the intercepts
and asymptotes of each function?
666 6 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

annual percentage rate (APR) the yearly interest rate earned by an investment account, also called nominal rate

carrying capacity in a logistic model, the limiting value of the output

change-of-base formula a formula for converting a logarithm with any base to a quotient of logarithms with any

other base.

common logarithm the exponent to which 10 must be raised to get                 is written simply as

compound interest interest earned on the total balance, not just the principal

doubling time the time it takes for a quantity to double

exponential growth a model that grows by a rate proportional to the amount present

extraneous solution a solution introduced while solving an equation that does not satisfy the conditions of the

original equation

half-life the length of time it takes for a substance to exponentially decay to half of its original quantity

logarithm the exponent to which must be raised to get written

logistic growth model a function of the form              where          is the initial value, is the carrying capacity,

or limiting value, and is a constant determined by the rate of growth

natural logarithm the exponent to which the number must be raised to get            is written as

Newton's Law of Cooling the scientific formula for temperature as a function of time as an object's temperature is

equalized with the ambient temperature

nominal rate the yearly interest rate earned by an investment account, also called annual percentage rate

order of magnitude the power of ten, when a number is expressed in scientific notation, with one non-zero digit to

the left of the decimal

power rule for logarithms a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a power is equal to the product of the

exponent and the log of its base

product rule for logarithms a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a product is equal to a sum of logarithms

quotient rule for logarithms a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a quotient is equal to a difference of

logarithms

Key Equations

definition of the exponential
              function

definition of exponential
            growth

compound interest formula

continuous growth formula                               is the number of unit time periods of growth
                                  is the starting amount (in the continuous compounding formula a is replaced

                                                                        with P, the principal)
                                                         is the mathematical constant,

General Form for the Translation of the Parent Function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 667

Definition of the logarithmic function For          if and only if
                                                                 if and only if
Definition of the common logarithm For
                                                               if and only if
Definition of the natural logarithm  For

General Form for the Translation of the Parent Logarithmic Function

The Product Rule for Logarithms
The Quotient Rule for Logarithms
The Power Rule for Logarithms
The Change-of-Base Formula

One-to-one property for exponential          For any algebraic expressions and and any positive real number
                   functions                                                               where

        Definition of a logarithm                                                       if and only if

One-to-one property for logarithmic         For any algebraic expression S and positive real numbers and where
                   functions
                                                                                         if and only if

                                              For any algebraic expressions S and T and any positive real number
                                                                                      where
                                                                                            if and only if

Half-life formula                               If                   the half-life is

Carbon-14 dating                     is the amount of carbon-14 when the plant or animal died
                                             is the amount of carbon-14 remaining today
  Doubling time                                       is the age of the fossil in years
      formula
                                            If      the doubling time is
Newton's Law of
      Cooling                               where   is the ambient temperature,           and is the
                                                    continuous rate of cooling.

Key Concepts                                                                              raised to a variable exponent.

6.1 Exponential Functions

  · An exponential function is defined as a function with a positive constant other than
      See Example 1.
668 6 · Chapter Review

· A function is evaluated by solving at a specific value. See Example 2 and Example 3.

· An exponential model can be found when the growth rate and initial value are known. See Example 4.

· An exponential model can be found when the two data points from the model are known. See Example 5.

· An exponential model can be found using two data points from the graph of the model. See Example 6.

· An exponential model can be found using two data points from the graph and a calculator. See Example 7.

· The value of an account at any time can be calculated using the compound interest formula when the principal,

annual interest rate, and compounding periods are known. See Example 8.

· The initial investment of an account can be found using the compound interest formula when the value of the

account, annual interest rate, compounding periods, and life span of the account are known. See Example 9.

· The number is a mathematical constant often used as the base of real world exponential growth and decay

models. Its decimal approximation is

· Scientific and graphing calculators have the key  or        for calculating powers of See Example 10.

· Continuous growth or decay models are exponential models that use as the base. Continuous growth and decay

models can be found when the initial value and growth or decay rate are known. See Example 11 and Example 12.

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions

· The graph of the function             has a y-intercept at  domain   range  and horizontal

asymptote               See Example 1.

· If  the function is increasing. The left tail of the graph will approach the asymptote                  and the right tail will

increase without bound.

· If        the function is decreasing. The left tail of the graph will increase without bound, and the right tail will

approach the asymptote

· The equation                   represents a vertical shift of the parent function

· The equation                   represents a horizontal shift of the parent function     See Example 2.

· Approximate solutions of the equation                       can be found using a graphing calculator. See Example 3.

· The equation                   where   represents a vertical stretch if              or compression if        of the

parent function                  See Example 4.

· When the parent function              is multiplied by the result,                   is a reflection about the x-axis.

When the input is multiplied by the result,                   is a reflection about the y-axis. See Example 5.

· All translations of the exponential function can be summarized by the general equation                        See Table

3.

· Using the general equation                     we can write the equation of a function given its description. See

Example 6.

6.3 Logarithmic Functions

· The inverse of an exponential function is a logarithmic function, and the inverse of a logarithmic function is an
    exponential function.

· Logarithmic equations can be written in an equivalent exponential form, using the definition of a logarithm. See
    Example 1.

· Exponential equations can be written in their equivalent logarithmic form using the definition of a logarithm See
    Example 2.

· Logarithmic functions with base can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of powers of See Example
    3 and Example 4.

· Common logarithms can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of powers of See Example 5.
· When common logarithms cannot be evaluated mentally, a calculator can be used. See Example 6.
· Real-world exponential problems with base can be rewritten as a common logarithm and then evaluated using a

    calculator. See Example 7.
· Natural logarithms can be evaluated using a calculator Example 8.

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions

· To find the domain of a logarithmic function, set up an inequality showing the argument greater than zero, and

solve for See Example 1 and Example 2

· The graph of the parent function                  has an x-intercept at            domain  range  

vertical asymptote               and

 if         the function is increasing.

 if              the function is decreasing.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 669

    See Example 3.              shifts the parent function     horizontally
· The equation

     left units if
     right units if

    See Example 4.              shifts the parent function     vertically
· The equation

     up units if
     down units if

See Example 5.

· For any constant      the equation

 stretches the parent function             vertically by a factor of if
                                              vertically by a factor of if
 compresses the parent function

See Example 6 and Example 7.

· When the parent function            is multiplied by the result is a reflection about the x-axis. When the input

is multiplied by the result is a reflection about the y-axis.

 The equation                   represents a reflection of the parent function about the x-axis.

 The equation                   represents a reflection of the parent function about the y-axis.

See Example 8.
 A graphing calculator may be used to approximate solutions to some logarithmic equations See Example 9.

· All translations of the logarithmic function can be summarized by the general equation

See Table 4.

· Given an equation with the general form                      we can identify the vertical asymptote     for

the transformation. See Example 10.

· Using the general equation               we can write the equation of a logarithmic function given its

graph. See Example 11.

6.5 Logarithmic Properties

· We can use the product rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a product as a sum of logarithms. See Example 1.
· We can use the quotient rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a quotient as a difference of logarithms. See

    Example 2.
· We can use the power rule for logarithms to rewrite the log of a power as the product of the exponent and the log

    of its base. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5.
· We can use the product rule, the quotient rule, and the power rule together to combine or expand a logarithm with

    a complex input. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8.
· The rules of logarithms can also be used to condense sums, differences, and products with the same base as a

    single logarithm. See Example 9, Example 10, Example 11, and Example 12.
· We can convert a logarithm with any base to a quotient of logarithms with any other base using the change-of-base

    formula. See Example 13.
· The change-of-base formula is often used to rewrite a logarithm with a base other than 10 and as the quotient of

    natural or common logs. That way a calculator can be used to evaluate. See Example 14.

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

· We can solve many exponential equations by using the rules of exponents to rewrite each side as a power with the
    same base. Then we use the fact that exponential functions are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to one
    another and solve for the unknown.

· When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are explicitly shown as being equal, set the exponents
    equal to one another and solve for the unknown. See Example 1.

· When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are not explicitly shown as being equal, rewrite each
    side of the equation as powers of the same base, then set the exponents equal to one another and solve for the
    unknown. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4.

· When an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with a common base, solve by taking the logarithm of each side.
    See Example 5.

· We can solve exponential equations with base by applying the natural logarithm of both sides because
    exponential and logarithmic functions are inverses of each other. See Example 6 and Example 7.

· After solving an exponential equation, check each solution in the original equation to find and eliminate any
670 6 · Chapter Review

extraneous solutions. See Example 8.

· When given an equation of the form                 where is an algebraic expression, we can use the definition of a

logarithm to rewrite the equation as the equivalent exponential equation             and solve for the unknown. See

Example 9 and Example 10.

· We can also use graphing to solve equations with the form        We graph both equations                       and

      on the same coordinate plane and identify the solution as the x-value of the intersecting point. See Example

11.

· When given an equation of the form                 where and are algebraic expressions, we can use the one-

to-one property of logarithms to solve the equation          for the unknown. See Example 12.

· Combining the skills learned in this and previous sections, we can solve equations that model real world situations,

whether the unknown is in an exponent or in the argument of a logarithm. See Example 13.

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models

· The basic exponential function is       If         we have exponential growth; if            we have

exponential decay.

· We can also write this formula in terms of continuous growth as         where is the starting value. If is

positive, then we have exponential growth when       and exponential decay when       See Example 1.

· In general, we solve problems involving exponential growth or decay in two steps. First, we set up a model and use

the model to find the parameters. Then we use the formula with these parameters to predict growth and decay. See

Example 2.

· We can find the age, of an organic artifact by measuring the amount, of carbon-14 remaining in the artifact and

using the formula                to solve for See Example 3.

· Given a substance's doubling time or half-time, we can find a function that represents its exponential growth or

decay. See Example 4.

· We can use Newton's Law of Cooling to find how long it will take for a cooling object to reach a desired

temperature, or to find what temperature an object will be after a given time. See Example 5.

· We can use logistic growth functions to model real-world situations where the rate of growth changes over time,

such as population growth, spread of disease, and spread of rumors. See Example 6.

· We can use real-world data gathered over time to observe trends. Knowledge of linear, exponential, logarithmic,

and logistic graphs help us to develop models that best fit our data. See Example 7.

· Any exponential function with the form             can be rewritten as an equivalent exponential function with the

form                    where        See Example 8.

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data

· Exponential regression is used to model situations where growth begins slowly and then accelerates rapidly without

bound, or where decay begins rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero.

· We use the command "ExpReg" on a graphing utility to fit function of the form       to a set of data points. See

Example 1.

· Logarithmic regression is used to model situations where growth or decay accelerates rapidly at first and then slows

over time.

· We use the command "LnReg" on a graphing utility to fit a function of the form               to a set of data

points. See Example 2.

· Logistic regression is used to model situations where growth accelerates rapidly at first and then steadily slows as

the function approaches an upper limit.

· We use the command "Logistic" on a graphing utility to fit a function of the form            to a set of data

points. See Example 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  6 · Exercises 671

Exercises                                   2. The population of a herd of     3. Find an exponential
                                                deer is represented by the         equation that passes
Review Exercises                                function                           through the points
                                                where is given in years. To        and
Exponential Functions                           the nearest whole number,
1. Determine whether the                        what will the herd
                                                population be after years?
    function
    represents exponential
    growth, exponential decay,
    or neither. Explain

4. Determine whether Table 1                5. A retirement account is         6. Hsu-Mei wants to save
    could represent a function that             opened with an initial
    is linear, exponential, or neither.         deposit of $8,500 and earns    $5,000 for a down payment
    If it appears to be exponential,                      interest compounded
    find a function that passes                 monthly. What will the         on a car. To the nearest
    through the points.                         account be worth in
                                                years?                         dollar, how much will she

                                                                               need to invest in an account

                                                                               now with  APR,

                                                                               compounded daily, in order

x 12                   3                 4                                     to reach her goal in years?

f(x) 3 0.9 0.27 0.081

Table 1

7. Does the equation                        8. Suppose an investment
                              represent
                                            account is opened with an
    continuous growth,
    continuous decay, or                    initial deposit of
    neither? Explain.
                                            earning    interest,

                                            compounded continuously.

                                            How much will the account

                                            be worth after years?

Graphs of Exponential Functions

9. Graph the function                       State the           10. Graph the function                   and its

domain and range and give the y-intercept.                            reflection about the y-axis on the same axes, and
                                                                      give the y-intercept.
672 6 · Exercises

11. The graph of                 is reflected about the  12. The graph below shows transformations of the

y-axis and stretched vertically by a factor of                  graph of           What is the equation for the

What is the equation of the new function,                       transformation?

State its y-intercept, domain, and range.

                                                                                    Figure 1

Logarithmic Functions              14. Rewrite           as an        15. Rewrite                 as an

13. Rewrite                        equivalent exponential                 equivalent logarithmic
      as an equivalent
      exponential equation.        equation.                              equation.

16. Rewrite        as an           17. Solve for x if                 by converting the
                                         logarithmic equation                     to exponential
equivalent logarithmic                   form.

equation.

18. Evaluate                       19. Evaluate                 without using a calculator.
      without using a calculator.

20. Evaluate            using a    21. Evaluate                       22. Evaluate                using a
                                         without using a calculator.
calculator. Round to the                                                  calculator. Round to the
                                                                          nearest thousandth.
nearest thousandth.

Graphs of Logarithmic Functions                          24. Graph the function
23. Graph the function

25. State the domain, vertical asymptote, and end
      behavior of the function

Logarithmic Properties

26. Rewrite             in expanded form.                27. Rewrite
                                                               in compact form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  6 · Exercises 673

28. Rewrite  in expanded form.                                  29. Rewrite           in compact form.

30. Rewrite  as a product.                                      31. Rewrite           as a single logarithm.

32. Use properties of logarithms to expand                      33. Use properties of logarithms to expand

34. Condense the expression                                     35. Condense the expression
      to a single logarithm.                                                                               to a single logarithm.

36. Rewrite  to base                                            37. Rewrite           as a logarithm. Then apply

                                                                the change of base formula to solve for using

                                                                the common log. Round to the nearest

                                                                thousandth.

Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

38. Solve                                  39. Solve            by                    40. Use logarithms to find the
                                                                                            exact solution for
             by                                                                                                         If there
                                                                                            is no solution, write no
rewriting each side with a                 rewriting each side with a                       solution.
common base.                               common base.

41. Use logarithms to find the             42. Find the exact solution for            43. Find the exact solution for
      exact solution for                                            . If there is no                                    If there
                                 If there
      is no solution, write no                   solution, write no solution.               is no solution, write no
      solution.                                                                             solution.

44. Find the exact solution for            45. Find the exact solution for            46. Use the definition of a
                           If there is                                        If            logarithm to solve.

      no solution, write no                      there is no solution, write
      solution.                                  no solution.

47. Use the definition of a                48. Use the one-to-one property of         49. Use the one-to-one property
      logarithm to find the exact                logarithms to find an exact                of logarithms to find an exact
      solution for                               solution for                               solution for

                                                 If there is no solution, write no          If there is no solution, write no
                                                 solution.                                  solution.

50. The formula for measuring sound intensity in                51. The population of a city is modeled by the
      decibels is defined by the equation
                                                                equation              where is
                                 where is the intensity of the
                                                                measured in years. If the city continues to grow at
      sound in watts per square meter and
      is the lowest level of sound that the average             this rate, how many years will it take for the
      person can hear. How many decibels are emitted
      from a large orchestra with a sound intensity of          population to reach one million?

                     watts per square meter?
674 6 · Exercises

52. Find the inverse function      for the exponential   53. Find the inverse function     for the logarithmic
      function                                                 function

Exponential and Logarithmic Models

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes   milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by

about  each hour.

54. To the nearest minute, what is the half-life of the  55. Write an exponential model representing the
      drug?                                                    amount of the drug remaining in the patient's
                                                               system after hours. Then use the formula to find
                                                               the amount of the drug that would remain in the
                                                               patient's system after hours. Round to the
                                                               nearest hundredth of a gram.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A soup with an internal temperature of  Fahrenheit was taken off the

stove to cool in a  room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of the soup was

56. Use Newton's Law of            57. How many minutes will it
      Cooling to write a formula         take the soup to cool to
      that models this situation.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation                        models the number of people in a

school who have heard a rumor after days.                             60. What is the carrying
                                                                            capacity?
58. How many people started        59. To the nearest tenth, how
      the rumor?                         many days will it be before
                                         the rumor spreads to half
                                         the carrying capacity?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             6 · Exercises 675

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter
plots. Determine whether the data from the table would likely represent a function that is linear, exponential, or
logarithmic.

61.              62.                                                 63. Find a formula for an
         x f(x)           x f(x)
                                                                     exponential equation that
         1 3.05
                                                                     goes through the points
         2 4.42
                 0.5 18.05                                                               and  Then

                                                                     express the formula as an

                 1  17                                               equivalent equation with

                                                                     base e.

3 6.4            3 15.33

4 9.28           5 14.55

5 13.46          7 14.04

6 19.52          10 13.5

7 28.3           12 13.22

8 41.04          13 13.1

9 59.5           15 12.88

10 86.28         17 12.69

                 20 12.45

Fitting Exponential Models to Data                                   65. The population of a culture of bacteria is modeled
64. What is the carrying capacity for a population                         by the logistic equation

      modeled by the logistic equation                               where is in days. To the nearest tenth, how many
                                     What is the initial population
                                                                     days will it take the culture to reach  of its
      for the model?

                                                                     carrying capacity?
676 6 · Exercises

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the
shape of the scatter diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an exponential, logarithmic, or logistic
model. Then use the appropriate regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When necessary, round
values to five decimal places.

66.                                   67.                       68.
         x f(x)                                                          x f(x)
                                           x  f(x)

1 409.4                                    0.15 36.21           0  9

2 260.7                                    0.25 28.88           2 22.6

3 170.4                                    0.5 24.39            4 44.2

4 110.6                                    0.75 18.28           5 62.1

5  74                                      1  16.5              7 96.9

6 44.7                                     1.5 12.99            8 113.4

7 32.4                                     2  9.91              10 133.4

8 19.5                                     2.25 8.57            11 137.6

9 12.7                                     2.75 7.23            15 148.4

10 8.1                                     3  5.99              17 149.3

                                           3.5 4.81

Practice Test                         2. Find an exponential    3. Drew wants to save $2,500
                                          equation that passes      to go to the next World Cup.
1. The population of a pod of             through the points        To the nearest dollar, how
    bottlenose dolphins is                and                       much will he need to invest
    modeled by the function                                         in an account now with
                            where is                                          APR, compounding
    given in years. To the                                          daily, in order to reach his
    nearest whole number, what                                      goal in years?
    will the pod population be
    after years?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               6 · Exercises 677

4. An investment account was       5. Graph the function                6. The graph shows transformations
    opened with an initial                                     and its
    deposit of $9,600 and earns                                         of the graph of                        What
            interest, compounded       reflection across the y-axis
    continuously. How much will        on the same axes, and give       is the equation for the
    the account be worth after         the y-intercept.                 transformation?
        years?

7. Rewrite                         8. Rewrite         as an             9. Solve for by converting the
    as an equivalent exponential                                            logarithmic equation
    equation.                      equivalent logarithmic                                      to exponential

                                   equation.                                form.

10. Evaluate                       11. Evaluate           using a       12. Graph the function
      without using a calculator.
                                   calculator. Round to the

                                   nearest thousandth.

13. State the domain, vertical     14. Rewrite               as a       15. Rewrite
      asymptote, and end                 sum.
      behavior of the function                                          in compact form.

16. Rewrite     as a               17. Use properties of
      product.
                                   logarithm to expand

18. Condense the expression                               19. Rewrite                as
      logarithm.
                                   to a single               a logarithm. Then apply the

                                                             change of base formula to

                                                             solve for using the

                                                             natural log. Round to the

                                                             nearest thousandth.

20. Solve                          by rewriting each      21. Use logarithms to find the
      side with a common base.                                  exact solution for
                                                                                              . If
                                                                there is no solution, write
                                                                no solution.
678 6 · Exercises

22. Find the exact solution for            23. Find the exact solution for        24. Find the exact solution for
                                 If there                                     If                             If there is

      is no solution, write no                   there is no solution, write            no solution, write no
      solution.                                  no solution.                           solution.

25. Find the exact solution for            26. Use the definition of a
                                 If there        logarithm to find the exact
                                                 solution for
      is no solution, write no
      solution.

27. Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to find                   28. The formula for measuring
      an exact solution for                                                   sound intensity in decibels
                                                        If there is no           is defined by the
      solution, write no solution.                                            equation

                                                                                                         where

                                                                        is the intensity of the

                                                                        sound in watts per square

                                                                        meter and                is

                                                                        the lowest level of sound

                                                                        that the average person

                                                                        can hear. How many

                                                                        decibels are emitted from a

                                                                        rock concert with a sound

                                                                        intensity of

                                                                        watts per square meter?

29. A radiation safety officer is          30. Write the formula found in         31. A bottle of soda with a
      working with grams of                      the previous exercise as an
      a radioactive substance.                   equivalent equation with             temperature of
      After days, the sample                     base Express the
      has decayed to grams.                      exponent to five significant         Fahrenheit was taken off a
      Rounding to five significant               digits.
      digits, write an exponential                                                    shelf and placed in a
      equation representing this
      situation. To the nearest                                                       refrigerator with an
      day, what is the half-life of
      this substance?                                                                 internal temperature of

                                                                                      After ten minutes,

                                                                                      the internal temperature of

                                                                                      the soda was              Use

                                                                                      Newton's Law of Cooling to

                                                                                      write a formula that

                                                                                      models this situation. To

                                                                                      the nearest degree, what

                                                                                      will the temperature of the

                                                                                      soda be after one hour?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        6 · Exercises 679

32. The population of a wildlife           33. Enter the data from Table 1     34. The population of a lake of
      habitat is modeled by the                  into a graphing calculator          fish is modeled by the
      equation                                   and graph the resulting             logistic equation
                                    where        scatter plot. Determine
                                                 whether the data from the                                       where
        is given in years. How                   table would likely
      many animals were                          represent a function that is  is time in years. To the
      originally transported to                  linear, exponential, or
      the habitat? How many                      logarithmic.                  nearest hundredth, how
      years will it take before the
      habitat reaches half its                      x f(x)                     many years will it take the
      capacity?
                                                                               lake to reach       of its

                                                                               carrying capacity?

                                           1        3

                                           2 8.55

                                           3 11.79

                                           4 14.09

                                           5 15.88

                                           6 17.33

                                           7 18.57

                                           8 19.64

                                           9 20.58

                                           10 21.42

                                           Table 1
680 6 · Exercises

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the
shape of the scatter diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an exponential, logarithmic, or logistic
model. Then use the appropriate regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When necessary, round
values to five decimal places.

35.                              36.              37.
         x f(x)                           x f(x)           x f(x)

1  20                            3 13.98          0 2.2

2 21.6                           4 17.84          0.5 2.9

3 29.2                           5 20.01          1 3.9

4 36.4                           6 22.7           1.5 4.8

5 46.6                           7 24.1           2 6.4

6 55.7                           8 26.15          3 9.3

7 72.6                           9 27.37          4 12.3

8 87.1                           10 28.38         5 15

9 107.2                          11 29.97         6 16.2

10 138.1                         12 31.07         7 17.3

                                 13 31.43         8 17.9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               7 · Introduction 681

7  THE UNIT CIRCLE: SINE AND COSINE FUNCTIONS

The tide rises and falls at regular, predictable intervals. (credit: Andrea Schaffer, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Angles
  7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry
  7.3 Unit Circle
  7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions

      Introduction to The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Life is dense with phenomena that repeat in regular intervals. Each day, for example, the tides rise and fall in response to
the gravitational pull of the moon. And as a result of the motion of the moon itself, the tides occur with different
strengths. Throughout history, many Indigenous peoples have used this regularity to build cultural narratives and direct
key activities, such as agriculture, hunting, and fishing. Aboriginal people in the Torres Strait area (the northern tip) of
Australia used the tidal peaks to determine the best times to fish. Their elders explain that the stronger spring tides
stirred up sediment and obscured fish vision, leaving them more likely to take in lures and resulting in a larger catch.1

In mathematics, a function that repeats its values in regular intervals is known as a periodic function. The graphs of such
functions show a general shape reflective of a pattern that keeps repeating. This means the graph of the function has
the same output at exactly the same place in every cycle. And this translates to all the cycles of the function
having exactly the same length. So, if we know all the details of one full cycle of a true periodic function, then we know
the state of the function's outputs at all times, future and past. In this chapter, we will investigate various examples of
periodic functions.

1 Hamacher, D.W., Tapim, A., Passi, S., and Barsa, J. (2018). Dancing with the stars - astronomy and music in the Torres Strait. In Imagining
Other Worlds: Explorations in Astronomy and Culture.
682 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

    7.1 Angles

      Learning Objectives

       In this section you will:
                  Draw angles in standard position.
                  Convert between degrees and radians.
                  Find coterminal angles.
                  Find the length of a circular arc.
                  Use linear and angular speed to describe motion on a circular path.

       A golfer swings to hit a ball over a sand trap and onto the green. An airline pilot maneuvers a plane toward a narrow
       runway. A dress designer creates the latest fashion. What do they all have in common? They all work with angles, and so
       do all of us at one time or another. Sometimes we need to measure angles exactly with instruments. Other times we
       estimate them or judge them by eye. Either way, the proper angle can make the difference between success and failure
       in many undertakings. In this section, we will examine properties of angles.

     Drawing Angles in Standard Position

       Properly defining an angle first requires that we define a ray. A ray is a directed line segment. It consists of one point on
       a line and all points extending in one direction from that point. The first point is called the endpoint of the ray. We can
       refer to a specific ray by stating its endpoint and any other point on it. The ray in Figure 1 can be named as ray EF, or in
       symbol form

                                                                                     Figure 1
       An angle is the union of two rays having a common endpoint. The endpoint is called the vertex of the angle, and the
       two rays are the sides of the angle. The angle in Figure 2 is formed from and . Angles can be named using a
       point on each ray and the vertex, such as angle DEF, or in symbol form

                                                                                     Figure 2
       Greek letters are often used as variables for the measure of an angle. Table 1 is a list of Greek letters commonly used to
       represent angles, and a sample angle is shown in Figure 3.

                                                                             or
                                                              theta phi alpha beta gamma
                                                            Table 1

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                              7.1 · Angles 683

                                                            Figure 3 Angle theta, shown as
Angle creation is a dynamic process. We start with two rays lying on top of one another. We leave one fixed in place, and
rotate the other. The fixed ray is the initial side, and the rotated ray is the terminal side. In order to identify the
different sides, we indicate the rotation with a small arrow close to the vertex as in Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4
As we discussed at the beginning of the section, there are many applications for angles, but in order to use them
correctly, we must be able to measure them. The measure of an angle is the amount of rotation from the initial side to
the terminal side. Probably the most familiar unit of angle measurement is the degree. One degree is of a circular
rotation, so a complete circular rotation contains degrees. An angle measured in degrees should always include the
unit "degrees" after the number, or include the degree symbol For example,
To formalize our work, we will begin by drawing angles on an x-y coordinate plane. Angles can occur in any position on
the coordinate plane, but for the purpose of comparison, the convention is to illustrate them in the same position
whenever possible. An angle is in standard position if its vertex is located at the origin, and its initial side extends along
the positive x-axis. See Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5
If the angle is measured in a counterclockwise direction from the initial side to the terminal side, the angle is said to be a
positive angle. If the angle is measured in a clockwise direction, the angle is said to be a negative angle.
684 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Drawing an angle in standard position always starts the same way--draw the initial side along the positive x-axis. To
place the terminal side of the angle, we must calculate the fraction of a full rotation the angle represents. We do that by

dividing the angle measure in degrees by            For example, to draw a angle, we calculate that  So, the

terminal side will be one-fourth of the way around the circle, moving counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. To draw

a  angle, we calculate that                         So the terminal side will be 1 complete rotation around the circle, moving

counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. In this case, the initial side and the terminal side overlap. See Figure 6.

                                                                              Figure 6
Since we define an angle in standard position by its terminal side, we have a special type of angle whose terminal side
lies on an axis, a quadrantal angle. This type of angle can have a measure of 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°, or 360°. See Figure 7.

                  Figure 7 Quadrantal angles have a terminal side that lies along an axis. Examples are shown.
  Quadrantal Angles
  An angle is a quadrantal angle if its terminal side lies on an axis, including 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°, or 360°.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given an angle measure in degrees, draw the angle in standard position.
   1. Express the angle measure as a fraction of
   2. Reduce the fraction to simplest form.
   3. Draw an angle that contains that same fraction of the circle, beginning on the positive x-axis and moving

        counterclockwise for positive angles and clockwise for negative angles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   7.1 · Angles 685

EXAMPLE 1

Drawing an Angle in Standard Position Measured in Degrees

 Sketch an angle of  in standard position.  Sketch an angle of              in standard position.

     Solution



Divide the angle measure by

To rewrite the fraction in a more familiar fraction, we can recognize that

One-twelfth equals one-third of a quarter, so by dividing a quarter rotation into thirds, we can sketch a line at as
in Figure 8.

                             Figure 8
686 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

    

       Divide the angle measure by

       In this case, we can recognize that

       Three-eighths is one and one-half times a quarter, so we place a line by moving clockwise one full quarter and one-
       half of another quarter, as in Figure 9.

                                                     Figure 9

    TRY IT #1 Show an angle of    on a circle in standard position.

Converting Between Degrees and Radians

Dividing a circle into 360 parts is an arbitrary choice, although it creates the familiar degree measurement. We may
choose other ways to divide a circle. To find another unit, think of the process of drawing a circle. Imagine that you stop
before the circle is completed. The portion that you drew is referred to as an arc. An arc may be a portion of a full circle, a
full circle, or more than a full circle, represented by more than one full rotation. The length of the arc around an entire
circle is called the circumference of that circle.

The circumference of a circle is  If we divide both sides of this equation by we create the ratio of the

circumference, which is always to the radius, regardless of the length of the radius. So the circumference of any circle

is  times the length of the radius. That means that if we took a string as long as the radius and used it to

measure consecutive lengths around the circumference, there would be room for six full string-lengths and a little more

than a quarter of a seventh, as shown in Figure 10.

Access for free at openstax.org
          7.1 · Angles 687

                                                                             Figure 10
This brings us to our new angle measure. One radian is the measure of a central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc
equal in length to the radius of that circle. A central angle is an angle formed at the center of a circle by two radii.
Because the total circumference equals times the radius, a full circular rotation is radians.

See Figure 11. Note that when an angle is described without a specific unit, it refers to radian measure. For example, an
angle measure of 3 indicates 3 radians. In fact, radian measure is dimensionless, since it is the quotient of a length
(circumference) divided by a length (radius) and the length units cancel.

Figure 11 The angle sweeps out a measure of one radian. Note that the length of the intercepted arc is the same as
the length of the radius of the circle.

Relating Arc Lengths to Radius

An arc length is the length of the curve along the arc. Just as the full circumference of a circle always has a constant
ratio to the radius, the arc length produced by any given angle also has a constant relation to the radius, regardless of
the length of the radius.

This ratio, called the radian measure, is the same regardless of the radius of the circle--it depends only on the angle.
This property allows us to define a measure of any angle as the ratio of the arc length to the radius r. See Figure 12.

If  then
688 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Figure 12 (a) In an angle of 1 radian, the arc length equals the radius    (b) An angle of 2 radians has an arc length
          (c) A full revolution is or about 6.28 radians.

To elaborate on this idea, consider two circles, one with radius 2 and the other with radius 3. Recall the circumference of

a circle is    where is the radius. The smaller circle then has circumference              and the larger has

circumference                    Now we draw a angle on the two circles, as in Figure 13.

              Figure 13 A angle contains one-eighth of the circumference of a circle, regardless of the radius.
Notice what happens if we find the ratio of the arc length divided by the radius of the circle.

Since both ratios are the angle measures of both circles are the same, even though the arc length and radius differ.

Radians

One radian is the measure of the central angle of a circle such that the length of the arc between the initial side and

the terminal side is equal to the radius of the circle. A full revolution  equals radians. A half revolution

is equivalent to radians.

The radian measure of an angle is the ratio of the length of the arc subtended by the angle to the radius of the circle.
In other words, if is the length of an arc of a circle, and is the radius of the circle, then the central angle containing
that arc measures radians. In a circle of radius 1, the radian measure corresponds to the length of the arc.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.1 · Angles 689

Q&A  A measure of 1 radian looks to be about Is that correct?

     Yes. It is approximately  Because radians equals                         radian equals

Using Radians

Because radian measure is the ratio of two lengths, it is a unitless measure. For example, in Figure 12, suppose the
radius were 2 inches and the distance along the arc were also 2 inches. When we calculate the radian measure of the
angle, the "inches" cancel, and we have a result without units. Therefore, it is not necessary to write the label "radians"
after a radian measure, and if we see an angle that is not labeled with "degrees" or the degree symbol, we can assume
that it is a radian measure.

Considering the most basic case, the unit circle (a circle with radius 1), we know that 1 rotation equals 360 degrees,

We can also track one rotation around a circle by finding the circumference,  and for the unit circle

These two different ways to rotate around a circle give us a way to convert from degrees to radians.

Identifying Special Angles Measured in Radians

In addition to knowing the measurements in degrees and radians of a quarter revolution, a half revolution, and a full
revolution, there are other frequently encountered angles in one revolution of a circle with which we should be familiar.
It is common to encounter multiples of 30, 45, 60, and 90 degrees. These values are shown in Figure 14. Memorizing
these angles will be very useful as we study the properties associated with angles.

                                       Figure 14 Commonly encountered angles measured in degrees

Now, we can list the corresponding radian values for the common measures of a circle corresponding to those listed in
Figure 14, which are shown in Figure 15. Be sure you can verify each of these measures.
690 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                               Figure 15 Commonly encountered angles measured in radians
         EXAMPLE 2
       Finding a Radian Measure
       Find the radian measure of one-third of a full rotation.

            Solution
       For any circle, the arc length along such a rotation would be one-third of the circumference. We know that
       So,
       The radian measure would be the arc length divided by the radius.

              TRY IT #2 Find the radian measure of three-fourths of a full rotation.

      Converting Between Radians and Degrees

       Because degrees and radians both measure angles, we need to be able to convert between them. We can easily do so
       using a proportion where is the measure of the angle in degrees and is the measure of the angle in radians.
       This proportion shows that the measure of angle in degrees divided by 180 equals the measure of angle in radians
       divided by Or, phrased another way, degrees is to 180 as radians is to

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               7.1 · Angles 691

  Converting between Radians and Degrees
  To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion

  EXAMPLE 3
Converting Radians to Degrees
Convert each radian measure to degrees.

 3

     Solution
Because we are given radians and we want degrees, we should set up a proportion and solve it.

 We use the proportion, substituting the given information.

 We use the proportion, substituting the given information.

TRY IT #3 Convert  radians to degrees.

  EXAMPLE 4

Converting Degrees to Radians
Convert degrees to radians.

     Solution
In this example, we start with degrees and want radians, so we again set up a proportion, but we substitute the given
information into a different part of the proportion.

     Analysis                                                   Because                        we can find that
Another way to think about this problem is by remembering that

         is

TRY IT #4 Convert  to radians.
692 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Finding Coterminal Angles

Converting between degrees and radians can make working with angles easier in some applications. For other

applications, we may need another type of conversion. Negative angles and angles greater than a full revolution are

more awkward to work with than those in the range of to  or to It would be convenient to replace those

out-of-range angles with a corresponding angle within the range of a single revolution.

It is possible for more than one angle to have the same terminal side. Look at Figure 16. The angle of  is a positive

angle, measured counterclockwise. The angle of       is a negative angle, measured clockwise. But both angles have

the same terminal side. If two angles in standard position have the same terminal side, they are coterminal angles. Every

angle greater than  or less than is coterminal with an angle between and                 and it is often more convenient

to find the coterminal angle within the range of to  than to work with an angle that is outside that range.

                    Figure 16 An angle of           and an angle of  are coterminal angles.

Any angle has infinitely many coterminal angles because each time we add        to that angle--or subtract   from
it--the resulting value has a terminal side in the same location. For example,
reason, as is                                                                   and        are coterminal for this

An angle's reference angle is the measure of the smallest, positive, acute angle formed by the terminal side of the
angle and the horizontal axis. Thus positive reference angles have terminal sides that lie in the first quadrant and can
be used as models for angles in other quadrants. See Figure 17 for examples of reference angles for angles in different
quadrants.

                                                                             Figure 17
  Coterminal and Reference Angles
  Coterminal angles are two angles in standard position that have the same terminal side.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            7.1 · Angles 693

An angle's reference angle is the size of the smallest acute angle,  formed by the terminal side of the angle and
the horizontal axis.

...

     HOW TO

Given an angle greater than             find a coterminal angle between and

1. Subtract  from the given angle.

2. If the result is still greater than   subtract  again till the result is between and

3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding an Angle Coterminal with an Angle of Measure Greater Than            where
Find the least positive angle that is coterminal with an angle measuring

     Solution              is coterminal with an angle with measure                 but    is still greater than
An angle with measure   again to find another coterminal angle:

        so we subtract

The angle    is coterminal with          To put it another way,      equals  plus two full rotations, as shown in
Figure 18.

                                                   Figure 18

TRY IT #5 Find an angle that is coterminal with an angle measuring                  where

...

     HOW TO

Given an angle with measure less than find a coterminal angle having a measure between and

1. Add       to the given angle.

2. If the result is still less than add  again until the result is between and

3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.
694 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

EXAMPLE 6

Finding an Angle Coterminal with an Angle Measuring Less Than

Show the angle with measure      on a circle and find a positive coterminal angle such that

     Solution     we can start at the positive horizontal axis and measure clockwise half of a angle.
Since is half of

Because we can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting a full rotation of  we can find a positive coterminal
angle here by adding

We can then show the angle on a circle, as in Figure 19.

                                                           Figure 19

TRY IT #6 Find an angle that is coterminal with an angle measuring                 such that

Finding Coterminal Angles Measured in Radians

We can find coterminal angles measured in radians in much the same way as we have found them using degrees. In
both cases, we find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting one or more full rotations.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an angle greater than find a coterminal angle between 0 and

   1. Subtract from the given angle.
   2. If the result is still greater than subtract again until the result is between and
   3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.

EXAMPLE 7

Finding Coterminal Angles Using Radians

Find an angle that is coterminal with               where

     Solution
When working in degrees, we found coterminal angles by adding or subtracting 360 degrees, a full rotation. Likewise, in
radians, we can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting full rotations of radians:

The angle is coterminal, but not less than so we subtract another rotation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    7.1 · Angles 695

The angle is coterminal with  as shown in Figure 20.

                                  Figure 20

TRY IT #7 Find an angle of measure that is coterminal with an angle of measure               where

Determining the Length of an Arc

Recall that the radian measure of an angle was defined as the ratio of the arc length of a circular arc to the radius of

the circle,  From this relationship, we can find arc length along a circle, given an angle.

Arc Length on a Circle

In a circle of radius r, the length of an arc subtended by an angle with measure in radians, shown in Figure 21, is

                                                                           Figure 21

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a circle of radius calculate the length of the arc subtended by a given angle of measure
 1. If necessary, convert to radians.
696 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

          2. Multiply the radius

         EXAMPLE 8
       Finding the Length of an Arc
       Assume the orbit of Mercury around the sun is a perfect circle. Mercury is approximately 36 million miles from the sun.

     In one Earth day, Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution. How many miles does it travel in one day?
     Use your answer from part (a) to determine the radian measure for Mercury's movement in one Earth day.

            Solution

     Let's begin by finding the circumference of Mercury's orbit.

       Since Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution in one Earth day, we can now find the distance traveled.

     Now, we convert to radians.

TRY IT #8 Find the arc length along a circle of radius 10 units subtended by an angle of

Finding the Area of a Sector of a Circle

In addition to arc length, we can also use angles to find the area of a sector of a circle. A sector is a region of a circle

bounded by two radii and the intercepted arc, like a slice of pizza or pie. Recall that the area of a circle with radius can

be found using the formula       If the two radii form an angle of measured in radians, then is the ratio of the

angle measure to the measure of a full rotation and is also, therefore, the ratio of the area of the sector to the area of
the circle. Thus, the area of a sector is the fraction multiplied by the entire area. (Always remember that this formula

only applies if is in radians.)

Area of a Sector
The area of a sector of a circle with radius subtended by an angle measured in radians, is

See Figure 22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                              7.1 · Angles 697

    Figure 22 The area of the sector equals half the square of the radius times the central angle measured in radians.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a circle of radius find the area of a sector defined by a given angle
   1. If necessary, convert to radians.
   2. Multiply half the radian measure of by the square of the radius
  EXAMPLE 9
Finding the Area of a Sector
An automatic lawn sprinkler sprays a distance of 20 feet while rotating 30 degrees, as shown in Figure 23. What is the
area of the sector of grass the sprinkler waters?

                                             Figure 23 The sprinkler sprays 20 ft within an arc of
     Solution
First, we need to convert the angle measure into radians. Because 30 degrees is one of our special angles, we already
know the equivalent radian measure, but we can also convert:

The area of the sector is then

So the area is about
698 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

TRY IT #9  In central pivot irrigation, which creates the field shapes similar to the image at the beginning of
           Equations and Inequalities, a large irrigation pipe on wheels rotates around a center point. A
           farmer has a central pivot system with a radius of 400 meters. If water restrictions only allow her
           to water 150 thousand square meters a day, what angle should she set the system to cover? Write
           the answer in radian measure to two decimal places.

Use Linear and Angular Speed to Describe Motion on a Circular Path

In addition to finding the area of a sector, we can use angles to describe the speed of a moving object. An object
traveling in a circular path has two types of speed. Linear speed is speed along a straight path and can be determined
by the distance it moves along (its displacement) in a given time interval. For instance, if a wheel with radius 5 inches
rotates once a second, a point on the edge of the wheel moves a distance equal to the circumference, or inches,
every second. So the linear speed of the point is in./s. The equation for linear speed is as follows where is linear
speed, is displacement, and is time.

Angular speed results from circular motion and can be determined by the angle through which a point rotates in a given
time interval. In other words, angular speed is angular rotation per unit time. So, for instance, if a gear makes a full

rotation every 4 seconds, we can calculate its angular speed as          90 degrees per second. Angular speed can

be given in radians per second, rotations per minute, or degrees per hour for example. The equation for angular speed
is as follows, where (read as omega) is angular speed, is the angle traversed, and is time.

Combining the definition of angular speed with the arc length equation,  we can find a relationship between
angular and linear speeds. The angular speed equation can be solved for
length equation gives:                                                   giving  Substituting this into the arc

Substituting this into the linear speed equation gives:

Angular and Linear Speed
As a point moves along a circle of radius its angular speed, is the angular rotation per unit time,

The linear speed, of the point can be found as the distance traveled, arc length per unit time,

When the angular speed is measured in radians per unit time, linear speed and angular speed are related by the
equation
This equation states that the angular speed in radians, representing the amount of rotation occurring in a unit of
time, can be multiplied by the radius to calculate the total arc length traveled in a unit of time, which is the definition
of linear speed.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                              7.1 · Angles 699

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the amount of angle rotation and the time elapsed, calculate the angular speed.
   1. If necessary, convert the angle measure to radians.
   2. Divide the angle in radians by the number of time units elapsed:
   3. The resulting speed will be in radians per time unit.

Water wheels have been used for thousands of years to transfer the power of flowing water to other devices. The image
below depicts the design of the the 3rd century Roman water wheel in Hierapolis, a city in what is now Turkey. Water
turned the wheel, which in turn rotated a crank connected to two saws used to cut blocks. These design elements were
used in water wheel applications throughout the world, and even provided the underlying principle for the steam
engine, invented about 1500 years later.

  EXAMPLE 10

Finding Angular Speed
A water wheel, shown in Figure 24, completes 1 rotation every 5 seconds. Find the angular speed in radians per second.

             Figure 24

     Solution                                                  radians in 5 seconds, so the angular speed would be
The wheel completes 1 rotation, or passes through an angle of

                        radians per second.

TRY IT #10   A vintage vinyl record is played on a turntable rotating clockwise at a rate of 45 rotations per
             minute. Find the angular speed in radians per second.

...

     HOW TO

Given the radius of a circle, an angle of rotation, and a length of elapsed time, determine the linear speed.

 1. Convert the total rotation to radians if necessary.
 2. Divide the total rotation in radians by the elapsed time to find the angular speed: apply
700 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

          3. Multiply the angular speed by the length of the radius to find the linear speed, expressed in terms of the length
                unit used for the radius and the time unit used for the elapsed time: apply

         EXAMPLE 11
       Finding a Linear Speed
       A bicycle has wheels 28 inches in diameter. A tachometer determines the wheels are rotating at 180 RPM (revolutions per
       minute). Find the speed the bicycle is traveling down the road.

            Solution
       Here, we have an angular speed and need to find the corresponding linear speed, since the linear speed of the outside
       of the tires is the speed at which the bicycle travels down the road.
       We begin by converting from rotations per minute to radians per minute. It can be helpful to utilize the units to make
       this conversion:

       Using the formula from above along with the radius of the wheels, we can find the linear speed:

       Remember that radians are a unitless measure, so it is not necessary to include them.
       Finally, we may wish to convert this linear speed into a more familiar measurement, like miles per hour.

TRY IT #11  A satellite is rotating around Earth at 0.25 radian per hour at an altitude of 242 km above Earth. If
            the radius of Earth is 6378 kilometers, find the linear speed of the satellite in kilometers per hour.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with angles, arc length, and areas of sectors.

Angles in Standard Position (http://openstax.org/l/standardpos)
Angle of Rotation (http://openstax.org/l/angleofrotation)
Coterminal Angles (http://openstax.org/l/coterminal)
Determining Coterminal Angles (http://openstax.org/l/detcoterm)
Positive and Negative Coterminal Angles (http://openstax.org/l/posnegcoterm)
Radian Measure (http://openstax.org/l/radianmeas)
Coterminal Angles in Radians (http://openstax.org/l/cotermrad)
Arc Length and Area of a Sector (http://openstax.org/l/arclength)

        7.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Draw an angle in standard     2. Explain why there are an    3. State what a positive or
    position. Label the vertex,      infinite number of angles      negative angle signifies, and
    initial side, and terminal       that are coterminal to a       explain how to draw each.
    side.                            certain angle.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.1 · Angles 701

4. How does radian measure      5. Explain the differences
    of an angle compare to the      between linear speed and
    degree measure? Include an      angular speed when
    explanation of 1 radian in      describing motion along a
    your paragraph.                 circular path.

Graphical

For the following exercises, draw an angle in standard position with the given measure.

6.                              7.                                   8.

9.                              10.                                  11.

12.                             13.                                  14.

15.                             16.                                  17.

18.                             19.                                  20.

21.

For the following exercises, refer to Figure 25. Round to two decimal places.

22. Find the arc length.                                  Figure 25
                                23. Find the area of the sector.
702 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

       For the following exercises, refer to Figure 26. Round to two decimal places.

24. Find the arc length.                                   Figure 26
                                 25. Find the area of the sector.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, convert angles in radians to degrees.

26. radians                      27. radians                          28.             radians

29. radians                      30.  radians                         31.             radians

32.  radians

For the following exercises, convert angles in degrees to radians.

33.                              34.                                  35.

36.                              37.                                  38.

39.

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the length of a circular arc. Round to two decimal places.

40. Find the length of the arc   41. Find the length of the arc       42. Find the length of the arc
      of a circle of radius 12         of a circle of radius 5.02           of a circle of diameter 14
      inches subtended by a            miles subtended by the               meters subtended by the
      central angle of radians.        central angle of                     central angle of

43. Find the length of the arc   44. Find the length of the arc       45. Find the length of the arc
      of a circle of radius 10         of a circle of radius 5              of a circle of diameter 12
      centimeters subtended by         inches subtended by the              meters subtended by the
      the central angle of             central angle of                     central angle is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              7.1 · Angles 703

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the area of the sector. Round to four decimal places.

46. A sector of a circle has a     47. A sector of a circle has a    48. A sector of a circle with
      central angle of and a             central angle of and a            diameter 10 feet and an
      radius 6 cm.                       radius of 20 cm.                  angle of radians.

49. A sector of a circle with
      radius of 0.7 inches and an
      angle of radians.

For the following exercises, find the angle between and    that is coterminal to the given angle.
                                                                    52.
50.                                51.

53.

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and  in radians that is coterminal to the given angle.
                                                                         56.
54.                                55.

57.

Real-World Applications            59. A bicycle with 24-inch        60. A wheel of radius 8 inches
                                         diameter wheels is                is rotating 15°/s. What is
58. A truck with 32-inch                 traveling at 15 mi/h. Find        the linear speed the
      diameter wheels is                 the angular speed of the          angular speed in RPM, and
      traveling at 60 mi/h. Find         wheels in rad/min. How            the angular speed in rad/s?
      the angular speed of the           many revolutions per
      wheels in rad/min. How             minute do the wheels
      many revolutions per               make?
      minute do the wheels
      make?

61. A wheel of radius inches       62. A computer hard drive disc    63. When being burned in a
      is rotating rad/s. What            has diameter of 120               writable CD-R drive, the
      is the linear speed the            millimeters. When playing         angular speed of a CD is
      angular speed in RPM, and          audio, the angular speed          often much faster than
      the angular speed in deg/          varies to keep the linear         when playing audio, but
      s?                                 speed constant where the          the angular speed still
                                         disc is being read. When          varies to keep the linear
                                         reading along the outer           speed constant where the
                                         edge of the disc, the             disc is being written. When
                                         angular speed is about 200        writing along the outer
                                         RPM (revolutions per              edge of the disc, the
                                         minute). Find the linear          angular speed of one drive
                                         speed.                            is about 4800 RPM
                                                                           (revolutions per minute).
                                                                           Find the linear speed if the
                                                                           CD has diameter of 120
                                                                           millimeters.
704 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

64. A person is standing on the      65. Find the distance along an               66. Find the distance along an
      equator of Earth (radius             arc on the surface of Earth                  arc on the surface of Earth
      3960 miles). What are their          that subtends a central                      that subtends a central
      linear and angular speeds?           angle of 5 minutes                           angle of 7 minutes
                                                                               .                                            .

                                           The radius of Earth is 3960                  The radius of Earth is
                                           miles.                                       miles.

67. Consider a clock with an
      hour hand and minute
      hand. What is the measure
      of the angle the minute
      hand traces in minutes?

Extensions                           69. A city is located at 40                  70. A city is located at 75
                                           degrees north latitude.                      degrees north latitude.
68. Two cities have the same               Assume the radius of the                     Assume the radius of the
      longitude. The latitude of           earth is 3960 miles and the                  earth is 3960 miles and the
      city A is 9.00 degrees north         earth rotates once every 24                  earth rotates once every 24
      and the latitude of city B is        hours. Find the linear                       hours. Find the linear
      30.00 degree north.                  speed of a person who                        speed of a person who
      Assume the radius of the             resides in this city.                        resides in this city.
      earth is 3960 miles. Find
      the distance between the
      two cities.

71. Find the linear speed of the     72. A bicycle has wheels 28                  73. A car travels 3 miles. Its
      moon if the average                  inches in diameter. A                        tires make 2640
      distance between the earth           tachometer determines                        revolutions. What is the
      and moon is 239,000 miles,           that the wheels are                          radius of a tire in inches?
      assuming the orbit of the            rotating at 180 RPM
      moon is circular and                 (revolutions per minute).
      requires about 28 days.              Find the speed the bicycle
      Express answer in miles              is travelling down the road.
      per hour.

74. A wheel on a tractor has a
      24-inch diameter. How
      many revolutions does the
      wheel make if the tractor
      travels 4 miles?

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:

Use right triangles to evaluate trigonometric functions.

Find function values for                            and

Use equal cofunctions of complementary angles.
Use the definitions of trigonometric functions of any angle.
Use right-triangle trigonometry to solve applied problems.

Mt. Everest, which straddles the border between China and Nepal, is the tallest mountain in the world. Measuring its
height is no easy task. In fact, the actual measurement has been a source of controversy for hundreds of years. The

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 705

measurement process involves the use of triangles and a branch of mathematics known as trigonometry. In this section,
we will define a new group of functions known as trigonometric functions, and find out how they can be used to
measure heights, such as those of the tallest mountains.

Using Right Triangles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions

Figure 1 shows a right triangle with a vertical side of length and a horizontal side has length Notice that the triangle
is inscribed in a circle of radius 1. Such a circle, with a center at the origin and a radius of 1, is known as a unit circle.

                                                                              Figure 1
We can define the trigonometric functions in terms an angle t and the lengths of the sides of the triangle. The adjacent
side is the side closest to the angle, x. (Adjacent means "next to.") The opposite side is the side across from the angle, y.
The hypotenuse is the side of the triangle opposite the right angle, 1. These sides are labeled in Figure 2.

                                            Figure 2 The sides of a right triangle in relation to angle
Given a right triangle with an acute angle of the first three trigonometric functions are listed.

A common mnemonic for remembering these relationships is SohCahToa, formed from the first letters of "Sine is
opposite over hypotenuse, Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, Tangent is opposite over adjacent."
For the triangle shown in Figure 1, we have the following.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given the side lengths of a right triangle and one of the acute angles, find the sine, cosine, and tangent of that
  angle.
   1. Find the sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse.
   2. Find the cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.
   3. Find the tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side.
706 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

         EXAMPLE 1
       Evaluating a Trigonometric Function of a Right Triangle
       Given the triangle shown in Figure 3, find the value of

                                                                                     Figure 3
            Solution
       The side adjacent to the angle is 15, and the hypotenuse of the triangle is 17.

              TRY IT #1 Given the triangle shown in Figure 4, find the value of

                                                                          Figure 4

      Reciprocal Functions

       In addition to sine, cosine, and tangent, there are three more functions. These too are defined in terms of the sides of
       the triangle.

       Take another look at these definitions. These functions are the reciprocals of the first three functions.

       When working with right triangles, keep in mind that the same rules apply regardless of the orientation of the triangle.
       In fact, we can evaluate the six trigonometric functions of either of the two acute angles in the triangle in Figure 5. The
       side opposite one acute angle is the side adjacent to the other acute angle, and vice versa.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                    7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 707

                                    Figure 5 The side adjacent to one angle is opposite the other angle.
Many problems ask for all six trigonometric functions for a given angle in a triangle. A possible strategy to use is to find
the sine, cosine, and tangent of the angles first. Then, find the other trigonometric functions easily using the reciprocals.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the side lengths of a right triangle, evaluate the six trigonometric functions of one of the acute angles.

   1. If needed, draw the right triangle and label the angle provided.
   2. Identify the angle, the adjacent side, the side opposite the angle, and the hypotenuse of the right triangle.
   3. Find the required function:

          sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse
          cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse
          tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side
          secant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the adjacent side
          cosecant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the opposite side
          cotangent as the ratio of the adjacent side to the opposite side

  EXAMPLE 2

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Angles Not in Standard Position
Using the triangle shown in Figure 6, evaluate

          Figure 6

Solution

     Analysis
Another approach would have been to find sine, cosine, and tangent first. Then find their reciprocals to determine the
other functions.
708 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

TRY IT #2 Using the triangle shown in Figure 7,evaluate

                                                    Figure 7

Finding Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths

It is helpful to evaluate the trigonometric functions as they relate to the special angles--multiples of  and

Remember, however, that when dealing with right triangles, we are limited to angles between

Suppose we have a        triangle, which can also be described as a  triangle. The sides have lengths in

the relation             The sides of a             triangle, which can also be described as a            triangle, have

lengths in the relation  These relations are shown in Figure 8.

                                                       Figure 8 Side lengths of special triangles
We can then use the ratios of the side lengths to evaluate trigonometric functions of special angles.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given trigonometric functions of a special angle, evaluate using side lengths.
   1. Use the side lengths shown in Figure 8 for the special angle you wish to evaluate.
   2. Use the ratio of side lengths appropriate to the function you wish to evaluate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 709

  EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of using side lengths.

     Solution

     TRY IT #3 Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of using side lengths.

Using Equal Cofunction of Complements

If we look more closely at the relationship between the sine and cosine of the special angles, we notice a pattern. In a

right triangle with angles of and  we see that the sine of  namely          is also the cosine of while the sine of
namely is also the cosine of

See Figure 9.

                Figure 9 The sine of equals the cosine of and vice versa.

This result should not be surprising because, as we see from Figure 9, the side opposite the angle of is also the side

adjacent to so  and                are exactly the same ratio of the same two sides,  and Similarly,

and            are also the same ratio using the same two sides, and

The interrelationship between the sines and cosines of and also holds for the two acute angles in any right triangle,
since in every case, the ratio of the same two sides would constitute the sine of one angle and the cosine of the other.
710 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

       Since the three angles of a triangle add to and the right angle is the remaining two angles must also add up to
       That means that a right triangle can be formed with any two angles that add to --in other words, any two
      complementary angles. So we may state a cofunction identity: If any two angles are complementary, the sine of one is
       the cosine of the other, and vice versa. This identity is illustrated in Figure 10.

                     Figure 10 Cofunction identity of sine and cosine of complementary angles

Using this identity, we can state without calculating, for instance, that the sine of  equals the cosine of  and that
the sine of equals the cosine of We can also state that if, for a given angle                         then                as
well.

    Cofunction Identities

    The cofunction identities in radians are listed in Table 1.

                                 Table 1

               ...

                  HOW TO

    Given the sine and cosine of an angle, find the sine or cosine of its complement.
     1. To find the sine of the complementary angle, find the cosine of the original angle.
     2. To find the cosine of the complementary angle, find the sine of the original angle.

    EXAMPLE 4

Using Cofunction Identities

If             find

     Solution
According to the cofunction identities for sine and cosine, we have the following.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 711

So

TRY IT #4 If  find

Using Trigonometric Functions

In previous examples, we evaluated the sine and cosine in triangles where we knew all three sides. But the real power of
right-triangle trigonometry emerges when we look at triangles in which we know an angle but do not know all the sides.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a right triangle, the length of one side, and the measure of one acute angle, find the remaining sides.

   1. For each side, select the trigonometric function that has the unknown side as either the numerator or the
        denominator. The known side will in turn be the denominator or the numerator.

   2. Write an equation setting the function value of the known angle equal to the ratio of the corresponding sides.
   3. Using the value of the trigonometric function and the known side length, solve for the missing side length.

  EXAMPLE 5

Finding Missing Side Lengths Using Trigonometric Ratios
Find the unknown sides of the triangle in Figure 11.

                                                                             Figure 11
     Solution
We know the angle and the opposite side, so we can use the tangent to find the adjacent side.

We rearrange to solve for

We can use the sine to find the hypotenuse.

Again, we rearrange to solve for
712 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

TRY IT #5    A right triangle has one angle of      and a hypotenuse of 20. Find the unknown sides and angle of
             the triangle.

Using Right Triangle Trigonometry to Solve Applied Problems

Right-triangle trigonometry has many practical applications. For example, the ability to compute the lengths of sides of a
triangle makes it possible to find the height of a tall object without climbing to the top or having to extend a tape
measure along its height. We do so by measuring a distance from the base of the object to a point on the ground some
distance away, where we can look up to the top of the tall object at an angle. The angle of elevation of an object above
an observer relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's
eye. The right triangle this position creates has sides that represent the unknown height, the measured distance from
the base, and the angled line of sight from the ground to the top of the object. Knowing the measured distance to the
base of the object and the angle of the line of sight, we can use trigonometric functions to calculate the unknown height.

Similarly, we can form a triangle from the top of a tall object by looking downward. The angle of depression of an object
below an observer relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the
observer's eye. See Figure 12.

                                                    Figure 12

...

     HOW TO

Given a tall object, measure its height indirectly.

 1. Make a sketch of the problem situation to keep track of known and unknown information.
 2. Lay out a measured distance from the base of the object to a point where the top of the object is clearly visible.
 3. At the other end of the measured distance, look up to the top of the object. Measure the angle the line of sight

      makes with the horizontal.
 4. Write an equation relating the unknown height, the measured distance, and the tangent of the angle of the line

      of sight.
 5. Solve the equation for the unknown height.

  EXAMPLE 6

Measuring a Distance Indirectly
To find the height of a tree, a person walks to a point 30 feet from the base of the tree. She measures an angle of
between a line of sight to the top of the tree and the ground, as shown in Figure 13. Find the height of the tree.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 713

                                                           Figure 13

     Solution                            and the adjacent side is 30 ft long. The opposite side is the unknown height.
We know that the angle of elevation is

The trigonometric function relating the side opposite to an angle and the side adjacent to the angle is the tangent. So we
will state our information in terms of the tangent of letting be the unknown height.

The tree is approximately 46 feet tall.

TRY IT #6  How long a ladder is needed to reach a windowsill 50 feet above the ground if the ladder rests
           against the building making an angle of with the ground? Round to the nearest foot.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with right triangle trigonometry.

Finding Trig Functions on Calculator (http://openstax.org/l/findtrigcal)
Finding Trig Functions Using a Right Triangle (http://openstax.org/l/trigrttri)
Relate Trig Functions to Sides of a Right Triangle (http://openstax.org/l/reltrigtri)
Determine Six Trig Functions from a Triangle (http://openstax.org/l/sixtrigfunc)
Determine Length of Right Triangle Side (http://openstax.org/l/rttriside)

        7.2 SECTION EXERCISES                              2. When a right triangle with a hypotenuse of 1 is
                                                               placed in a circle of radius 1, which sides of the
Verbal                                                         triangle correspond to the x- and y-coordinates?

1. For the given right triangle, label the adjacent side,
    opposite side, and hypotenuse for the indicated
    angle.
714 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

3. The tangent of an angle       4. What is the relationship           5. Explain the cofunction
    compares which sides of the      between the two acute                 identity.
    right triangle?                  angles in a right triangle?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use cofunctions of complementary angles.

6.                               7.                                    8.

9.

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the missing sides if side is opposite angle  side is opposite angle
and side is the hypotenuse.

10.                              11.                                   12.

13.                              14.                                   15.

16.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use Figure 14 to evaluate each trigonometric function of angle

                                                    Figure 14

17.                              18.                                   19.

20.                              21.                                   22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              7.2 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 715

For the following exercises, use Figure 15 to evaluate each trigonometric function of angle

                      Figure 15

23.         24.                  25.

26.         27.                  28.

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given triangle.

29.         30.                  31.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the length of each side to four decimal places.

32.         33.                       34.

35.              36.

37.         38.                  39.

40.         41.
716 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Extensions                                          43. Find                           44. Find

42. Find

45. Find                                            46. A radio tower is located 400   47. A radio tower is located 325
                                                          feet from a building. From         feet from a building. From
                                                          a window in the building, a        a window in the building, a
                                                          person determines that the         person determines that the
                                                          angle of elevation to the          angle of elevation to the
                                                          top of the tower is and            top of the tower is and
                                                          that the angle of                  that the angle of
                                                          depression to the bottom           depression to the bottom
                                                          of the tower is How                of the tower is How
                                                          tall is the tower?                 tall is the tower?

48. A 200-foot tall monument        49. A 400-foot tall monument       50. There is an antenna on the
      is located in the distance.         is located in the distance.        top of a building. From a
      From a window in a                  From a window in a                 location 300 feet from the
      building, a person                  building, a person                 base of the building, the
      determines that the angle           determines that the angle          angle of elevation to the
      of elevation to the top of          of elevation to the top of         top of the building is
      the monument is and                 the monument is and                measured to be From
      that the angle of                   that the angle of                  the same location, the
      depression to the bottom            depression to the bottom           angle of elevation to the
      of the monument is                  of the monument is                 top of the antenna is
      How far is the person from          How far is the person from         measured to be Find
      the monument?                       the monument?                      the height of the antenna.

51. There is lightning rod on
      the top of a building. From
      a location 500 feet from the
      base of the building, the
      angle of elevation to the
      top of the building is
      measured to be From
      the same location, the
      angle of elevation to the
      top of the lightning rod is
      measured to be Find
      the height of the lightning
      rod.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               7.3 · Unit Circle 717

Real-World Applications             53. A 23-ft ladder leans against       54. The angle of elevation to
                                          a building so that the angle           the top of a building in
52. A 33-ft ladder leans against          between the ground and                 Charlotte is found to be 9
      a building so that the angle        the ladder is How high                 degrees from the ground
      between the ground and              does the ladder reach up               at a distance of 1 mile from
      the ladder is How high              the side of the building?              the base of the building.
      does the ladder reach up                                                   Using this information, find
      the side of the building?                                                  the height of the building.

55. The angle of elevation to       56. Assuming that a 370-foot
      the top of a building in            tall giant redwood grows
      Seattle is found to be 2            vertically, if I walk a certain
      degrees from the ground             distance from the tree and
      at a distance of 2 miles            measure the angle of
      from the base of the                elevation to the top of the
      building. Using this                tree to be how far
      information, find the               from the base of the tree
      height of the building.             am I?

7.3 Unit Circle

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:

Find function values for the sine and cosine of                            and

Identify the domain and range of sine and cosine functions.
Find reference angles.
Use reference angles to evaluate trigonometric functions.

Figure 1 The Singapore Flyer was the world's tallest Ferris wheel until being overtaken by the High Roller in Las Vegas
and the Ain Dubai in Dubai. (credit: Vibin JK/Flickr)

Looking for a thrill? Then consider a ride on the Ain Dubai, the world's tallest Ferris wheel. Located in Dubai, the most
populous city and the financial and tourism hub of the United Arab Emirates, the wheel soars to 820 feet, about 1.5
tenths of a mile. Described as an observation wheel, riders enjoy spectacular views of the Burj Khalifa (the world's tallest
building) and the Palm Jumeirah (a human-made archipelago home to over 10,000 people and 20 resorts) as they travel
from the ground to the peak and down again in a repeating pattern. In this section, we will examine this type of
revolving motion around a circle. To do so, we need to define the type of circle first, and then place that circle on a
coordinate system. Then we can discuss circular motion in terms of the coordinate pairs.

Finding Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle

We have already defined the trigonometric functions in terms of right triangles. In this section, we will redefine them in
718 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

terms of the unit circle. Recall that a unit circle is a circle centered at the origin with radius 1, as shown in Figure 2. The

angle (in radians) that intercepts forms an arc of length Using the formula  and knowing that                we see

that for a unit circle,

The x- and y-axes divide the coordinate plane into four quarters called quadrants. We label these quadrants to mimic the
direction a positive angle would sweep. The four quadrants are labeled I, II, III, and IV.

For any angle we can label the intersection of the terminal side and the unit circle as by its coordinates,    The

coordinates and will be the outputs of the trigonometric functions           and          respectively. This

means           and

                                 Figure 2 Unit circle where the central angle is radians

Unit Circle

A unit circle has a center at    and radius In a unit circle, the length of the intercepted arc is equal to the radian
measure of the central angle

Let    be the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of arc length The        coordinates of this point can be

described as functions of the angle.

Defining Sine and Cosine Functions from the Unit Circle

The sine function relates a real number to the y-coordinate of the point where the corresponding angle intercepts the
unit circle. More precisely, the sine of an angle equals the y-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length
In Figure 2, the sine is equal to Like all functions, the sine function has an input and an output. Its input is the
measure of the angle; its output is the y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the unit circle.

The cosine function of an angle equals the x-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length In Figure 3,
the cosine is equal to

                                                    Figure 3

Because it is understood that sine and cosine are functions, we do not always need to write them with parentheses:

is the same as           and     is the same as     Likewise,  is a commonly used shorthand notation for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7.3 · Unit Circle 719

Be aware that many calculators and computers do not recognize the shorthand notation. When in doubt, use the extra
parentheses when entering calculations into a calculator or computer.

Sine and Cosine Functions

If is a real number and a point  on the unit circle corresponds to a central angle then

...

     HOW TO

Given a point P  on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of  find the sine and cosine.

1. The sine of is equal to the y-coordinate of point
2. The cosine of is equal to the x-coordinate of point

EXAMPLE 1

Finding Function Values for Sine and Cosine

Point is a point on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of as shown in Figure 4. Find  and

                                             Figure 4

Solution

We know that     is the x-coordinate of the corresponding point on the unit circle and       is the y-coordinate of the

corresponding point on the unit circle. So:

TRY IT #1        A certain angle corresponds to a point on the unit circle at                as shown in Figure 5.

                 Find      and
720 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                                                  Figure 5

Finding Sines and Cosines of Angles on an Axis

For quadrantral angles, the corresponding point on the unit circle falls on the x- or y-axis. In that case, we can easily
calculate cosine and sine from the values of and

EXAMPLE 2

Calculating Sines and Cosines along an Axis

Find       and

Solution

Moving counterclockwise around the unit circle from the positive x-axis brings us to the top of the circle, where the

      coordinates are            as shown in Figure 6.

                                                        Figure 6

We can then use our definitions of cosine and sine.

The cosine of is 0; the sine of is 1.
       TRY IT #2 Find cosine and sine of the angle

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         7.3 · Unit Circle 721

The Pythagorean Identity

Now that we can define sine and cosine, we will learn how they relate to each other and the unit circle. Recall that the

equation for the unit circle is       Because         and             we can substitute for and to get

                  This equation,               is known as the Pythagorean Identity. See Figure 7.

                                                                              Figure 7
We can use the Pythagorean Identity to find the cosine of an angle if we know the sine, or vice versa. However, because
the equation yields two solutions, we need additional knowledge of the angle to choose the solution with the correct
sign. If we know the quadrant where the angle is, we can easily choose the correct solution.

  Pythagorean Identity

  The Pythagorean Identity states that, for any real number

    ...

         HOW TO

    Given the sine of some angle and its quadrant location, find the cosine of

    1. Substitute the known value of  into the Pythagorean Identity.

    2. Solve for

    3. Choose the solution with the appropriate sign for the x-values in the quadrant where is located.

    EXAMPLE 3

Finding a Cosine from a Sine or a Sine from a Cosine

If  and is in the second quadrant, find

     Solution
If we drop a vertical line from the point on the unit circle corresponding to we create a right triangle, from which we
can see that the Pythagorean Identity is simply one case of the Pythagorean Theorem. See Figure 8.
722 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                                                              Figure 8
Substituting the known value for sine into the Pythagorean Identity,

Because the angle is in the second quadrant, we know the x-value is a negative real number, so the cosine is also
negative.

    TRY IT #3 If                     and is in the fourth quadrant, find

Finding Sines and Cosines of Special Angles

We have already learned some properties of the special angles, such as the conversion from radians to degrees, and we
found their sines and cosines using right triangles. We can also calculate sines and cosines of the special angles using
the Pythagorean Identity.

Finding Sines and Cosines of                        Angles                              triangle is an isosceles triangle, so the x-

First, we will look at angles of or                 as shown in Figure 9. A

and y-coordinates of the corresponding point on the circle are the same. Because the x- and y-values are the same, the
sine and cosine values will also be equal.

                                                    Figure 9

At  which is 45 degrees, the radius of the unit circle bisects the first quadrantal angle. This means the radius lies

along the line  A unit circle has a radius equal to 1 so the right triangle formed below the line  has sides

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 7.3 · Unit Circle 723

and             and radius = 1. See Figure 10.

                                                 Figure 10

From the Pythagorean Theorem we get
We can then substitute
Next we combine like terms.
And solving for we get

In quadrant I,

At   or 45 degrees,

If we then rationalize the denominators, we get

Therefore, the  coordinates of a point on a circle of radius at an angle of are

Finding Sines and Cosines of and Angles                   First, we will draw a triangle inside a circle with one side at

Next, we will find the cosine and sine at an angle of or
724 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

an angle of and another at an angle of                  as shown in Figure 11. If the resulting two right triangles are combined

into one large triangle, notice that all three angles of this larger triangle will be as shown in Figure 12.

                                                        Figure 11

                                                        Figure 12

Because all the angles are equal, the sides are also equal. The vertical line has length  and since the sides are all

equal, we can also conclude that                    or  Since

And since  in our unit circle,

Using the Pythagorean Identity, we can find the cosine value.

The        coordinates for the point on a circle of radius at an angle of are             At                    the radius of

the unit circle, 1, serves as the hypotenuse of a 30-60-90 degree right triangle,         as shown in Figure 13. Angle has

measure At point we draw an angle                       with measure of We know the angles in a triangle sum to        so

the measure of angle is also Now we have an equilateral triangle. Because each side of the equilateral triangle

     is the same length, and we know one side is the radius of the unit circle, all sides must be of length 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   7.3 · Unit Circle 725

                                                 Figure 13

The measure of angle          is 30°. Angle  is double angle  so its measure is 60°. is the perpendicular

bisector of so it cuts in half. This means that is the radius, or Notice that is the x-coordinate of

point which is at the intersection of the 60° angle and the unit circle. This gives us a triangle  with hypotenuse of

1 and side of length

From the Pythagorean Theorem, we get

Substituting          we get

Solving for we get

Since         has the terminal side in quadrant I where the y-coordinate is positive, we choose    the positive value.
                                                                                                        so we can find
At     (60°), the     coordinates for the point on a circle of radius at an angle of are

the sine and cosine.

We have now found the cosine and sine values for all of the most commonly encountered angles in the first quadrant of
the unit circle. Table 1 summarizes these values.

                              Angle          or  or           or  or

                              Table 1
726 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                 Cosine 1                                         0

                                 Sine 0                                           1

                                       Table 1
Figure 14 shows the common angles in the first quadrant of the unit circle.

                                                           Figure 14

Using a Calculator to Find Sine and Cosine

To find the cosine and sine of angles other than the special angles, we turn to a computer or calculator. Be aware: Most

calculators can be set into "degree" or "radian" mode, which tells the calculator the units for the input value. When we

evaluate   on our calculator, it will evaluate it as the cosine of 30 degrees if the calculator is in degree mode, or the

cosine of 30 radians if the calculator is in radian mode.

...

     HOW TO

Given an angle in radians, use a graphing calculator to find the cosine.

 1. If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode.
 2. Press the COS key.
 3. Enter the radian value of the angle and press the close-parentheses key ")".
 4. Press ENTER.

EXAMPLE 4

Using a Graphing Calculator to Find Sine and Cosine

Evaluate   using a graphing calculator or computer.

     Solution
Enter the following keystrokes:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                        7.3 · Unit Circle 727

     Analysis
We can find the cosine or sine of an angle in degrees directly on a calculator with degree mode. For calculators or
software that use only radian mode, we can find the sine of for example, by including the conversion factor to
radians as part of the input:

TRY IT #4 Evaluate

Identifying the Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine Functions

Now that we can find the sine and cosine of an angle, we need to discuss their domains and ranges. What are the

domains of the sine and cosine functions? That is, what are the smallest and largest numbers that can be inputs of the

functions? Because angles smaller than and angles larger than can still be graphed on the unit circle and have real

values of  and there is no lower or upper limit to the angles that can be inputs to the sine and cosine functions.

The input to the sine and cosine functions is the rotation from the positive x-axis, and that may be any real number.

What are the ranges of the sine and cosine functions? What are the least and greatest possible values for their output?

We can see the answers by examining the unit circle, as shown in Figure 15. The bounds of the x-coordinate are

The bounds of the y-coordinate are also  Therefore, the range of both the sine and cosine functions is

                                                                             Figure 15

Finding Reference Angles

We have discussed finding the sine and cosine for angles in the first quadrant, but what if our angle is in another
quadrant? For any given angle in the first quadrant, there is an angle in the second quadrant with the same sine value.
Because the sine value is the y-coordinate on the unit circle, the other angle with the same sine will share the same
y-value, but have the opposite x-value. Therefore, its cosine value will be the opposite of the first angle's cosine value.

Likewise, there will be an angle in the fourth quadrant with the same cosine as the original angle. The angle with the
same cosine will share the same x-value but will have the opposite y-value. Therefore, its sine value will be the opposite
of the original angle's sine value.

As shown in Figure 16, angle has the same sine value as angle the cosine values are opposites. Angle has the same
cosine value as angle the sine values are opposites.
728 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                                                             Figure 16

Recall that an angle's reference angle is the acute angle, formed by the terminal side of the angle and the horizontal
axis. A reference angle is always an angle between and or and radians. As we can see from Figure 17, for any
angle in quadrants II, III, or IV, there is a reference angle in quadrant I.

                                                    Figure 17

...

     HOW TO

Given an angle between and find its reference angle.

1. An angle in the first quadrant is its own reference angle.

2. For an angle in the second or third quadrant, the reference angle is  or

3. For an angle in the fourth quadrant, the reference angle is  or

4. If an angle is less than or greater than add or subtract as many times as needed to find an equivalent

angle between and

  EXAMPLE 5                      as shown in Figure 18.

Finding a Reference Angle
Find the reference angle of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          7.3 · Unit Circle 729

                                                Figure 18

Solution

Because   is in the third quadrant, the reference angle is

TRY IT #5 Find the reference angle of

Using Reference Angles

Now let's take a moment to reconsider the Ferris wheel introduced at the beginning of this section. Suppose a rider

snaps a photograph while stopped twenty feet above ground level. The rider then rotates three-quarters of the way

around the circle. What is the rider's new elevation? To answer questions such as this one, we need to evaluate the sine

or cosine functions at angles that are greater than 90 degrees or at a negative angle. Reference angles make it possible

to evaluate trigonometric functions for angles outside the first quadrant. They can also be used to find  coordinates

for those angles. We will use the reference angle of the angle of rotation combined with the quadrant in which the

terminal side of the angle lies.

Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions

We can find the cosine and sine of any angle in any quadrant if we know the cosine or sine of its reference angle. The
absolute values of the cosine and sine of an angle are the same as those of the reference angle. The sign depends on the
quadrant of the original angle. The cosine will be positive or negative depending on the sign of the x-values in that
quadrant. The sine will be positive or negative depending on the sign of the y-values in that quadrant.

Using Reference Angles to Find Cosine and Sine

Angles have cosines and sines with the same absolute value as their reference angles. The sign (positive or negative)
can be determined from the quadrant of the angle.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an angle in standard position, find the reference angle, and the cosine and sine of the original angle.

 1. Measure the angle between the terminal side of the given angle and the horizontal axis. That is the reference
      angle.

 2. Determine the values of the cosine and sine of the reference angle.
 3. Give the cosine the same sign as the x-values in the quadrant of the original angle.
730 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

4. Give the sine the same sign as the y-values in the quadrant of the original angle.

EXAMPLE 6

Using Reference Angles to Find Sine and Cosine

 Using a reference angle, find the exact value of           and

 Using the reference angle, find                    and

  Solution

          is located in the second quadrant. The angle it makes with the x-axis is          so the reference

angle is

This tells us that  has the same sine and cosine values as except for the sign.

Since     is in the second quadrant, the x-coordinate of the point on the circle is negative, so the cosine value is

negative. The y-coordinate is positive, so the sine value is positive.

          is in the third quadrant. Its reference angle is              The cosine and sine of are both  In the third

quadrant, both and are negative, so:

  TRY IT #6          Use the reference angle of              to find    and
                     Use the reference angle of             to find     and

Using Reference Angles to Find Coordinates

Now that we have learned how to find the cosine and sine values for special angles in the first quadrant, we can use

symmetry and reference angles to fill in cosine and sine values for the rest of the special angles on the unit circle. They

are shown in Figure 19. Take time to learn the           coordinates of all of the major angles in the first quadrant.

                    Figure 19 Special angles and coordinates of corresponding points on the unit circle

In addition to learning the values for special angles, we can use reference angles to find  coordinates of any point
on the unit circle, using what we know of reference angles along with the identities

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.3 · Unit Circle 731

First we find the reference angle corresponding to the given angle. Then we take the sine and cosine values of the
reference angle, and give them the signs corresponding to the y- and x-values of the quadrant.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the angle of a point on a circle and the radius of the circle, find the  coordinates of the point.

 1. Find the reference angle by measuring the smallest angle to the x-axis.
 2. Find the cosine and sine of the reference angle.
 3. Determine the appropriate signs for and in the given quadrant.

EXAMPLE 7

Using the Unit Circle to Find Coordinates
Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of

     Solution             is in the third quadrant.
We know that the angle

First, let's find the reference angle by measuring the angle to the x-axis. To find the reference angle of an angle whose
terminal side is in quadrant III, we find the difference of the angle and

Next, we will find the cosine and sine of the reference angle.

We must determine the appropriate signs for x and y in the given quadrant. Because our original angle is in the third
quadrant, where both and are negative, both cosine and sine are negative.

Now we can calculate the  coordinates using the identities           and

The coordinates of the point are  on the unit circle.

TRY IT #7 Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sine and cosine functions.
Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle (http://openstax.org/l/trigunitcir)
Sine and Cosine from the Unit (http://openstax.org/l/sincosuc)
Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Six (http://openstax.org/l/sincosmult)
Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Four (http://openstax.org/l/sincosmult4)
Trigonometric Functions Using Reference Angles (http://openstax.org/l/trigrefang)
732 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

        7.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe the unit circle.       2. What do the x- and               3. Discuss the difference
                                       y-coordinates of the points         between a coterminal angle
                                       on the unit circle represent?       and a reference angle.

4. Explain how the cosine of an    5. Explain how the sine of an
    angle in the second                angle in the second
    quadrant differs from the          quadrant differs from the
    cosine of its reference angle      sine of its reference angle in
    in the unit circle.                the unit circle.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use the given sign of the sine and cosine functions to find the quadrant in which the terminal
point determined by lies.

6.         and                     7.               and                8.          and

9.         and

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each trigonometric function.

10.                                11.                                 12.

13.                                14.                                 15.

16.                                17.                                 18.

19.                                20.                                 21.

22.

Numeric

For the following exercises, state the reference angle for the given angle.

23.                                24.                                 25.

26.                                27.                                 28.

29.                                30.                                 31.

32.                                33.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 7.3 · Unit Circle 733

For the following exercises, find the reference angle, the quadrant of the terminal side, and the sine and cosine of each
angle. If the angle is not one of the angles on the unit circle, use a calculator and round to three decimal places.

34.                                  35.                                  36.

37.                                  38.                                  39.

40.                                  41.                                  42.

43.                                  44.                                  45.

46.                                  47.                                  48.

49.

For the following exercises, find the requested value.

50. If     and is in the             51. If             and is in the     52. If  and is in the

     fourth quadrant, find                first quadrant, find                 second quadrant, find

53. If     and is in                 54. Find the coordinates of the      55. Find the coordinates of the
                                           point on a circle with radius        point on a circle with radius
     the third quadrant, find              15 corresponding to an               20 corresponding to an
                                           angle of                             angle of

56. Find the coordinates of the      57. Find the coordinates of the      58. State the domain of the
      point on a circle with radius        point on a circle with radius        sine and cosine functions.
      8 corresponding to an                16 corresponding to an
      angle of                             angle of

59. State the range of the sine
      and cosine functions.

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the given point on the unit circle to find the value of the sine and cosine of

60.                                  61.                                  62.
734 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

63.                              64.                65.

66.                              67.                68.

69.                              70.                71.

72.                              73.                74.

75.                              76.                77.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     7.3 · Unit Circle 735

78.                                     79.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate.

80.                            81.                                   82.

83.                            84.                                   85.

86.                            87.                                   88.

89.

Extensions

For the following exercises, evaluate.

90.                            91.                                   92.

93.                            94.                                   95.

96.                            97.                                   98.

99.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A child enters a carousel that takes one minute to revolve once around.

The child enters at the point  that is, on the due north position. Assume the carousel revolves counter clockwise.

100. What are the coordinates  101. What are the coordinates         102. What are the coordinates
        of the child after 45          of the child after 90                 of the child after 125
        seconds?                       seconds?                              seconds?
736 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

103. When will the child have              104. When will the child have
        coordinates                                coordinates
                              if the ride          if the ride lasts 6 minutes?
        lasts 6 minutes? (There
        are multiple answers.)

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:

Find exact values of the trigonometric functions secant, cosecant, tangent, and cotangent of  and

Use reference angles to evaluate the trigonometric functions secant, tangent, and cotangent.
Use properties of even and odd trigonometric functions.
Recognize and use fundamental identities.
Evaluate trigonometric functions with a calculator.

A wheelchair ramp that meets the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act must make an angle with the ground
whose tangent is or less, regardless of its length. A tangent represents a ratio, so this means that for every 1 inch of

rise, the ramp must have 12 inches of run. Trigonometric functions allow us to specify the shapes and proportions of
objects independent of exact dimensions. We have already defined the sine and cosine functions of an angle. Though
sine and cosine are the trigonometric functions most often used, there are four others. Together they make up the set of
six trigonometric functions. In this section, we will investigate the remaining functions.

Finding Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Secant, Cosecant, Tangent,
and Cotangent

We can also define the remaining functions in terms of the unit circle with a point    corresponding to an angle of

as shown in Figure 1. As with the sine and cosine, we can use the                coordinates to find the other functions.

                                                    Figure 1

The first function we will define is the tangent. The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the y-value to the x-value of the

corresponding point on the unit circle. In Figure 1, the tangent of angle is equal to  Because the y-value is

equal to the sine of and the x-value is equal to the cosine of the tangent of angle can also be defined as

The tangent function is abbreviated as The remaining three functions can all be expressed as

reciprocals of functions we have already defined.

· The secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine function. In Figure 1, the secant of angle is equal to
                             The secant function is abbreviated as

· The cotangent function is the reciprocal of the tangent function. In Figure 1, the cotangent of angle is equal to
                             The cotangent function is abbreviated as

· The cosecant function is the reciprocal of the sine function. In Figure 1, the cosecant of angle is equal to
                             The cosecant function is abbreviated as

Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions

If is a real number and                    is a point where the terminal side of an angle of radians intercepts the unit circle, then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 737

EXAMPLE 1

Finding Trigonometric Functions from a Point on the Unit Circle

The point  is on the unit circle, as shown in Figure 2. Find                   and

     Solution                                                     Figure 2
Because we know the         coordinates of the point on the unit circle indicated by angle we can use those coordinates
to find the six functions:

TRY IT #1 The point         is on the unit circle, as shown in Figure 3. Find
                                    and
738 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

                                                               Figure 3

EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Trigonometric Functions of an Angle

Find                             and                when

Solution

We have previously used the properties of equilateral triangles to demonstrate that  and  We

can use these values and the definitions of tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent as functions of sine and cosine to
find the remaining function values.

      TRY IT #2 Find                                      and  when

Because we know the sine and cosine values for the common first-quadrant angles, we can find the other function
values for those angles as well by setting equal to the cosine and equal to the sine and then using the definitions of
tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent. The results are shown in Table 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                              7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 739

Angle

Cosine   1                    0

Sine     0                    1

Tangent  0              1     Undefined

Secant   1                 2  Undefined

Cosecant Undefined   2        1

Cotangent Undefined     1     0

                             Table 1

Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent

We can evaluate trigonometric functions of angles outside the first quadrant using reference angles as we have already
done with the sine and cosine functions. The procedure is the same: Find the reference angle formed by the terminal
side of the given angle with the horizontal axis. The trigonometric function values for the original angle will be the same
as those for the reference angle, except for the positive or negative sign, which is determined by x- and y-values in the
original quadrant. Figure 4 shows which functions are positive in which quadrant.

To help remember which of the six trigonometric functions are positive in each quadrant, we can use the mnemonic
phrase "A Smart Trig Class." Each of the four words in the phrase corresponds to one of the four quadrants, starting
with quadrant I and rotating counterclockwise. In quadrant I, which is "A," all of the six trigonometric functions are
positive. In quadrant II, "Smart," only sine and its reciprocal function, cosecant, are positive. In quadrant III, "Trig," only
tangent and its reciprocal function, cotangent, are positive. Finally, in quadrant IV, "Class," only cosine and its reciprocal
function, secant, are positive.

              Figure 4 The trigonometric functions are each listed in the quadrants in which they are positive.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an angle not in the first quadrant, use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions.
 1. Measure the angle formed by the terminal side of the given angle and the horizontal axis. This is the reference
740 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

     angle.
2. Evaluate the function at the reference angle.
3. Observe the quadrant where the terminal side of the original angle is located. Based on the quadrant, determine

     whether the output is positive or negative.

EXAMPLE 3

Using Reference Angles to Find Trigonometric Functions
Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of

Solution

The angle between this angle's terminal side and the x-axis is so that is the reference angle. Since  is in the third

quadrant, where both and are negative, cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant will be negative, while tangent and
cotangent will be positive.

TRY IT #3 Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of

Using Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions

To be able to use our six trigonometric functions freely with both positive and negative angle inputs, we should examine
how each function treats a negative input. As it turns out, there is an important difference among the functions in this
regard.

Consider the function            shown in Figure 5. The graph of the function is symmetrical about the y-axis. All along

the curve, any two points with opposite x-values have the same function value. This matches the result of calculation:

                                 and so on. So      is an even function, a function such that two inputs that are

opposites have the same output. That means

                                 Figure 5 The function           is an even function.

Now consider the function        shown in Figure 6. The graph is not symmetrical about the y-axis. All along the

graph, any two points with opposite x-values also have opposite y-values. So           is an odd function, one such that

two inputs that are opposites have outputs that are also opposites. That means

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 741

Figure 6 The function                                                                 is an odd function.

We can test whether a trigonometric function is even or odd by drawing a unit circle with a positive and a negative angle,
as in Figure 7. The sine of the positive angle is The sine of the negative angle is The sine function, then, is an odd
function. We can test each of the six trigonometric functions in this fashion. The results are shown in Table 2.

                                                                            Figure 7

                                   Table 2
Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions
An even function is one in which
An odd function is one in which
Cosine and secant are even:
Sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are odd:
742 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

         EXAMPLE 4
       Using Even and Odd Properties of Trigonometric Functions
       If the secant of angle is 2, what is the secant of

            Solution
       Secant is an even function. The secant of an angle is the same as the secant of its opposite. So if the secant of angle is
       2, the secant of is also 2.

              TRY IT #4 If the cotangent of angle is what is the cotangent of

     Recognizing and Using Fundamental Identities

       We have explored a number of properties of trigonometric functions. Now, we can take the relationships a step further,
       and derive some fundamental identities. Identities are statements that are true for all values of the input on which they
       are defined. Usually, identities can be derived from definitions and relationships we already know. For example, the
       Pythagorean Identity we learned earlier was derived from the Pythagorean Theorem and the definitions of sine and
       cosine.

         Fundamental Identities
         We can derive some useful identities from the six trigonometric functions. The other four trigonometric functions
         can be related back to the sine and cosine functions using these basic relationships:

EXAMPLE 5

Using Identities to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions

 Given                           evaluate

 Given                           evaluate

     Solution

Because we know the sine and cosine values for these angles, we can use identities to evaluate the other functions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 743

                     


       TRY IT #5 Evaluate

  EXAMPLE 6
Using Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions
Simplify

     Solution
We can simplify this by rewriting both functions in terms of sine and cosine.

By showing that  can be simplified to        we have, in fact, established a new identity.

TRY IT #6 Simplify

Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity

We can use these fundamental identities to derive alternate forms of the Pythagorean Identity,  One

form is obtained by dividing both sides by

The other form is obtained by dividing both sides by

Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity
744 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

    EXAMPLE 7

Using Identities to Relate Trigonometric Functions

If             and is in quadrant IV, as shown in Figure 8, find the values of the other five trigonometric functions.

                                                      Figure 8

     Solution                                                   and the remaining functions by relating them to
We can find the sine using the Pythagorean Identity,
sine and cosine.

The sign of the sine depends on the y-values in the quadrant where the angle is located. Since the angle is in quadrant
IV, where the y-values are negative, its sine is negative,

The remaining functions can be calculated using identities relating them to sine and cosine.

    TRY IT #7 If                 and                  find the values of the other five functions.

As we discussed at the beginning of the chapter, a function that repeats its values in regular intervals is known as a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 745

periodic function. The trigonometric functions are periodic. For the four trigonometric functions, sine, cosine, cosecant
and secant, a revolution of one circle, or will result in the same outputs for these functions. And for tangent and
cotangent, only a half a revolution will result in the same outputs.

Other functions can also be periodic. For example, the lengths of months repeat every four years. If represents the

length time, measured in years, and  represents the number of days in February, then                     This pattern

repeats over and over through time. In other words, every four years, February is guaranteed to have the same number

of days as it did 4 years earlier. The positive number 4 is the smallest positive number that satisfies this condition and is

called the period. A period is the shortest interval over which a function completes one full cycle--in this example, the

period is 4 and represents the time it takes for us to be certain February has the same number of days.

Period of a Function

The period  of a repeating function  is the number representing the interval such that                   for any
value of

The period of the cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant functions is

The period of the tangent and cotangent functions is

  EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Values of Trigonometric Functions
Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle based on Figure 9.

                                                      Figure 9

Solution
746 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

              TRY IT #8 Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle based on Figure 10.

                                              Figure 10

  EXAMPLE 9
Finding the Value of Trigonometric Functions
If

     Solution

       TRY IT #9

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions with a Calculator

We have learned how to evaluate the six trigonometric functions for the common first-quadrant angles and to use them
as reference angles for angles in other quadrants. To evaluate trigonometric functions of other angles, we use a
scientific or graphing calculator or computer software. If the calculator has a degree mode and a radian mode, confirm
the correct mode is chosen before making a calculation.
Evaluating a tangent function with a scientific calculator as opposed to a graphing calculator or computer algebra
system is like evaluating a sine or cosine: Enter the value and press the TAN key. For the reciprocal functions, there may
not be any dedicated keys that say CSC, SEC, or COT. In that case, the function must be evaluated as the reciprocal of a
sine, cosine, or tangent.
If we need to work with degrees and our calculator or software does not have a degree mode, we can enter the degrees
multiplied by the conversion factor to convert the degrees to radians. To find the secant of we could press

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 747

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an angle measure in radians, use a scientific calculator to find the cosecant.
   1. If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode.
   2. Enter:
   3. Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses.
   4. Press the SIN key.
   5. Press the = key.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an angle measure in radians, use a graphing utility/calculator to find the cosecant.
    · If the graphing utility has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode.
    · Enter:
    · Press the SIN key.
    · Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses.
    · Press the ENTER key.

  EXAMPLE 10
Evaluating the Cosecant Using Technology
Evaluate the cosecant of

     Solution
For a scientific calculator, enter information as follows:

       TRY IT #10 Evaluate the cotangent of

       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with other trigonometric functions.
      Determing Trig Function Values (http://openstax.org/l/trigfuncval)
      More Examples of Determining Trig Functions (http://openstax.org/l/moretrigfun)
      Pythagorean Identities (http://openstax.org/l/pythagiden)
      Trig Functions on a Calculator (http://openstax.org/l/trigcalc)
748 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

        7.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. On an interval of              2. What would you estimate           3. For any angle in quadrant II,
    can the sine and cosine           the cosine of degrees to             if you knew the sine of the
    values of a radian measure        be? Explain your reasoning.          angle, how could you
    ever be equal? If so, where?                                           determine the cosine of the
                                                                           angle?

4. Describe the secant            5. Tangent and cotangent have
    function.                         a period of What does
                                      this tell us about the output
                                      of these functions?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression.

6.                                7.                                   8.

9.                                10.                                  11.

12.                               13.                                  14.

15.                               16.                                  17.

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the expression.

18.                               19.                                  20.

21.                               22.                                  23.

24.                               25.                                  26.

27.                               28.                                  29.

30.                               31.                                  32.

33.                               34.                                  35.

36.                               37.                                  38. If    and is in

                                                                            quadrant II, find

                                                                            and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   7.4 · The Other Trigonometric Functions 749

39. If      and is in          40. If  , and        , find 41. If                                and
                                                                                             find
     quadrant III, find
                                                                                                      and

     and

42. If                    and  43. If  what is the  44. If         what is the
      and                find

45. If      what is the        46. If  what is the 47. If                                    what is the

48. If      what is the

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the angle in the unit circle to find the value of the each of the six trigonometric functions.

49.                            50.                  51.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate to three decimal places.

52.                            53.                  54.

55.                            56.                  57.

58.                            59.                  60.

61.
750 7 · The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Extensions

For the following exercises, use identities to evaluate the expression.

62. If       and                          63. If                   and              64. If               and
            find                                                   find                                  find

65. If          and                       66. Determine whether the function
            find                                                              is even, odd, or neither.

67. Determine whether the function                                 68. Determine whether the function
                                                 is even, odd, or                                         is even, odd, or neither.

      neither.

69. Determine whether the function
                                      is even, odd, or neither.

For the following exercises, use identities to simplify the expression.

70.                                       71.

Real-World Applications

72. The amount of sunlight in a           73. The amount of sunlight in a           74. The equation
      certain city can be modeled               certain city can be modeled
      by the function                           by the function                           models the blood pressure,
                                   where                                     where             where represents time

        represents the hours of                   represents the hours of                 in seconds. (a) Find the
      sunlight, and is the day                  sunlight, and is the day                  blood pressure after 15
      of the year. Use the                      of the year. Use the                      seconds. (b) What are the
      equation to find how many                 equation to find how many                 maximum and minimum
      hours of sunlight there are               hours of sunlight there are               blood pressures?
      on February 11, the 42nd                  on September 24, the
      day of the year. State the                267th day of the year. State
      period of the function.                   the period of the function.

75. The height of a piston, in            76. The height of a piston, in
      inches, can be modeled by                 inches, can be modeled by
      the equation                              the equation
                             where                                      where
      represents the crank angle.               represents the crank angle.
      Find the height of the                    Find the height of the
      piston when the crank                     piston when the crank
      angle is                                  angle is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   7 · Chapter Review 751

Chapter Review

Key Terms

adjacent side in a right triangle, the side between a given angle and the right angle
angle the union of two rays having a common endpoint
angle of depression the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's eye, assuming the

    object is positioned lower than the observer
angle of elevation the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's eye, assuming the

    object is positioned higher than the observer
angular speed the angle through which a rotating object travels in a unit of time
arc length the length of the curve formed by an arc
area of a sector area of a portion of a circle bordered by two radii and the intercepted arc; the fraction multiplied

    by the area of the entire circle
cosecant the reciprocal of the sine function: on the unit circle,

cosine function the x-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle
cotangent the reciprocal of the tangent function: on the unit circle,

coterminal angles description of positive and negative angles in standard position sharing the same terminal side

degree a unit of measure describing the size of an angle as one-360th of a full revolution of a circle

hypotenuse the side of a right triangle opposite the right angle

identities statements that are true for all values of the input on which they are defined

initial side the side of an angle from which rotation begins

linear speed the distance along a straight path a rotating object travels in a unit of time; determined by the arc length

measure of an angle the amount of rotation from the initial side to the terminal side

negative angle description of an angle measured clockwise from the positive x-axis

opposite side in a right triangle, the side most distant from a given angle

period the smallest interval of a repeating function such that

positive angle description of an angle measured counterclockwise from the positive x-axis

Pythagorean Identity a corollary of the Pythagorean Theorem stating that the square of the cosine of a given angle

plus the square of the sine of that angle equals 1

quadrantal angle an angle whose terminal side lies on an axis

radian the measure of a central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc equal in length to the radius of that circle

radian measure the ratio of the arc length formed by an angle divided by the radius of the circle

ray one point on a line and all points extending in one direction from that point; one side of an angle

reference angle the measure of the acute angle formed by the terminal side of the angle and the horizontal axis

secant the reciprocal of the cosine function: on the unit circle,

sine function the y-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle

standard position the position of an angle having the vertex at the origin and the initial side along the positive x-axis

tangent the quotient of the sine and cosine: on the unit circle,

terminal side the side of an angle at which rotation ends

unit circle a circle with a center at  and radius 1

vertex the common endpoint of two rays that form an angle

Key Equations

arc length

area of a sector

angular speed

linear speed

linear speed related to angular speed
752 7 · Chapter Review

Trigonometric Functions

Reciprocal Trigonometric Functions

Cofunction Identities

          Cosine
           Sine

Pythagorean Identity

Tangent function
Secant function
Cosecant function
Cotangent function

Key Concepts

7.1 Angles

· An angle is formed from the union of two rays, by keeping the initial side fixed and rotating the terminal side. The
    amount of rotation determines the measure of the angle.

· An angle is in standard position if its vertex is at the origin and its initial side lies along the positive x-axis. A positive
    angle is measured counterclockwise from the initial side and a negative angle is measured clockwise.

· To draw an angle in standard position, draw the initial side along the positive x-axis and then place the terminal side
    according to the fraction of a full rotation the angle represents. See Example 1.

· In addition to degrees, the measure of an angle can be described in radians. See Example 2.

· To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion  See Example 3 and Example 4.

· Two angles that have the same terminal side are called coterminal angles.

· We can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting      or See Example 5 and Example 6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    7 · Chapter Review 753

· Coterminal angles can be found using radians just as they are for degrees. See Example 7.
· The length of a circular arc is a fraction of the circumference of the entire circle. See Example 8.
· The area of sector is a fraction of the area of the entire circle. See Example 9.
· An object moving in a circular path has both linear and angular speed.
· The angular speed of an object traveling in a circular path is the measure of the angle through which it turns in a

    unit of time. See Example 10.
· The linear speed of an object traveling along a circular path is the distance it travels in a unit of time. See Example

    11.

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry

· We can define trigonometric functions as ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle. See Example 1.
· The same side lengths can be used to evaluate the trigonometric functions of either acute angle in a right triangle.

    See Example 2.
· We can evaluate the trigonometric functions of special angles, knowing the side lengths of the triangles in which

    they occur. See Example 3.
· Any two complementary angles could be the two acute angles of a right triangle.
· If two angles are complementary, the cofunction identities state that the sine of one equals the cosine of the other

    and vice versa. See Example 4.
· We can use trigonometric functions of an angle to find unknown side lengths.
· Select the trigonometric function representing the ratio of the unknown side to the known side. See Example 5.
· Right-triangle trigonometry facilitates the measurement of inaccessible heights and distances.
· The unknown height or distance can be found by creating a right triangle in which the unknown height or distance

    is one of the sides, and another side and angle are known. See Example 6.

7.3 Unit Circle

· Finding the function values for the sine and cosine begins with drawing a unit circle, which is centered at the origin
    and has a radius of 1 unit.

· Using the unit circle, the sine of an angle equals the y-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length
   whereas the cosine of an angle equals the x-value of the endpoint. See Example 1.

· The sine and cosine values are most directly determined when the corresponding point on the unit circle falls on an
    axis. See Example 2.

· When the sine or cosine is known, we can use the Pythagorean Identity to find the other. The Pythagorean Identity
    is also useful for determining the sines and cosines of special angles. See Example 3.

· Calculators and graphing software are helpful for finding sines and cosines if the proper procedure for entering
    information is known. See Example 4.

· The domain of the sine and cosine functions is all real numbers.
· The range of both the sine and cosine functions is
· The sine and cosine of an angle have the same absolute value as the sine and cosine of its reference angle.
· The signs of the sine and cosine are determined from the x- and y-values in the quadrant of the original angle.
· An angle's reference angle is the size angle, formed by the terminal side of the angle and the horizontal axis. See

    Example 5.
· Reference angles can be used to find the sine and cosine of the original angle. See Example 6.
· Reference angles can also be used to find the coordinates of a point on a circle. See Example 7.

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions

· The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the y-value to the x-value of the corresponding point on the unit circle.

· The secant, cotangent, and cosecant are all reciprocals of other functions. The secant is the reciprocal of the cosine

function, the cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent function, and the cosecant is the reciprocal of the sine

function.

· The six trigonometric functions can be found from a point on the unit circle. See Example 1.

· Trigonometric functions can also be found from an angle. See Example 2.

· Trigonometric functions of angles outside the first quadrant can be determined using reference angles. See

Example 3.

· A function is said to be even if     and odd if  for all x in the domain of f.

· Cosine and secant are even; sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are odd.

· Even and odd properties can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions. See Example 4.

· The Pythagorean Identity makes it possible to find a cosine from a sine or a sine from a cosine.

· Identities can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions. See Example 5 and Example 6.
754 7 · Exercises

    · Fundamental identities such as the Pythagorean Identity can be manipulated algebraically to produce new

     identities. See Example 7.

    · The trigonometric functions repeat at regular intervals.

    · The period of a repeating function is the smallest interval such that                   for any value of

    · The values of trigonometric functions can be found by mathematical analysis. See Example 8 and Example 9.

    · To evaluate trigonometric functions of other angles, we can use a calculator or computer software. See Example 10.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Angles

For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to degrees.

1.                                2.

For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to radians.

3.                                4.                                  5. Find the length of an arc in a
                                                                          circle of radius 7 meters
                                                                          subtended by the central
                                                                          angle of

6. Find the area of the sector
    of a circle with diameter 32
    feet and an angle of

    radians.

For the following exercises, find the angle between and          that is coterminal with the given angle.

7.                                8.

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and       in radians that is coterminal with the given angle.

9.                                10.

For the following exercises, draw the angle provided in standard position on the Cartesian plane.

11.                               12.                                 13.

14.                               15. Find the linear speed of a      16. A car wheel with a

                                       point on the equator of the         diameter of 18 inches spins

                                       earth if the earth has a            at the rate of 10

                                       radius of 3,960 miles and           revolutions per second.

                                       the earth rotates on its axis       What is the car's speed in

                                       every 24 hours. Express             miles per hour? Round to

                                       answer in miles per hour.           the nearest hundredth.

                                       Round to the nearest

                                       hundredth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    7 · Exercises 755

Right Triangle Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use side lengths to evaluate.

17.                                 18.                          19.

20.                                 21.

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the lengths of the other two sides of the right triangle.

22.                                 23.

For the following exercises, use Figure 1 to evaluate each trigonometric function.

                                         Figure 1

24.                                 25.

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given triangle.

26.                                 27.                          28. A 15-ft ladder leans against

                                                                      a building so that the angle

                                                                      between the ground and

                                                                      the ladder is How high

                                                                      does the ladder reach up

                                                                      the side of the building?

                                                                      Find the answer to four

                                                                      decimal places.

29. The angle of elevation to
      the top of a building in
      Baltimore is found to be 4
      degrees from the ground
      at a distance of 1 mile from
      the base of the building.
      Using this information, find
      the height of the building.
      Find the answer to four
      decimal places.

Unit Circle                         31. Find the exact value of  32. Find the exact value of
30. Find the exact value of
756 7 · Exercises

33. State the reference angle     34. State the reference angle     35. Compute cosine of
      for                               for

36. Compute sine of               37. State the domain of the       38. State the range of the sine
                                        sine and cosine functions.        and cosine functions.

The Other Trigonometric Functions

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the given expression.

39.                               40.                               41.

42.

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the given expression.

43.                               44.                               45. If           what is

                                                                            the

46. If                 what is the 47. If     find                  48. If           find

                                                                                            There are two
                                                                            possible solutions.

49. Which trigonometric           50. Which trigonometric
      functions are even?               functions are odd?

Practice Test

1. Convert    radians to          2. Convert  to radians.           3. Find the length of a circular
    degrees.                                                            arc with a radius 12
                                                                        centimeters subtended by
                                                                        the central angle of

4. Find the area of the sector    5. Find the angle between         6. Find the angle between 0
    with radius of 8 feet and an                                        and in radians that is
    angle of radians.                  and    that is coterminal        coterminal with

                                       with

7. Draw the angle      in         8. Draw the angle in              9. A carnival has a Ferris wheel
                                                                        with a diameter of 80 feet.
     standard position on the         standard position on the          The time for the Ferris wheel
                                      Cartesian plane.                  to make one revolution is 75
     Cartesian plane.                                                   seconds. What is the linear
                                                                        speed in feet per second of
                                                                        a point on the Ferris wheel?
                                                                        What is the angular speed in
                                                                        radians per second?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7 · Exercises 757

10. Find the missing sides of    11. Find the missing sides of  12. The angle of elevation to
      the triangle                     the triangle.                  the top of a building in
                                                                      Chicago is found to be 9
                                                                      degrees from the ground
                                                                      at a distance of 2000 feet
                                                                      from the base of the
                                                                      building. Using this
                                                                      information, find the
                                                                      height of the building.

13. Find the exact value of      14. Compute sine of            15. State the domain of the
                                                                      sine and cosine functions.
16. State the range of the sine  17. Find the exact value of
      and cosine functions.                                     18. Find the exact value of

19. Use reference angles to      20. Use reference angles to    21. If  what is the
      evaluate                         evaluate

22. If  find                     23. Find the missing angle:
758 7 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      8 · Introduction 759

8  PERIODIC FUNCTIONS

Dawn colors the sky over the Olare Motorgi Conservancy bordering tha Masai Mara National Reserve in Kenya. (Credit:
Modification of "KenyaLive_Day_#02" by Make it Kenya/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions
  8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions
  8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions

      Introduction to Periodic Functions

The sun has played a core role in many religions. The ancient Egyptian culture portrayed the sun god, Ra (sometimes
written as Re), as undertaking a two-part daily journey, with one portion in the sky (day) and the other through the
underworld (night). Surya, the Hindu sun god, traces a similar path through the sky on a chariot pulled by seven horses.
While their origins and associated narratives are quite different, both Ra and Surya are primary deities and seen as
creators and preservers of life. In many Native American cultures, the sun is core to spiritual and religious practice, but is
not always a deity. The Sun Dance, practiced differently by many Native American tribes, was a ceremony that generally
paid homage to the sun and, in many cases, tested or expressed the strength of the tribe's people.

As one of the most most prominent natural phenomena and with its close association to giving life, the sun was an
obvious subject for reverence. And its regularity, even in ancient times, made it the primary determinant of time. Each
day, the sun rises in an easterly direction, approaches some maximum height relative to the celestial equator, and sets in
a westerly direction. The celestial equator is an imaginary line that divides the visible universe into two halves in much
the same way Earth's equator is an imaginary line that divides the planet into two halves. The exact path the sun
appears to follow depends on the exact location on Earth, but each location observes a predictable pattern over time.

The pattern of the sun's motion throughout the course of a year is a periodic function. Creating a visual representation
of a periodic function in the form of a graph can help us analyze the properties of the function. In this chapter, we will
investigate graphs of sine, cosine, and other trigonometric functions.

8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:

   Graph variations of      and                    .

   Use phase shifts of sine and cosine curves.
760 8 · Periodic Functions

              Figure 1 Light can be separated into colors because of its wavelike properties. (credit: "wonderferret"/ Flickr)
       White light, such as the light from the sun, is not actually white at all. Instead, it is a composition of all the colors of the
       rainbow in the form of waves. The individual colors can be seen only when white light passes through an optical prism
       that separates the waves according to their wavelengths to form a rainbow.
       Light waves can be represented graphically by the sine function. In the chapter on Trigonometric Functions
       (http://openstax.org/books/precalculus-2e/pages/5-introduction-to-trigonometric-functions), we examined
       trigonometric functions such as the sine function. In this section, we will interpret and create graphs of sine and cosine
       functions.

     Graphing Sine and Cosine Functions

       Recall that the sine and cosine functions relate real number values to the x- and y-coordinates of a point on the unit
       circle. So what do they look like on a graph on a coordinate plane? Let's start with the sine function. We can create a
       table of values and use them to sketch a graph. Table 1 lists some of the values for the sine function on a unit circle.

                                             Table 1
       Plotting the points from the table and continuing along the x-axis gives the shape of the sine function. See Figure 2.

                                                                         Figure 2 The sine function
       Notice how the sine values are positive between 0 and which correspond to the values of the sine function in
       quadrants I and II on the unit circle, and the sine values are negative between and which correspond to the values
       of the sine function in quadrants III and IV on the unit circle. See Figure 3.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 761

                                                     Figure 3 Plotting values of the sine function
Now let's take a similar look at the cosine function. Again, we can create a table of values and use them to sketch a
graph. Table 2 lists some of the values for the cosine function on a unit circle.

                                 Table 2
As with the sine function, we can plots points to create a graph of the cosine function as in Figure 4.

                                                                Figure 4 The cosine function
Because we can evaluate the sine and cosine of any real number, both of these functions are defined for all real
numbers. By thinking of the sine and cosine values as coordinates of points on a unit circle, it becomes clear that the
range of both functions must be the interval
In both graphs, the shape of the graph repeats after which means the functions are periodic with a period of A
periodic function is a function for which a specific horizontal shift, P, results in a function equal to the original function:

                         for all values of in the domain of When this occurs, we call the smallest such horizontal shift with
         the period of the function. Figure 5 shows several periods of the sine and cosine functions.
762 8 · Periodic Functions

                                              Figure 5

Looking again at the sine and cosine functions on a domain centered at the y-axis helps reveal symmetries. As we can

see in Figure 6, the sine function is symmetric about the origin. Recall from The Other Trigonometric Functions that we

determined from the unit circle that the sine function is an odd function because               Now we can clearly

see this property from the graph.

                                                     Figure 6 Odd symmetry of the sine function

Figure 7 shows that the cosine function is symmetric about the y-axis. Again, we determined that the cosine function is
an even function. Now we can see from the graph that

                                   Figure 7 Even symmetry of the cosine function

Characteristics of Sine and Cosine Functions

The sine and cosine functions have several distinct characteristics:

· They are periodic functions with a period of

· The domain of each function is   and the range is

· The graph of                   is symmetric about the origin, because it is an odd function.
· The graph of                   is symmetric about the -axis, because it is an even function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 763

Investigating Sinusoidal Functions

As we can see, sine and cosine functions have a regular period and range. If we watch ocean waves or ripples on a pond,
we will see that they resemble the sine or cosine functions. However, they are not necessarily identical. Some are taller
or longer than others. A function that has the same general shape as a sine or cosine function is known as a sinusoidal
function. The general forms of sinusoidal functions are

Determining the Period of Sinusoidal Functions

Looking at the forms of sinusoidal functions, we can see that they are transformations of the sine and cosine functions.
We can use what we know about transformations to determine the period.

In the general formula, is related to the period by        If             then the period is less than and the function

undergoes a horizontal compression, whereas if       then the period is greater than and the function undergoes

a horizontal stretch. For example,                   so the period is which we knew. If                      then

so the period is and the graph is compressed. If                          then  so the period is and the graph

is stretched. Notice in Figure 8 how the period is indirectly related to

                                                     Figure 8

Period of Sinusoidal Functions

If we let      and      in the general form equations of the sine and cosine functions, we obtain the forms

The period is

EXAMPLE 1

Identifying the Period of a Sine or Cosine Function
Determine the period of the function

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form

In the given equation,  so the period will be
764 8 · Periodic Functions

TRY IT #1 Determine the period of the function

Determining Amplitude

Returning to the general formula for a sinusoidal function, we have analyzed how the variable relates to the period.

Now let's turn to the variable so we can analyze how it is related to the amplitude, or greatest distance from rest.

represents the vertical stretch factor, and its absolute value is the amplitude. The local maxima will be a distance

above the horizontal midline of the graph, which is the line          because  in this case, the midline is the x-axis.

The local minima will be the same distance below the midline. If          the function is stretched. For example, the

amplitude of                     is twice the amplitude of            If       the function is compressed. Figure 9

compares several sine functions with different amplitudes.

                                                            Figure 9

Amplitude of Sinusoidal Functions

If we let     and                in the general form equations of the sine and cosine functions, we obtain the forms

The amplitude is which is the vertical height from the midline In addition, notice in the example that

EXAMPLE 2

Identifying the Amplitude of a Sine or Cosine Function                Is the function stretched or compressed vertically?
What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function                      The function is stretched.

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the function to the simplified form

In the given function,           so the amplitude is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 765

     Analysis          results in a reflection across the x-axis of the sine function, as shown in Figure 10.
The negative value of

                                                  Figure 10

TRY IT #2              What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function           Is the function stretched or
                       compressed vertically?

Analyzing Graphs of Variations of y = sin x and y = cos x

Now that we understand how and relate to the general form equation for the sine and cosine functions, we will
explore the variables and Recall the general form:

The value for a sinusoidal function is called the phase shift, or the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine

function. If  the graph shifts to the right. If   the graph shifts to the left. The greater the value of           the

more the graph is shifted. Figure 11 shows that the graph of             shifts to the right by units, which is

more than we see in the graph of                  which shifts to the right by units.

                                                  Figure 11

While relates to the horizontal shift, indicates the vertical shift from the midline in the general formula for a

sinusoidal function. See Figure 12. The function              has its midline at
766 8 · Periodic Functions

                                                                             Figure 12  with

Any value of other than zero shifts the graph up or down. Figure 13 compares
which is shifted 2 units up on a graph.

Variations of Sine and Cosine Functions      Figure 13                                  is the phase shift and
                                                    or
Given an equation in the form
   is the vertical shift.

EXAMPLE 3

Identifying the Phase Shift of a Function
Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form

In the given equation, notice that      and  So the phase shift is

or units to the left.

Analysis

We must pay attention to the sign in the equation for the general form of a sinusoidal function. The equation shows a

minus sign before Therefore                  can be rewritten as                              If the value of

is negative, the shift is to the left.

TRY IT #3 Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 767

EXAMPLE 4

Identifying the Vertical Shift of a Function
Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form

In the given equation,         so the shift is 3 units downward.

TRY IT #4 Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for

          ...

               HOW TO

Given a sinusoidal function in the form                           identify the midline, amplitude, period, and
phase shift.

 1. Determine the amplitude as
 2. Determine the period as
 3. Determine the phase shift as
 4. Determine the midline as

EXAMPLE 5

Identifying the Variations of a Sinusoidal Function from an Equation
Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the function

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form

          so the amplitude is

Next,     so the period is

There is no added constant inside the parentheses, so      and the phase shift is

Finally,   so the midline is

     Analysis                                              the midline is  and the amplitude is 3. See Figure 14.
Inspecting the graph, we can determine that the period is

                                                                      Figure 14
TRY IT #5 Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the function
768 8 · Periodic Functions

         EXAMPLE 6
       Identifying the Equation for a Sinusoidal Function from a Graph
       Determine the formula for the cosine function in Figure 15.

                                                                             Figure 15

     Solution
To determine the equation, we need to identify each value in the general form of a sinusoidal function.

The graph could represent either a sine or a cosine function that is shifted and/or reflected. When        the graph has

an extreme point,           Since the cosine function has an extreme point for  let us write our equation in terms of a

cosine function.

Let's start with the midline. We can see that the graph rises and falls an equal distance above and below  This

value, which is the midline, is in the equation, so

The greatest distance above and below the midline is the amplitude. The maxima are 0.5 units above the midline and the

minima are 0.5 units below the midline. So           Another way we could have determined the amplitude is by

recognizing that the difference between the height of local maxima and minima is 1, so                   Also, the graph is

reflected about the x-axis so that

The graph is not horizontally stretched or compressed, so  and the graph is not shifted horizontally, so

Putting this all together,

TRY IT #6 Determine the formula for the sine function in Figure 16.

                                                                  Figure 16

  EXAMPLE 7
Identifying the Equation for a Sinusoidal Function from a Graph
Determine the equation for the sinusoidal function in Figure 17.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 769

                                                Figure 17

     Solution
With the highest value at 1 and the lowest value at the midline will be halfway between at So

The distance from the midline to the highest or lowest value gives an amplitude of

The period of the graph is 6, which can be measured from the peak at     to the next peak at   or from the

distance between the lowest points. Therefore,      Using the positive value for we find that

So far, our equation is either                  or                       For the shape and shift, we have more

than one option. We could write this as any one of the following:

· a cosine shifted to the right
· a negative cosine shifted to the left
· a sine shifted to the left
· a negative sine shifted to the right

While any of these would be correct, the cosine shifts are easier to work with than the sine shifts in this case because
they involve integer values. So our function becomes

Again, these functions are equivalent, so both yield the same graph.
       TRY IT #7 Write a formula for the function graphed in Figure 18.

                                                             Figure 18

Graphing Variations of y = sin x and y = cos x

Throughout this section, we have learned about types of variations of sine and cosine functions and used that
information to write equations from graphs. Now we can use the same information to create graphs from equations.
Instead of focusing on the general form equations
770 8 · Periodic Functions

we will let       and            and work with a simplified form of the equations in the following examples.

...

     HOW TO

Given the function               sketch its graph.

1. Identify the amplitude,
2. Identify the period,

3. Start at the origin, with the function increasing to the right if is positive or decreasing if  is negative.

4. At             there is a local maximum for     or a minimum for        with

5. The curve returns to the x-axis at

6. There is a local minimum for                (maximum for      ) at      with

7. The curve returns again to the x-axis at

EXAMPLE 8

Graphing a Function and Identifying the Amplitude and Period
Sketch a graph of

     Solution
Let's begin by comparing the equation to the form

Step 1. We can see from the equation that          so the amplitude is 2.

Step 2. The equation shows that                so the period is

Step 3. Because is negative, the graph descends as we move to the right of the origin.

Step 4-7. The x-intercepts are at the beginning of one period,         the horizontal midpoints are at        and at the end

of one period at

The quarter points include the minimum at       and the maximum at         A local minimum will occur 2 units below

the midline, at             and a local maximum will occur at 2 units above the midline, at  Figure 19 shows the graph

of the function.

TRY IT #8                   Sketch a graph of      Figure 19
                            shift.                             Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 771

         ...

              HOW TO

Given a sinusoidal function with a phase shift and a vertical shift, sketch its graph.

1. Express the function in the general form
2. Identify the amplitude,
3. Identify the period,

4. Identify the phase shift,

5. Draw the graph of                       shifted to the right or left by  and up or down by

EXAMPLE 9

Graphing a Transformed Sinusoid
Sketch a graph of

Solution

Step 1. The function is already written in general form:                    This graph will have the shape of a sine

function, starting at the midline and increasing to the right.

Step 2.               The amplitude is 3.

Step 3. Since         we determine the period as follows.

The period is 8.      the phase shift is
Step 4. Since

The phase shift is 1 unit.
Step 5. Figure 20 shows the graph of the function.

               Figure 20 A horizontally compressed, vertically stretched, and horizontally shifted sinusoid

TRY IT #9             Draw a graph of                           Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase
                      shift.
772 8 · Periodic Functions

EXAMPLE 10

Identifying the Properties of a Sinusoidal Function

Given                             determine the amplitude, period, phase shift, and vertical shift. Then graph the

function.

     Solution
Begin by comparing the equation to the general form and use the steps outlined in Example 9.

Step 1. The function is already written in general form.

Step 2. Since               the amplitude is

Step 3.        so the period is                           The period is 4.

Step 4.        so we calculate the phase shift as                                   The phase shift is
Step 5.
               so the midline is               and the vertical shift is up 3.

Since is negative, the graph of the cosine function has been reflected about the x-axis.
Figure 21 shows one cycle of the graph of the function.

                                                          Figure 21

Using Transformations of Sine and Cosine Functions

We can use the transformations of sine and cosine functions in numerous applications. As mentioned at the beginning
of the chapter, circular motion can be modeled using either the sine or cosine function.

EXAMPLE 11

Finding the Vertical Component of Circular Motion
A point rotates around a circle of radius 3 centered at the origin. Sketch a graph of the y-coordinate of the point as a
function of the angle of rotation.

Solution

Recall that, for a point on a circle of radius r, the y-coordinate of the point is        so in this case, we get the

equation                         The constant 3 causes a vertical stretch of the y-values of the function by a factor of 3, which

we can see in the graph in Figure 22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 773

              Figure 22

    Analysis

Notice that the period of the function is still as we travel around the circle, we return to the point  for

              Because the outputs of the graph will now oscillate between and the amplitude of the sine wave

is

    TRY IT #10 What is the amplitude of the function  Sketch a graph of this function.

  EXAMPLE 12

Finding the Vertical Component of Circular Motion
A circle with radius 3 ft is mounted with its center 4 ft off the ground. The point closest to the ground is labeled P, as
shown in Figure 23. Sketch a graph of the height above the ground of the point as the circle is rotated; then find a
function that gives the height in terms of the angle of rotation.

                                                                             Figure 23

     Solution
Sketching the height, we note that it will start 1 ft above the ground, then increase up to 7 ft above the ground, and
continue to oscillate 3 ft above and below the center value of 4 ft, as shown in Figure 24.
774 8 · Periodic Functions

                                                                             Figure 24

Although we could use a transformation of either the sine or cosine function, we start by looking for characteristics that
would make one function easier to use than the other. Let's use a cosine function because it starts at the highest or
lowest value, while a sine function starts at the middle value. A standard cosine starts at the highest value, and this
graph starts at the lowest value, so we need to incorporate a vertical reflection.

Second, we see that the graph oscillates 3 above and below the center, while a basic cosine has an amplitude of 1, so this
graph has been vertically stretched by 3, as in the last example.

Finally, to move the center of the circle up to a height of 4, the graph has been vertically shifted up by 4. Putting these
transformations together, we find that

TRY IT #11                  A weight is attached to a spring that is then hung from a board, as shown in Figure 25. As the

                            spring oscillates up and down, the position of the weight relative to the board ranges from

                            in. (at time  to in. (at time  below the board. Assume the position of is given as a

                            sinusoidal function of Sketch a graph of the function, and then find a cosine function that gives

                            the position in terms of

                                                           Figure 25

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 775

EXAMPLE 13

Determining a Rider's Height on a Ferris Wheel
The London Eye is a huge Ferris wheel with a diameter of 135 meters (443 feet). It completes one rotation every 30
minutes. Riders board from a platform 2 meters above the ground. Express a rider's height above ground as a function
of time in minutes.

     Solution
With a diameter of 135 m, the wheel has a radius of 67.5 m. The height will oscillate with amplitude 67.5 m above and
below the center.

Passengers board 2 m above ground level, so the center of the wheel must be located                       m above ground
level. The midline of the oscillation will be at 69.5 m.

The wheel takes 30 minutes to complete 1 revolution, so the height will oscillate with a period of 30 minutes.

Lastly, because the rider boards at the lowest point, the height will start at the smallest value and increase, following the
shape of a vertically reflected cosine curve.

· Amplitude:      so

· Midline:    so

· Period: so

· Shape:

An equation for the rider's height would be

where is in minutes and is measured in meters.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of sine and cosine functions.

Amplitude and Period of Sine and Cosine (http://openstax.org/l/ampperiod)
Translations of Sine and Cosine (http://openstax.org/l/translasincos)
Graphing Sine and Cosine Transformations (http://openstax.org/l/transformsincos)
Graphing the Sine Function (http://openstax.org/l/graphsinefunc)

        8.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Why are the sine and cosine  2. How does the graph of         3. For the equation
    functions called periodic                                                                       what
    functions?                               compare with the
                                                                     constants affect the range
                                graph of                Explain      of the function and how do
                                                                     they affect the range?
                                how you could horizontally

                                translate the graph of

                                             to obtain

4. How does the range of a      5. How can the unit circle be
    translated sine function        used to construct the graph
    relate to the equation          of
776 8 · Periodic Functions

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph two full periods of each function and state the amplitude, period, and midline. State

the maximum and minimum y-values and their corresponding x-values on one period for  Round answers to two

decimal places if necessary.

6.                               7.   8.

9.                               10.  11.

12.                              13.  14.

15.                              16.  17.

For the following exercises, graph one full period of each function, starting at  For each function, state the

amplitude, period, and midline. State the maximum and minimum y-values and their corresponding x-values on one

period for  State the phase shift and vertical translation, if applicable. Round answers to two decimal places if

necessary.

18.                              19.  20.

21.                              22.  23. Determine the amplitude, midline,
                                            period, and an equation involving
                                            the sine function for the graph
                                            shown in Figure 26.

                                                                                  Figure 26

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              8.1 · Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 777

24. Determine the amplitude, period, 25. Determine the amplitude, period, 26. Determine the amplitude, period,

midline, and an equation involving midline, and an equation involving         midline, and an equation involving

cosine for the graph shown in             cosine for the graph shown in       sine for the graph shown in Figure

Figure 27.                                Figure 28.                          29.

                                                      Figure 28

                                                                                          Figure 29

            Figure 27

27. Determine the amplitude, period, 28. Determine the amplitude, period, 29. Determine the amplitude, period,

midline, and an equation involving        midline, and an equation involving  midline, and an equation involving

cosine for the graph shown in             sine for the graph shown in Figure  cosine for the graph shown in

Figure 30.                                31.                                 Figure 32.

                                                      Figure 31                           Figure 32

                         Figure 30

30. Determine the amplitude, period,
      midline, and an equation involving
      sine for the graph shown in Figure
      33.

            Figure 33
778 8 · Periodic Functions

Algebraic

For the following exercises, let

31. On          solve                 32. On          solve           33. Evaluate

34. On                                35. On          the maximum     36. On        the minimum
      Find all values of
                                      value(s) of the function        value(s) of the function

                                      occur(s) at what x-value(s)?    occur(s) at what x-value(s)?

37. Show that
      This means that
                         is an odd
      function and possesses
      symmetry with respect to
      ________________.

For the following exercises, let

38. On          solve the             39. On          solve           40. On        find the
      equation
                                                                      x-intercepts of

41. On          find the              42. On          solve the
                                            equation
x-values at which the

function has a maximum or

minimum value.

Technology

43. Graph                        on   44. Graph                   on  45. Graph               on

           Explain why the                            Did the graph              and verbalize how

graph appears as it does.             appear as predicted in the      the graph varies from the

                                      previous exercise?              graph of

46. Graph                        on   47. Graph              on the

the window                       and  window                 and

explain what the graph                explain what the graph

shows.                                shows.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 779

Real-World Applications

48. A Ferris wheel is 25 meters
      in diameter and boarded
      from a platform that is 1
      meter above the ground.
      The six o'clock position on
      the Ferris wheel is level
      with the loading platform.
      The wheel completes 1 full
      revolution in 10 minutes.
      The function gives a
      person's height in meters
      above the ground t
      minutes after the wheel
      begins to turn.

    Find the amplitude,

      midline, and period of

    Find a formula for the

      height function

    How high off the

      ground is a person after 5
      minutes?

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Analyze the graph of y=tan x.
           Graph variations of y=tan x.
           Analyze the graphs of y=sec x and y=csc x.
           Graph variations of y=sec x and y=csc x.
           Analyze the graph of y=cot x.
           Graph variations of y=cot x.

We know the tangent function can be used to find distances, such as the height of a building, mountain, or flagpole. But
what if we want to measure repeated occurrences of distance? Imagine, for example, a fire truck parked next to a
warehouse. The rotating light from the truck would travel across the wall of the warehouse in regular intervals. If the
input is time, the output would be the distance the beam of light travels. The beam of light would repeat the distance at
regular intervals. The tangent function can be used to approximate this distance. Asymptotes would be needed to
illustrate the repeated cycles when the beam runs parallel to the wall because, seemingly, the beam of light could
appear to extend forever. The graph of the tangent function would clearly illustrate the repeated intervals. In this
section, we will explore the graphs of the tangent and other trigonometric functions.

Analyzing the Graph of y = tan x

We will begin with the graph of the tangent function, plotting points as we did for the sine and cosine functions. Recall
that

The period of the tangent function is because the graph repeats itself on intervals of where is a constant. If we
graph the tangent function on to we can see the behavior of the graph on one complete cycle. If we look at any
larger interval, we will see that the characteristics of the graph repeat.

We can determine whether tangent is an odd or even function by using the definition of tangent.
780 8 · Periodic Functions

Therefore, tangent is an odd function. We can further analyze the graphical behavior of the tangent function by looking
at values for some of the special angles, as listed in Table 1.

                                                                                               0

                                 undefined               -1  0                     1  undefined

              Table 1

These points will help us draw our graph, but we need to determine how the graph behaves where it is undefined. If we

look more closely at values when                    we can use a table to look for a trend. Because  and

we will evaluate at radian measures                          as shown in Table 2.

                                                         1.3 1.5 1.55 1.56

                                                         3.6 14.1 48.1 92.6

                                            Table 2

As approaches the outputs of the function get larger and larger. Because              is an odd function, we see the
corresponding table of negative values in Table 3.

                                                     -1.3 -1.5 -1.55 -1.56

                                                     -3.6 -14.1 -48.1 -92.6

                                          Table 3

We can see that, as approaches            the outputs get smaller and smaller. Remember that there are some values of

for which                   For example,            and      At these values, the tangent function is undefined, so

the graph of                has discontinuities at           At these values, the graph of the tangent has vertical

asymptotes. Figure 1 represents the graph of                 The tangent is positive from 0 to and from to

corresponding to quadrants I and III of the unit circle.

                                            Figure 1 Graph of the tangent function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 781

Graphing Variations of y = tan x

As with the sine and cosine functions, the tangent function can be described by a general equation.

We can identify horizontal and vertical stretches and compressions using values of and The horizontal stretch can
typically be determined from the period of the graph. With tangent graphs, it is often necessary to determine a vertical
stretch using a point on the graph.

Because there are no maximum or minimum values of a tangent function, the term amplitude cannot be interpreted as
it is for the sine and cosine functions. Instead, we will use the phrase stretching/compressing factor when referring to
the constant

Features of the Graph of y = Atan(Bx)

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is all real numbers where                             such that  is an integer.
                                                          is an integer.
· The range is           

· The asymptotes occur at                          where

·                        is an odd function.

Graphing One Period of a Stretched or Compressed Tangent Function

We can use what we know about the properties of the tangent function to quickly sketch a graph of any stretched and/or

compressed tangent function of the form                          We focus on a single period of the function including the

origin, because the periodic property enables us to extend the graph to the rest of the function's domain if we wish. Our

limited domain is then the interval           and the graph has vertical asymptotes at where               On

the graph will come up from the left asymptote at                cross through the origin, and continue to increase as it

approaches the right asymptote at             To make the function approach the asymptotes at the correct rate, we also

need to set the vertical scale by actually evaluating the function for at least one point that the graph will pass through.
For example, we can use

because

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the function                            graph one period.

1. Identify the stretching factor,
2. Identify and determine the period,

3. Draw vertical asymptotes at                and

4. For          the graph approaches the left asymptote at negative output values and the right asymptote at

   positive output values (reverse for             ).

5. Plot reference points at                   and                and draw the graph through these points.

  EXAMPLE 1

Sketching a Compressed Tangent
Sketch a graph of one period of the function
782 8 · Periodic Functions

            Solution
       First, we identify and

Because  and                        we can find the stretching/compressing factor and period. The period is  so the
                                 At a quarter period from the origin, we have
asymptotes are at

This means the curve must pass through the points                and         The only inflection point is at the

origin. Figure 2 shows the graph of one period of the function.

                                                   Figure 2

   TRY IT #1 Sketch a graph of

Graphing One Period of a Shifted Tangent Function

Now that we can graph a tangent function that is stretched or compressed, we will add a vertical and/or horizontal (or
phase) shift. In this case, we add and to the general form of the tangent function.

The graph of a transformed tangent function is different from the basic tangent function  in several ways:

Features of the Graph of y = Atan(Bx-C)+D

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                  where is an integer.

· The range is                 

· The vertical asymptotes occur at                 where is an odd integer.

· There is no amplitude.

·                                is an odd function because it is the quotient of odd and even functions (sine and cosine

   respectively).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 783

         ...

              HOW TO

Given the function                         sketch the graph of one period.

1. Express the function given in the form
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor,
3. Identify and determine the period,

4. Identify and determine the phase shift,

5. Draw the graph of                 shifted to the right by and up by

6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at              where is an odd integer.

7. Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points.

EXAMPLE 2

Graphing One Period of a Shifted Tangent Function
Graph one period of the function

Solution

Step 1. The function is already written in the form

Step 2.       so the stretching factor is

Step 3.       so the period is

Step 4.       so the phase shift is

Step 5-7. The asymptotes are at      and             and the three recommended reference points are

         and          The graph is shown in Figure 3.

                                                     Figure 3

     Analysis
Note that this is a decreasing function because

TRY IT #2 How would the graph in Example 2 look different if we made                   instead of

         ...

              HOW TO

Given the graph of a tangent function, identify horizontal and vertical stretches.

1. Find the period from the spacing between successive vertical asymptotes or x-intercepts.

2. Write

3. Determine a convenient point            on the given graph and use it to determine
784 8 · Periodic Functions

         EXAMPLE 3
       Identifying the Graph of a Stretched Tangent
       Find a formula for the function graphed in Figure 4.

                                      Figure 4 A stretched tangent function

     Solution
The graph has the shape of a tangent function.

Step 1. One cycle extends from -4 to 4, so the period is     Since  we have
Step 2. The equation must have the form
Step 3. To find the vertical stretch we can use the point

Because
This function would have a formula

TRY IT #3 Find a formula for the function in Figure 5.

                                                Figure 5

Analyzing the Graphs of y = sec x and y = cscx

The secant was defined by the reciprocal identity                   Notice that the function is undefined when the cosine is

0, leading to vertical asymptotes at  etc. Because the cosine is never more than 1 in absolute value, the secant,

being the reciprocal, will never be less than 1 in absolute value.

We can graph  by observing the graph of the cosine function because these two functions are reciprocals of

one another. See Figure 6. The graph of the cosine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see the relationship.

Where the graph of the cosine function decreases, the graph of the secant function increases. Where the graph of the

cosine function increases, the graph of the secant function decreases. When the cosine function is zero, the secant is

undefined.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 785

The secant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of where the cosine graph crosses the x-axis; we show these in
the graph below with dashed vertical lines, but will not show all the asymptotes explicitly on all later graphs involving the
secant and cosecant.
Note that, because cosine is an even function, secant is also an even function. That is,

                                          Figure 6 Graph of the secant function,  as the stretching factor, not the amplitude.
As we did for the tangent function, we will again refer to the constant

Features of the Graph of y = Asec(Bx)

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is             where is an odd integer.

· The range is                         

· The vertical asymptotes occur at       where is an odd integer.

· There is no amplitude.

·                is an even function because cosine is an even function.

Similar to the secant, the cosecant is defined by the reciprocal identity              Notice that the function is

undefined when the sine is 0, leading to a vertical asymptote in the graph at     etc. Since the sine is never more than 1

in absolute value, the cosecant, being the reciprocal, will never be less than 1 in absolute value.

We can graph     by observing the graph of the sine function because these two functions are reciprocals of one

another. See Figure 7. The graph of sine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see the relationship. Where the

graph of the sine function decreases, the graph of the cosecant function increases. Where the graph of the sine function

increases, the graph of the cosecant function decreases.

The cosecant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of where the sine graph crosses the x-axis; we show these in
the graph below with dashed vertical lines.

Note that, since sine is an odd function, the cosecant function is also an odd function. That is,

The graph of cosecant, which is shown in Figure 7, is similar to the graph of secant.
786 8 · Periodic Functions

                                 Figure 7 The graph of the cosecant function,

Features of the Graph of y = Acsc(Bx)

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                  where  is an integer.

· The range is                          

· The asymptotes occur at               where is an integer.

·                           is an odd function because sine is an odd function.

Graphing Variations of y = sec x and y= csc x

For shifted, compressed, and/or stretched versions of the secant and cosecant functions, we can follow similar methods
to those we used for tangent and cotangent. That is, we locate the vertical asymptotes and also evaluate the functions
for a few points (specifically the local extrema). If we want to graph only a single period, we can choose the interval for
the period in more than one way. The procedure for secant is very similar, because the cofunction identity means that
the secant graph is the same as the cosecant graph shifted half a period to the left. Vertical and phase shifts may be
applied to the cosecant function in the same way as for the secant and other functions.The equations become the
following.

Features of the Graph of y = Asec(Bx-C)+D

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                  where is an odd integer.

· The range is                             

· The vertical asymptotes occur at                      where is an odd integer.

· There is no amplitude.

·                                is an even function because cosine is an even function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 787

Features of the Graph of y = Acsc(Bx-C)+D

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                      where is an integer.

· The range is                               

· The vertical asymptotes occur at                where is an integer.

· There is no amplitude.

·                           is an odd function because sine is an odd function.

         ...

              HOW TO

Given a function of the form                 graph one period.

1. Express the function given in the form
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor,
3. Identify and determine the period,

4. Sketch the graph of

5. Use the reciprocal relationship between               and        to draw the graph of

6. Sketch the asymptotes.

7. Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing a Variation of the Secant Function
Graph one period of

Solution

Step 1. The given function is already written in the general form,

Step 2.    so the stretching factor is

Step 3.    so                      The period is units.

Step 4. Sketch the graph of the function

Step 5. Use the reciprocal relationship of the cosine and secant functions to draw the cosecant function.

Steps 6-7. Sketch two asymptotes at          and              We can use two reference points, the local minimum at

         and the local maximum at            Figure 8 shows the graph.

                                                  Figure 8

   TRY IT #4 Graph one period of
788 8 · Periodic Functions

Q&A  Do the vertical shift and stretch/compression affect the secant's range?

     Yes. The range of                                      is                 

...

     HOW TO

Given a function of the form                                graph one period.

1. Express the function given in the form
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor,
3. Identify and determine the period,

4. Identify and determine the phase shift,

5. Draw the graph of             , but shift it to the right by       and up by
                                                                      where is an odd integer.
6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

  EXAMPLE 5

Graphing a Variation of the Secant Function
Graph one period of

     Solution
Step 1. Express the function given in the form
Step 2. The stretching/compressing factor is
Step 3. The period is

Step 4. The phase shift is

Step 5. Draw the graph of        but shift it to the right by              and up by
                                                                              There is a local minimum at
Step 6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at                and                                  and a

local maximum at                 Figure 9 shows the graph.

                                                            Figure 9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 789

TRY IT #5 Graph one period of

Q&A The domain of                  was given to be all such that      for any integer Would the domain of

           Yes. The excluded points of the domain follow the vertical asymptotes. Their locations show the horizontal
           shift and compression or expansion implied by the transformation to the original function's input.

         ...

              HOW TO

Given a function of the form                graph one period.

1. Express the function given in the form
2.
3. Identify and determine the period,

4. Draw the graph of

5. Use the reciprocal relationship between            and             to draw the graph of

6. Sketch the asymptotes.

7. Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points.

EXAMPLE 6

Graphing a Variation of the Cosecant Function
Graph one period of

Solution

Step 1. The given function is already written in the general form,

Step 2.               so the stretching factor is 3.

Step 3.    so              The period is units.

Step 4. Sketch the graph of the function

Step 5. Use the reciprocal relationship of the sine and cosecant functions to draw the cosecant function.

Steps 6-7. Sketch three asymptotes at                 and           We can use two reference points, the local maximum at

         and the local minimum at         Figure 10 shows the graph.
790 8 · Periodic Functions

                                                     Figure 10

TRY IT #6 Graph one period of

...

     HOW TO

Given a function of the form                         graph one period.

1. Express the function given in the form
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor,
3. Identify and determine the period,

4. Identify and determine the phase shift,

5. Draw the graph of             but shift it to the right by   and up by
                                                                where is an integer.
6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

EXAMPLE 7

Graphing a Vertically Stretched, Horizontally Compressed, and Vertically Shifted Cosecant

Sketch a graph of                What are the domain and range of this function?

     Solution
Step 1. Express the function given in the form
Step 2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 791

Step 3. The period is

Step 4. The phase shift is

Step 5. Draw the graph of   but shift it up

Step 6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

The graph for this function is shown in Figure 11.

                                                      Figure 11 A transformed cosecant function

     Analysis
The vertical asymptotes shown on the graph mark off one period of the function, and the local extrema in this interval
are shown by dots. Notice how the graph of the transformed cosecant relates to the graph of
shown as the orange dashed wave.

TRY IT #7              Given the graph of                             shown in Figure 12, sketch the graph of
                                           on the same axes.

                                                        Figure 12

Analyzing the Graph of y = cot x

The last trigonometric function we need to explore is cotangent. The cotangent is defined by the reciprocal identity

              Notice that the function is undefined when the tangent function is 0, leading to a vertical asymptote in

the graph at  etc. Since the output of the tangent function is all real numbers, the output of the cotangent function is
792 8 · Periodic Functions

also all real numbers.

We can graph                by observing the graph of the tangent function because these two functions are reciprocals of

one another. See Figure 13. Where the graph of the tangent function decreases, the graph of the cotangent function

increases. Where the graph of the tangent function increases, the graph of the cotangent function decreases.

The cotangent graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of where                 we show these in the graph below with

dashed lines. Since the cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent,    has vertical asymptotes at all values of where

   and                      at all values of where     has its vertical asymptotes.

                                                 Figure 13 The cotangent function

Features of the Graph of y = Acot(Bx)

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                  where is an integer.

· The range is  

· The asymptotes occur at                        where is an integer.

·                           is an odd function.

Graphing Variations of y = cot x

We can transform the graph of the cotangent in much the same way as we did for the tangent. The equation becomes
the following.

Features of the Graph of y = Acot(Bx-C)+D

· The stretching factor is
· The period is

· The domain is                  where is an integer.

· The range is              

· The vertical asymptotes occur at                     where is an integer.

· There is no amplitude.

·                           is an odd function because it is the quotient of even and odd functions (cosine and sine,

   respectively)

           ...                                                         graph one period.

              HOW TO

Given a modified cotangent function of the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 793

1. Express the function in the form
2. Identify the stretching factor,
3. Identify the period,

4. Draw the graph of
5. Plot any two reference points.
6. Use the reciprocal relationship between tangent and cotangent to draw the graph of
7. Sketch the asymptotes.

EXAMPLE 8

Graphing Variations of the Cotangent Function                       and then sketch a graph.
Determine the stretching factor, period, and phase shift of

     Solution                                                gives
Step 1. Expressing the function in the form                  and
Step 2. The stretching factor is
Step 3. The period is

Step 4. Sketch the graph of
Step 5. Plot two reference points. Two such points are

Step 6. Use the reciprocal relationship to draw
Step 7. Sketch the asymptotes,

The blue graph in Figure 14 shows    and the green graph shows

                                                        Figure 14

...

     HOW TO

Given a modified cotangent function of the form                              graph one period.

1. Express the function in the form
2. Identify the stretching factor,
3. Identify the period,

4. Identify the phase shift,

5. Draw the graph of                 shifted to the right by and up by

6. Sketch the asymptotes             where is an integer.

7. Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points.
794 8 · Periodic Functions

EXAMPLE 9

Graphing a Modified Cotangent
Sketch a graph of one period of the function

Solution

Step 1. The function is already written in the general form

Step 2.     so the stretching factor is 4.

Step 3.     so the period is

Step 4.     so the phase shift is

Step 5. We draw

Step 6-7. Three points we can use to guide the graph are                     and  We use the reciprocal relationship
of tangent and cotangent to draw

Step 8. The vertical asymptotes are  and

The graph is shown in Figure 15.

                                 Figure 15 One period of a modified cotangent function

Using the Graphs of Trigonometric Functions to Solve Real-World Problems

Many real-world scenarios represent periodic functions and may be modeled by trigonometric functions. As an example,
let's return to the scenario from the section opener. Have you ever observed the beam formed by the rotating light on a
fire truck and wondered about the movement of the light beam itself across the wall? The periodic behavior of the
distance the light shines as a function of time is obvious, but how do we determine the distance? We can use the tangent
function.

EXAMPLE 10

Using Trigonometric Functions to Solve Real-World Scenarios

Suppose the function                 marks the distance in the movement of a light beam from the top of a police car

across a wall where is the time in seconds and is the distance in feet from a point on the wall directly across from the
police car.

 Find and interpret the stretching factor and period.  Graph on the interval
 Evaluate                   and discuss the function's value at that input.

Access for free at openstax.org
     Solution                                                                              8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 795

 We know from the general form of                that is the stretching factor and is the period.

                                                 Figure 16

We see that the stretching factor is 5. This means that the beam of light will have moved 5 ft after half the period.

The period is                 This means that every 4 seconds, the beam of light sweeps the wall. The distance from

the spot across from the police car grows larger as the police car approaches.

 To graph the function, we draw an asymptote at  and use the stretching factor and period. See Figure 17

 period:                                   Figure 17
                                   after 1 second, the beam of has moved 5 ft from the spot across from
the police car.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of other trigonometric functions.

Graphing the Tangent (http://openstax.org/l/graphtangent)
Graphing Cosecant and Secant (http://openstax.org/l/graphcscsec)
Graphing the Cotangent (http://openstax.org/l/graphcot)

        8.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain how the graph of     2. How can the graph of              3. Explain why the period of
    the sine function can be                       be used to                     is equal to
    used to graph
                                    construct the graph of

4. Why are there no intercepts  5. How does the period of
    on the graph of                                compare with the

                                    period of
796 8 · Periodic Functions

      Algebraic

       For the following exercises, match each trigonometric function with one of the following graphs.

                                         Figure 18

6.                               7.                 8.

9.

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of each of the functions.

10.                              11.                12.

13. If     find                  14. If  find       15. If                                   find

16. If     find

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression such that the argument  is positive.

17.                              18.

Graphical

For the following exercises, sketch two periods of the graph for each of the following functions. Identify the stretching
factor, period, and asymptotes.

19.                              20.                21.

22.                              23.                24.

25.                              26.                27.

28.                              29.                30.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 797

31.                   32.                       33.

34.                   35.                       36.

For the following exercises, find and graph two periods of the periodic function with the given stretching factor,
period, and phase shift.

37. A tangent curve,  period of and phase  38. A tangent curve,                period of and phase
      shift                                      shift

For the following exercises, find an equation for the graph of each function.

39.                                        40.

41.                                        42.
798 8 · Periodic Functions

43.                                         44.

45.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to graph two periods of the given function. Note: most graphing

calculators do not have a cosecant button; therefore, you will need to input   as

46.                              47.                                 48.

49.                              50. Graph                                51.

                                      What is the function shown in
                                      the graph?

52.                              53.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    8.2 · Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 799

Real-World Applications

54. The function                       marks the

distance in the movement of a light beam from a

police car across a wall for time in seconds, and

distance          in feet.

 Graph on the interval
 Find and interpret the stretching factor,

period, and asymptote.

 Evaluate         and       and discuss the

function's values at those inputs.

55. Standing on the shore of a lake, a fisherman sights a   56. A laser rangefinder is locked on a comet

boat far in the distance to his left. Let measured in       approaching Earth. The distance     in

radians, be the angle formed by the line of sight to the    kilometers, of the comet after days, for      in the

ship and a line due north from his position. Assume due     interval 0 to 30 days, is given by

north is 0 and is measured negative to the left and

positive to the right. (See Figure 19.) The boat travels     Graph     on the interval

from due west to due east and, ignoring the curvature

of the Earth, the distance         in kilometers, from the   Evaluate  and interpret the information.

fisherman to the boat is given by the function               What is the minimum distance between the

                                                            comet and Earth? When does this occur? To which

 What is a reasonable domain for                            constant in the equation does this correspond?

 Graph            on this domain.                            Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical

 Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical               asymptotes.

asymptotes on the graph of

 Calculate and interpret               Round to the

second decimal place.

 Calculate and interpret               Round to the second

decimal place.

 What is the minimum distance between the

fisherman and the boat? When does this occur?

                            Figure 19
800 8 · Periodic Functions

57. A video camera is focused on a rocket on a
      launching pad 2 miles from the camera. The angle
      of elevation from the ground to the rocket after
      seconds is

 Write a function expressing the altitude

in miles, of the rocket above the ground after

seconds. Ignore the curvature of the Earth.

 Graph                      on the interval

 Evaluate and interpret the values               and

 What happens to the values of               as

approaches 60 seconds? Interpret the meaning of

this in terms of the problem.

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Understand and use the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions.
           Find the exact value of expressions involving the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions.
           Use a calculator to evaluate inverse trigonometric functions.
           Find exact values of composite functions with inverse trigonometric functions.

For any right triangle, given one other angle and the length of one side, we can figure out what the other angles and
sides are. But what if we are given only two sides of a right triangle? We need a procedure that leads us from a ratio of
sides to an angle. This is where the notion of an inverse to a trigonometric function comes into play. In this section, we
will explore the inverse trigonometric functions.

Understanding and Using the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions

In order to use inverse trigonometric functions, we need to understand that an inverse trigonometric function "undoes"
what the original trigonometric function "does," as is the case with any other function and its inverse. In other words,
the domain of the inverse function is the range of the original function, and vice versa, as summarized in Figure 1.

                                                        Figure 1

For example, if                    then we would write              Be aware that  does not mean  The

following examples illustrate the inverse trigonometric functions:

· Since                      then

· Since                     then
· Since                     then

In previous sections, we evaluated the trigonometric functions at various angles, but at times we need to know what

angle would yield a specific sine, cosine, or tangent value. For this, we need inverse functions. Recall that, for a one-to-

one function, if            then an inverse function would satisfy

Bear in mind that the sine, cosine, and tangent functions are not one-to-one functions. The graph of each function would
fail the horizontal line test. In fact, no periodic function can be one-to-one because each output in its range corresponds
to at least one input in every period, and there are an infinite number of periods. As with other functions that are not
one-to-one, we will need to restrict the domain of each function to yield a new function that is one-to-one. We choose a
domain for each function that includes the number 0. Figure 2 shows the graph of the sine function limited to

and the graph of the cosine function limited to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 801

    Figure 2 (a) Sine function on a restricted domain of     (b) Cosine function on a restricted domain of
Figure 3 shows the graph of the tangent function limited to

            Figure 3 Tangent function on a restricted domain of

These conventional choices for the restricted domain are somewhat arbitrary, but they have important, helpful
characteristics. Each domain includes the origin and some positive values, and most importantly, each results in a one-
to-one function that is invertible. The conventional choice for the restricted domain of the tangent function also has the
useful property that it extends from one vertical asymptote to the next instead of being divided into two parts by an
asymptote.

On these restricted domains, we can define the inverse trigonometric functions.

· The inverse sine function           means                  The inverse sine function is sometimes called the arcsine
    function, and notated

· The inverse cosine function         means                  The inverse cosine function is sometimes called the
    arccosine function, and notated

· The inverse tangent function        means                  The inverse tangent function is sometimes called the
    arctangent function, and notated
                                                             

The graphs of the inverse functions are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 6. Notice that the output of each of these

inverse functions is a number, an angle in radian measure. We see that  has domain     and range

has domain  and range                 and    has domain of all real numbers and range             To find the

domain and range of inverse trigonometric functions, switch the domain and range of the original functions. Each graph
of the inverse trigonometric function is a reflection of the graph of the original function about the line
802 8 · Periodic Functions

                                              Figure 4 The sine function and inverse sine (or arcsine) function
                                         Figure 5 The cosine function and inverse cosine (or arccosine) function
                                      Figure 6 The tangent function and inverse tangent (or arctangent) function

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 803

Relations for Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions

For angles in the interval      if               then
For angles in the interval  if               then
For angles in the interval
                                 if              then

EXAMPLE 1

Writing a Relation for an Inverse Function

Given                       write a relation involving the inverse sine.

  Solution

Use the relation for the inverse sine. If    then          .

In this problem,            and

  TRY IT #1 Given                            write a relation involving the inverse cosine.

Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and
Tangent Functions

Now that we can identify inverse functions, we will learn to evaluate them. For most values in their domains, we must
evaluate the inverse trigonometric functions by using a calculator, interpolating from a table, or using some other
numerical technique. Just as we did with the original trigonometric functions, we can give exact values for the inverse
functions when we are using the special angles, specifically (30°), (45°), and (60°), and their reflections into other

quadrants.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a "special" input value, evaluate an inverse trigonometric function.

 1. Find angle for which the original trigonometric function has an output equal to the given input for the inverse
      trigonometric function.

 2. If is not in the defined range of the inverse, find another angle that is in the defined range and has the same
      sine, cosine, or tangent as depending on which corresponds to the given inverse function.

EXAMPLE 2

Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions for Special Input Values
Evaluate each of the following.

                                                           

  Solution

 Evaluating                 is the same as determining the angle that would have a sine value of In other words,

what angle would satisfy                   There are multiple values that would satisfy this relationship, such as and

  but we know we need the angle in the interval            so the answer will be             Remember that

the inverse is a function, so for each input, we will get exactly one output.
804 8 · Periodic Functions

 To evaluate                      we know that and both have a sine value of        but neither is in the

interval      For that, we need the negative angle coterminal with

 To evaluate                      we are looking for an angle in the interval    with a cosine value of  The

angle that satisfies this is

 Evaluating                      we are looking for an angle in the interval   with a tangent value of 1. The correct

angle is

TRY IT #2 Evaluate each of the following.

                                                                               

Using a Calculator to Evaluate Inverse Trigonometric Functions

To evaluate inverse trigonometric functions that do not involve the special angles discussed previously, we will need to
use a calculator or other type of technology. Most scientific calculators and calculator-emulating applications have
specific keys or buttons for the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions. These may be labeled, for example, SIN ,
ARCSIN, or ASIN.

In the previous chapter, we worked with trigonometry on a right triangle to solve for the sides of a triangle given one
side and an additional angle. Using the inverse trigonometric functions, we can solve for the angles of a right triangle
given two sides, and we can use a calculator to find the values to several decimal places.

In these examples and exercises, the answers will be interpreted as angles and we will use as the independent
variable. The value displayed on the calculator may be in degrees or radians, so be sure to set the mode appropriate to
the application.

EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating the Inverse Sine on a Calculator

Evaluate                    using a calculator.

     Solution
Because the output of the inverse function is an angle, the calculator will give us a degree value if in degree mode and a
radian value if in radian mode. Calculators also use the same domain restrictions on the angles as we are using.

In radian mode,                   In degree mode,                              Note that in calculus and beyond we will
use radians in almost all cases.

TRY IT #3 Evaluate                                 using a calculator.

          ...

               HOW TO

Given two sides of a right triangle like the one shown in Figure 7, find an angle.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 805

                                                                              Figure 7
   1. If one given side is the hypotenuse of length and the side of length adjacent to the desired angle is given, use

        the equation
   2. If one given side is the hypotenuse of length and the side of length opposite to the desired angle is given, use

        the equation
   3. If the two legs (the sides adjacent to the right angle) are given, then use the equation
  EXAMPLE 4
Applying the Inverse Cosine to a Right Triangle
Solve the triangle in Figure 8 for the angle

                                                                              Figure 8
     Solution
Because we know the hypotenuse and the side adjacent to the angle, it makes sense for us to use the cosine function.

       TRY IT #4 Solve the triangle in Figure 9 for the angle

                                                                   Figure 9

Finding Exact Values of Composite Functions with Inverse Trigonometric
Functions

There are times when we need to compose a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function. In these
cases, we can usually find exact values for the resulting expressions without resorting to a calculator. Even when the
806 8 · Periodic Functions

input to the composite function is a variable or an expression, we can often find an expression for the output. To help

sort out different cases, let              and  be two different trigonometric functions belonging to the set

                            and let             and  be their inverses.

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f(f-1(y)) and f-1(f(x))

For any trigonometric function,                      for all in the proper domain for the given function. This follows from

the definition of the inverse and from the fact that the range of was defined to be identical to the domain of

However, we have to be a little more careful with expressions of the form

Compositions of a trigonometric function and its inverse

                                                                           

Q&A            Is it correct that

               No. This equation is correct if belongs to the restricted domain           but sine is defined for all real

               input values, and for outside the restricted interval, the equation is not correct because its inverse

               always returns a value in             The situation is similar for cosine and tangent and their inverses. For

               example,

...

     HOW TO

Given an expression of the form f-1(f()) where                           such that  evaluate.
                                                                                              Then
 1. If is in the restricted domain of
 2. If not, then find an angle within the restricted domain of

EXAMPLE 5

Using Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Evaluate the following:

                                                                           

     Solution                  so                      so
                                      but
                                                     because cosine is an even function.            so
                            so
                                  but


TRY IT #5 Evaluate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 807

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f-1(g(x))

Now that we can compose a trigonometric function with its inverse, we can explore how to evaluate a composition of a
trigonometric function and the inverse of another trigonometric function. We will begin with compositions of the form

            For special values of we can exactly evaluate the inner function and then the outer, inverse function.

However, we can find a more general approach by considering the relation between the two acute angles of a right

triangle where one is making the other  Consider the sine and cosine of each angle of the right triangle in

Figure 10.

                        Figure 10 Right triangle illustrating the cofunction relationships

Because                      we have                            if             If is not in this domain, then we need

to find another angle that has the same cosine as and does belong to the restricted domain; we then subtract this

angle from Similarly,                               so                     if      These are just the function-

cofunction relationships presented in another way.

       ...

            HOW TO

Given functions of the form             and                        evaluate them.
                                                              such that
1. If               then
2. If                    then find another angle

3. If                   then                                    such that
4. If                       then find another angle

EXAMPLE 6

Evaluating the Composition of an Inverse Sine with a Cosine
Evaluate

 by direct evaluation.   by the method described previously.

     Solution

 Here, we can directly evaluate the inside of the composition.

Now, we can evaluate the inverse function as we did earlier.     We have                    and
808 8 · Periodic Functions

TRY IT #6 Evaluate

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f(g-1(x))

To evaluate compositions of the form           where and are any two of the functions sine, cosine, or tangent

and is any input in the domain of              we have exact formulas, such as                      When we need to use

them, we can derive these formulas by using the trigonometric relations between the angles and sides of a right

triangle, together with the use of Pythagoras's relation between the lengths of the sides. We can use the Pythagorean

identity,                        to solve for one when given the other. We can also use the inverse trigonometric functions

to find compositions involving algebraic expressions.

EXAMPLE 7

Evaluating the Composition of a Sine with an Inverse Cosine
Find an exact value for

Solution

Beginning with the inside, we can say there is some angle such that               which means       and we

are looking for             We can use the Pythagorean identity to do this.

Since                       is in quadrant I,  must be positive, so the solution is See Figure 11.

                                   Figure 11 Right triangle illustrating that if      then
                                                                                  so we know that the sine of that angle must
We know that the inverse cosine always gives an angle on the interval
be positive; therefore

TRY IT #7 Evaluate

EXAMPLE 8

Evaluating the Composition of a Sine with an Inverse Tangent
Find an exact value for

Solution

While we could use a similar technique as in Example 6, we will demonstrate a different technique here. From the inside,

we know there is an angle such that            We can envision this as the opposite and adjacent sides on a right

triangle, as shown in Figure 12.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 809

                                                   Figure 12 A right triangle with two sides known
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the hypotenuse of this triangle.

Now, we can evaluate the sine of the angle as the opposite side divided by the hypotenuse.
This gives us our desired composition.

TRY IT #8 Evaluate

EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Cosine of the Inverse Sine of an Algebraic Expression

Find a simplified expression for     for

     Solution
We know there is an angle such that

Because we know that the inverse sine must give an angle on the interval  we can deduce that the cosine of
that angle must be positive.

TRY IT #9 Find a simplified expression for                         for

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with inverse trigonometric functions.
810 8 · Periodic Functions

     Evaluate Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions (http://openstax.org/l/evalinverstrig)

        8.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Why do the functions              2. Since the functions               3. Explain the meaning of
                          and                           and
                          have
                                         are inverse functions, why is
    different ranges?                                                not

                                         equal to

4. Most calculators do not           5. Why must the domain of the        6. Discuss why this statement
    have a key to evaluate                                                    is incorrect:
                   Explain how this       sine function,  be                                             for all
    can be done using the
    cosine function or the                restricted to   for the
    inverse cosine function.
                                          inverse sine function to
7. Determine whether the                  exist?
    following statement is true
    or false and explain your
    answer:

Algebraic

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions.

8.                                   9.                                   10.

11.                                  12.                                  13.

14.                                  15.                                  16.

For the following exercises, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. Express answers to the nearest hundredth.

17.                                  18.                                  19.

20.                                  21.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 8.3 · Inverse Trigonometric Functions 811

For the following exercises, find the angle in the given right triangle. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

22.  23.

For the following exercises, find the exact value, if possible, without a calculator. If it is not possible, explain why.

24.  25.                                           26.

27.  28.                                           29.

30.  31.                                           32.

33.  34.                                           35.

36.

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the expression in terms of  with the help of a reference triangle.

37.  38.                                           39.

40.  41.

Extensions

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression without using a calculator. Give the exact value.

42.

For the following exercises, find the function if

43.  44.                                           45.

46.  47.
812 8 · Periodic Functions

Graphical

48. Graph                   and       49. Graph  and                        50. Graph one cycle of
                                                                                                   and state the
state the domain and                  state the domain and
                                                                                  domain and range of the
range of the function.                range of the function.                      function.

51. For what value of does            52. For what value of does
                              Use a                                  Use a

      graphing calculator to                graphing calculator to
      approximate the answer.               approximate the answer.

Real-World Applications               54. Suppose you drive 0.6             55. An isosceles triangle has
                                            miles on a road so that the           two congruent sides of
53. Suppose a 13-foot ladder is             vertical distance changes             length 9 inches. The
      leaning against a building,           from 0 to 150 feet. What is           remaining side has a
      reaching to the bottom of a           the angle of elevation of             length of 8 inches. Find the
      second-floor window 12                the road?                             angle that a side of 9
      feet above the ground.                                                      inches makes with the
      What angle, in radians,                                                     8-inch side.
      does the ladder make with
      the building?

56. Without using a calculator,       57. A truss (interior beam            58. The line  passes
      approximate the value of              structure) for the roof of a
                             Explain        house is constructed from       through the origin in the
      why your answer is                    two identical right             x,y-plane. What is the
      reasonable.                           triangles. Each has a base      measure of the angle that
                                            of 12 feet and height of 4      the line makes with the
                                            feet. Find the measure of       positive x-axis?
                                            the acute angle adjacent to
                                            the 4-foot side.

59. The line                passes    60. What percentage grade             61. A 20-foot ladder leans up
                                            should a road have if the             against the side of a
through the origin in the                   angle of elevation of the             building so that the foot of
x,y-plane. What is the                      road is 4 degrees? (The               the ladder is 10 feet from
measure of the angle that                   percentage grade is                   the base of the building. If
the line makes with the                     defined as the change in              specifications call for the
negative x-axis?                            the altitude of the road              ladder's angle of elevation
                                            over a 100-foot horizontal            to be between 35 and 45
                                            distance. For example a 5%            degrees, does the
                                            grade means that the road             placement of this ladder
                                            rises 5 feet for every 100            satisfy safety
                                            feet of horizontal distance.)         specifications?

62. Suppose a 15-foot ladder
      leans against the side of a
      house so that the angle of
      elevation of the ladder is 42
      degrees. How far is the
      foot of the ladder from the
      side of the house?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   8 · Chapter Review 813

Chapter Review

Key Terms

amplitude the vertical height of a function; the constant appearing in the definition of a sinusoidal function

arccosine another name for the inverse cosine;

arcsine another name for the inverse sine;

arctangent another name for the inverse tangent;

inverse cosine function the function        which is the inverse of the cosine function and the angle that has a
    cosine equal to a given number

inverse sine function the function          which is the inverse of the sine function and the angle that has a sine equal
    to a given number

inverse tangent function the function            which is the inverse of the tangent function and the angle that has a

tangent equal to a given number

midline the horizontal line      where appears in the general form of a sinusoidal function

periodic function a function     that satisfies                     for a specific constant and any value of

phase shift the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine function; the constant

sinusoidal function any function that can be expressed in the form                             or

Key Equations

  Sinusoidal functions

Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched tangent function
Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched secant function
Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function
Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cotangent function

Key Concepts

8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions

· Periodic functions repeat after a given value. The smallest such value is the period. The basic sine and cosine

functions have a period of

· The function          is odd, so its graph is symmetric about the origin. The function    is even, so its graph is

symmetric about the y-axis.

· The graph of a sinusoidal function has the same general shape as a sine or cosine function.

· In the general formula for a sinusoidal function, the period is   See Example 1.

· In the general formula for a sinusoidal function, represents amplitude. If              the function is stretched,

whereas if              the function is compressed. See Example 2.

· The value in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the phase shift. See Example 3.

· The value in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the vertical shift from the midline. See
    Example 4.

· Combinations of variations of sinusoidal functions can be detected from an equation. See Example 5.
· The equation for a sinusoidal function can be determined from a graph. See Example 6 and Example 7.
· A function can be graphed by identifying its amplitude and period. See Example 8 and Example 9.
· A function can also be graphed by identifying its amplitude, period, phase shift, and horizontal shift. See Example

    10.
· Sinusoidal functions can be used to solve real-world problems. See Example 11, Example 12, and Example 13.
814 8 · Exercises

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions

    · The tangent function has period

    ·                            is a tangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and shift. See Example

       1, Example 2, and Example 3.

    · The secant and cosecant are both periodic functions with a period of                              gives a shifted,

       compressed, and/or stretched secant function graph. See Example 4 and Example 5.

    ·                            gives a shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function graph. See Example 6

       and Example 7.

    · The cotangent function has period and vertical asymptotes at

    · The range of cotangent is   and the function is decreasing at each point in its range.

    · The cotangent is zero at

    ·                            is a cotangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and shift. See

       Example 8 and Example 9.

    · Real-world scenarios can be solved using graphs of trigonometric functions. See Example 10.

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions

    · An inverse function is one that "undoes" another function. The domain of an inverse function is the range of the

       original function and the range of an inverse function is the domain of the original function.

    · Because the trigonometric functions are not one-to-one on their natural domains, inverse trigonometric functions

       are defined for restricted domains.

    · For any trigonometric function        if              then    However,              only implies              if is

       in the restricted domain of See Example 1.

    · Special angles are the outputs of inverse trigonometric functions for special input values; for example,

                                            See Example 2.

    · A calculator will return an angle within the restricted domain of the original trigonometric function. See Example 3.
    · Inverse functions allow us to find an angle when given two sides of a right triangle. See Example 4.
    · In function composition, if the inside function is an inverse trigonometric function, then there are exact expressions;

       for example,                                 See Example 5.

    · If the inside function is a trigonometric function, then the only possible combinations are                       if

       and                                      if          See Example 6 and Example 7.

    · When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function, draw a
        reference triangle to assist in determining the ratio of sides that represents the output of the trigonometric
        function. See Example 8.

    · When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function, you may use
        trig identities to assist in determining the ratio of sides. See Example 9.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions

For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and determine the amplitude or stretching factor,
period, midline equation, and asymptotes.

1.                                   2.                             3.

4.                                    5.                            6.

7.                                   8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        8 · Exercises 815

Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions

For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and determine the amplitude or stretching factor,
period, midline equation, and asymptotes.

9.                                  10.                              11.

12.

For the following exercises, graph two full periods. Identify the period, the phase shift, the amplitude, and asymptotes.

13.                                 14.                              15.

16.                                 17.                              18.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population of a city has risen and fallen over a 20-year interval. Its

population may be modeled by the following function:                      where the domain is the years

since 1980 and the range is the population of the city.

19. What is the largest and         20. Graph the function on the    21. What are the amplitude,
      smallest population the city                                         period, and phase shift for
      may have?                          domain of       .                 the function?

22. Over this domain, when          23. What is the predicted
      does the population reach           population in 2007? 2010?
      18,000? 13,000?
816 8 · Exercises

For the following exercises, suppose a weight is attached to a spring and bobs up and down, exhibiting symmetry.

24. Suppose the graph of the displacement function is    25. At time = 0, what is the displacement of the
      shown in Figure 1, where the values on the x-axis        weight?
      represent the time in seconds and the y-axis
      represents the displacement in inches. Give the
      equation that models the vertical displacement of
      the weight on the spring.

                                   Figure 1              27. What is the time required for the weight to return
                                                               to its initial height of 5 inches? In other words,
26. At what time does the displacement from the                what is the period for the displacement function?
      equilibrium point equal zero?

Inverse Trigonometric Functions
For the following exercises, find the exact value without the aid of a calculator.

28.                              29.                     30.

31.                              32.                     33.

34.                              35.                     36.

37.                              38.                     39. Graph                          and

                                                                                    on the

                                                              interval              and explain

                                                              any observations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 8 · Exercises 817

40. Graph               and  41. Graph the function

           and explain

     any observations.                 on the interval    and

                                       compare the graph to the

                                       graph of           on

                                       the same interval. Describe

                                       any observations.

Practice Test

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each function for two full periods. Determine the amplitude, the period,
and the equation for the midline.

1.                           2.                                     3.

4.                           5.                                     6.

7.                           8.                                     9.

10.                          11.                                    12.

13.

For the following exercises, determine the amplitude, period, and midline of the graph, and then find a formula for the
function.

14. Give in terms of a sine function.                     15. Give in terms of a sine function.
818 8 · Exercises

16. Give in terms of a tangent
      function.

For the following exercises, find the amplitude, period, phase shift, and midline.

17.                                                     18.

19. The outside temperature over the course of a day    20. Water is pumped into a storage bin and empties
      can be modeled as a sinusoidal function. Suppose        according to a periodic rate. The depth of the
      you know the temperature is 68°F at midnight and        water is 3 feet at its lowest at 2:00 a.m. and 71 feet
      the high and low temperatures during the day are        at its highest, which occurs every 5 hours. Write a
      80°F and 56°F, respectively. Assuming is the            cosine function that models the depth of the
      number of hours since midnight, find a function         water as a function of time, and then graph the
      for the temperature, in terms of                        function for one period.

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of each function.

21.                                                     22.

23. Write the equation for the graph in Figure 1 in     24. If  find

     terms of the secant function and give the period

     and phase shift.

25. If            Figure 1
        find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               8 · Exercises 819

For the following exercises, graph the functions on the specified window and answer the questions.

26. Graph                         27. Graph                                  28. Graph           on
                                                                         on
      on the viewing window                                                              and explain any
                    by                  the following domains in
                                                     and                          observations.
      Approximate the graph's
      period.                           Suppose this function
                                        models sound waves. Why
                                        would these views look so
                                        different?

For the following exercises, let  30. What is the smallest                   31. Where is the function
                                        possible value for                         increasing on the interval
29. What is the largest possible
      value for

For the following exercises, find and graph one period of the periodic function with the given amplitude, period, and
phase shift.

32. Sine curve with amplitude     33. Cosine curve with
      3, period and phase               amplitude 2, period and

      shift                             phase shift

For the following exercises, graph the function. Describe the graph and, wherever applicable, any periodic behavior,
amplitude, asymptotes, or undefined points.

34.                                   35.

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

36.                               37.                                        38.

39.                               40.                                        41.

42.                               43.

For the following exercises, suppose                Evaluate the following expressions.

44.                               45.
820 8 · Exercises

46. Given Figure 2, find the measure of angle to
      three decimal places. Answer in radians.

     Figure 2

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation is true or false.

47.                              48.              49. The grade of a road is 7%.

                                                  This means that for every

                                                  horizontal distance of 100

                                                  feet on the road, the

                                                  vertical rise is 7 feet. Find

                                                  the angle the road makes

                                                  with the horizontal in

                                                  radians.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           9 · Introduction 821

9  TRIGONOMETRIC IDENTITIES AND EQUATIONS

Tennis players can create advantages by changing the angles of their shots. The technology used to decide close calls
also relies heavily on mathematics. (credit: modification of "From the 2013 US Open" by Edwin Martinez/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions
  9.2 Sum and Difference Identities
  9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas
  9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas
  9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations

      Introduction to Trigonometric Identities and Equations

When we think of tennis as a game of angles, we may imagine players racing up to the net, creating options to deliver
powerful cross shots that will leave their opponent stumbling toward the line. This is an exciting and effective method of
play, though it brings greater risk.

But while the excitement of the game interplays with all types of geometry, some of the newest innovations make even
more use of mathematics. With balls traveling well over 100 miles per hour judges cannot always discern the centimeter
or millimeters of difference between a ball that is in or out of bounds. Professional tennis was among the first sports to
rely on an advanced tracking system called Hawk-Eye to help make close calls. The system uses several high-resolution
cameras that are able to monitor and the ball's movement and its position on the court. Using the images from several
cameras at once, the system's computers use trigonometric calculations to triangulate the ball's exact position and,
essentially, turn a series of two-dimensional images into a three-dimensional one. Also, since the ball travels faster than
the cameras' frame rate, the system also must make predictions to show where a ball is at all times. These technologies
generally provide a more accurate game that builds more confidence and fairness. Similar technologies are used for
baseball, and automated strike-calling is under discussion.

9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric
Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Verify the fundamental trigonometric identities.
           Simplify trigonometric expressions using algebra and the identities.
822 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

                                             Figure 1 International passports and travel documents

In espionage movies, we see international spies with multiple passports, each claiming a different identity. However, we
know that each of those passports represents the same person. The trigonometric identities act in a similar manner to
multiple passports--there are many ways to represent the same trigonometric expression. Just as a spy will choose an
Italian passport when traveling to Italy, we choose the identity that applies to the given scenario when solving a
trigonometric equation.

In this section, we will begin an examination of the fundamental trigonometric identities, including how we can verify
them and how we can use them to simplify trigonometric expressions.

Verifying the Fundamental Trigonometric Identities

Identities enable us to simplify complicated expressions. They are the basic tools of trigonometry used in solving
trigonometric equations, just as factoring, finding common denominators, and using special formulas are the basic tools
of solving algebraic equations. In fact, we use algebraic techniques constantly to simplify trigonometric expressions.
Basic properties and formulas of algebra, such as the difference of squares formula and the perfect squares formula, will
simplify the work involved with trigonometric expressions and equations. We already know that all of the trigonometric
functions are related because they all are defined in terms of the unit circle. Consequently, any trigonometric identity
can be written in many ways.

To verify the trigonometric identities, we usually start with the more complicated side of the equation and essentially
rewrite the expression until it has been transformed into the same expression as the other side of the equation.
Sometimes we have to factor expressions, expand expressions, find common denominators, or use other algebraic
strategies to obtain the desired result. In this first section, we will work with the fundamental identities: the Pythagorean
identities, the even-odd identities, the reciprocal identities, and the quotient identities.

We will begin with the Pythagorean identities (see Table 1), which are equations involving trigonometric functions
based on the properties of a right triangle. We have already seen and used the first of these identifies, but now we will
also use additional identities.

                                                                    Pythagorean Identities

                                        Table 1                                          is found by

The second and third identities can be obtained by manipulating the first. The identity
rewriting the left side of the equation in terms of sine and cosine.
Prove:

Access for free at openstax.org
                  9.1 · Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 823

Similarly,                  can be obtained by rewriting the left side of this identity in terms of sine and cosine. This
gives

Recall that we determined which trigonometric functions are odd and which are even. The next set of fundamental
identities is the set of even-odd identities. The even-odd identities relate the value of a trigonometric function at a
given angle to the value of the function at the opposite angle. (See Table 2).

                                                                      Even-Odd Identities

                            Table 2

Recall that an odd function is one in which         for all in the domain of The sine function is an odd

function because                     The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin. For example, consider

corresponding inputs of and          The output of  is opposite the output of    Thus,

This is shown in Figure 2.

                                              Figure 2 Graph of

Recall that an even function is one in which

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the y-axis. The cosine function is an even function because

                  For example, consider corresponding inputs and  The output of  is the same as the
824 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

output of       Thus,

See Figure 3.

                                                Figure 3 Graph of

For all in the domain of the sine and cosine functions, respectively, we can state the following:

· Since                         sine is an odd function.
· Since,                        cosine is an even function.

The other even-odd identities follow from the even and odd nature of the sine and cosine functions. For example,

consider the tangent identity,                  We can interpret the tangent of a negative angle as

                                                Tangent is therefore an odd function, which means that                   for

all in the domain of the tangent function.

The cotangent identity,                             also follows from the sine and cosine identities. We can interpret the
                                                                                               Cotangent is therefore an odd function, which
cotangent of a negative angle as
                                                in the domain of the cotangent function.
means that                      for all

The cosecant function is the reciprocal of the sine function, which means that the cosecant of a negative angle will be

interpreted as                                  The cosecant function is therefore odd.

Finally, the secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine function, and the secant of a negative angle is interpreted as
                                                    The secant function is therefore even.

To sum up, only two of the trigonometric functions, cosine and secant, are even. The other four functions are odd,
verifying the even-odd identities.

The next set of fundamental identities is the set of reciprocal identities, which, as their name implies, relate
trigonometric functions that are reciprocals of each other. See Table 3. Recall that we first encountered these identities
when defining trigonometric functions from right angles in Right Angle Trigonometry.

                                                Reciprocal Identities

                                                            Table 3
The final set of identities is the set of quotient identities, which define relationships among certain trigonometric
functions and can be very helpful in verifying other identities. See Table 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          9.1 · Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 825

                                                                       Quotient Identities
                                                             Table 4
The reciprocal and quotient identities are derived from the definitions of the basic trigonometric functions.
  Summarizing Trigonometric Identities
  The Pythagorean identities are based on the properties of a right triangle.

  The even-odd identities relate the value of a trigonometric function at a given angle to the value of the function at
  the opposite angle.

  The reciprocal identities define reciprocals of the trigonometric functions.

The quotient identities define the relationship among the trigonometric functions.

EXAMPLE 1

Graphing the Equations of an Identity

Graph both sides of the identity       In other words, on the graphing calculator, graph  and
826 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

            Solution
       See Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4
     Analysis
We see only one graph because both expressions generate the same image. One is on top of the other. This is a good
way to confirm an identity verified with analytical means. If both expressions give the same graph, then they are most
likely identities.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a trigonometric identity, verify that it is true.
   1. Work on one side of the equation. It is usually better to start with the more complex side, as it is easier to

        simplify than to build.
   2. Look for opportunities to factor expressions, square a binomial, or add fractions.
   3. Noting which functions are in the final expression, look for opportunities to use the identities and make the

        proper substitutions.
   4. If these steps do not yield the desired result, try converting all terms to sines and cosines.

  EXAMPLE 2

Verifying a Trigonometric Identity
Verify

     Solution
We will start on the left side, as it is the more complicated side:

Analysis

This identity was fairly simple to verify, as it only required writing  in terms of  and

TRY IT #1 Verify the identity

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          9.1 · Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 827

  EXAMPLE 3
Verifying the Equivalency Using the Even-Odd Identities
Verify the following equivalency using the even-odd identities:

     Solution
Working on the left side of the equation, we have

  EXAMPLE 4
Verifying a Trigonometric Identity Involving sec2
Verify the identity

     Solution
As the left side is more complicated, let's begin there.

There is more than one way to verify an identity. Here is another possibility. Again, we can start with the left side.

Analysis

In the first method, we used the identity                and continued to simplify. In the second method, we split the

fraction, putting both terms in the numerator over the common denominator. This problem illustrates that there are

multiple ways we can verify an identity. Employing some creativity can sometimes simplify a procedure. As long as the

substitutions are correct, the answer will be the same.

TRY IT #2 Show that

  EXAMPLE 5                                by rewriting strictly in terms of sine.

Creating and Verifying an Identity
Create an identity for the expression
828 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

            Solution
       There are a number of ways to begin, but here we will use the quotient and reciprocal identities to rewrite the
       expression:

       Thus,

         EXAMPLE 6
       Verifying an Identity Using Algebra and Even/Odd Identities
       Verify the identity:

            Solution
       Let's start with the left side and simplify:

              TRY IT #3 Verify the identity
         EXAMPLE 7
       Verifying an Identity Involving Cosines and Cotangents
       Verify the identity:

            Solution
       We will work on the left side of the equation.

                                                                                            

        Access for free at openstax.org
               9.1 · Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 829

Using Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions

We have seen that algebra is very important in verifying trigonometric identities, but it is just as critical in simplifying
trigonometric expressions before solving. Being familiar with the basic properties and formulas of algebra, such as the
difference of squares formula, the perfect square formula, or substitution, will simplify the work involved with
trigonometric expressions and equations.

For example, the equation                              resembles the equation                which uses the

factored form of the difference of squares. Using algebra makes finding a solution straightforward and familiar. We can

set each factor equal to zero and solve. This is one example of recognizing algebraic patterns in trigonometric

expressions or equations.

Another example is the difference of squares formula,                          which is widely used in many areas

other than mathematics, such as engineering, architecture, and physics. We can also create our own identities by

continually expanding an expression and making the appropriate substitutions. Using algebraic properties and formulas

makes many trigonometric equations easier to understand and solve.

EXAMPLE 8

Writing the Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression                                          Letting
Write the following trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression:

     Solution
Notice that the pattern displayed has the same form as a standard quadratic expression,

                we can rewrite the expression as follows:

This expression can be factored as  If it were set equal to zero and we wanted to solve the equation, we

would use the zero factor property and solve each factor for At this point, we would replace with        and solve for

  EXAMPLE 9

Rewriting a Trigonometric Expression Using the Difference of Squares
Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares:

     Solution
Notice that both the coefficient and the trigonometric expression in the first term are squared, and the square of the
number 1 is 1. This is the difference of squares.

Analysis

If this expression were written in the form of an equation set equal to zero, we could solve each factor using the zero

factor property. We could also use substitution like we did in the previous problem and let        rewrite the

expression as  and factor           Then replace with                          and solve for the angle.

       TRY IT #4 Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares:

  EXAMPLE 10
Simplify by Rewriting and Using Substitution
Simplify the expression by rewriting and using identities:
830 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

     Solution
We can start with the Pythagorean identity.

Now we can simplify by substituting                 for  We have

     TRY IT #5           Use algebraic techniques to verify the identity:
                         (Hint: Multiply the numerator and denominator on the left side by

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the fundamental trigonometric identities.

     Fundamental Trigonometric Identities (http://openstax.org/l/funtrigiden)
     Verifying Trigonometric Identities (http://openstax.org/l/verifytrigiden)

        9.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. We know                       is an  2. Examine the graph of                  3. After examining the
                                                                on the interval      reciprocal identity for
     even function, and                                                              explain why the function is
                                                        How can we tell              undefined at certain points.
            and                             whether the function is even
                                            or odd by only observing the
            are odd                         graph of

     functions. What about

     and                 Are they

     even, odd, or neither? Why?

4. All of the Pythagorean
    identities are related.
    Describe how to manipulate
    the equations to get from
                              to the
    other forms.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, use the fundamental identities to fully simplify the expression.

5.                                              6.                               7.

8.                                              9.

10.                                                      11.

12.                                                      13.

Access for free at openstax.org
            9.1 · Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 831

14.                                                           15.

For the following exercises, simplify the first trigonometric expression by writing the simplified form in terms of the
second expression.

16.         17.                                                    18.

19.                                                           20.

21.                                                           22.

23.                                                           24.

25.         26.                                                    27.

28.

For the following exercises, verify the identity.

29.                                                           30.

31.                                                           32.

33.

Extensions

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the identity.

34.                                                           35.

36.                                                           37.

38.                                                           39.

For the following exercises, determine whether the identity is true or false. If false, find an appropriate equivalent
expression.

40.         41.                                                         42.
832 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

    9.2 Sum and Difference Identities

      Learning Objectives

       In this section, you will:
                  Use sum and difference formulas for cosine.
                  Use sum and difference formulas for sine.
                  Use sum and difference formulas for tangent.
                  Use sum and difference formulas for cofunctions.
                  Use sum and difference formulas to verify identities.

       Figure 1 Mount McKinley, in Denali National Park, Alaska, rises 20,237 feet (6,168 m) above sea level. It is the highest
       peak in North America. (credit: Daniel A. Leifheit, Flickr)
       How can the height of a mountain be measured? What about the distance from Earth to the sun? Like many seemingly
       impossible problems, we rely on mathematical formulas to find the answers. The trigonometric identities, commonly
       used in mathematical proofs, have had real-world applications for centuries, including their use in calculating long
       distances.
       The trigonometric identities we will examine in this section can be traced to a Persian astronomer who lived around 950
       AD, but the ancient Greeks discovered these same formulas much earlier and stated them in terms of chords. These are
       special equations or postulates, true for all values input to the equations, and with innumerable applications.
       In this section, we will learn techniques that will enable us to solve problems such as the ones presented above. The
       formulas that follow will simplify many trigonometric expressions and equations. Keep in mind that, throughout this
       section, the term formula is used synonymously with the word identity.

     Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine

       Finding the exact value of the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle is often easier if we can rewrite the given angle in
       terms of two angles that have known trigonometric values. We can use the special angles, which we can review in the
       unit circle shown in Figure 2.

                                 Figure 2 The Unit Circle

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 833

We will begin with the sum and difference formulas for cosine, so that we can find the cosine of a given angle if we can
break it up into the sum or difference of two of the special angles. See Table 1.

                         Sum formula for cosine

Difference formula for cosine

Table 1

First, we will prove the difference formula for cosines. Let's consider two points on the unit circle. See Figure 3. Point is

at an angle from the positive x-axis with coordinates    and point is at an angle of from the positive

x-axis with coordinates       Note the measure of angle            is

Label two more points: at an angle of   from the positive x-axis with coordinates       and

point with coordinates        Triangle  is a rotation of triangle      and thus the distance from to is the

same as the distance from to

                                                                              Figure 3
We can find the distance from to using the distance formula.
Then we apply the Pythagorean identity and simplify.

Similarly, using the distance formula we can find the distance from to
Applying the Pythagorean identity and simplifying we get:

Because the two distances are the same, we set them equal to each other and simplify.
834 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

       Finally we subtract from both sides and divide both sides by

       Thus, we have the difference formula for cosine. We can use similar methods to derive the cosine of the sum of two
       angles.

         Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine
         These formulas can be used to calculate the cosine of sums and differences of angles.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Given two angles, find the cosine of the difference between the angles.
          1. Write the difference formula for cosine.
          2. Substitute the values of the given angles into the formula.
          3. Simplify.

         EXAMPLE 1
       Finding the Exact Value Using the Formula for the Cosine of the Difference of Two Angles
       Using the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles, find the exact value of

            Solution
       Begin by writing the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles. Then substitute the given values.

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing calculator in radian mode.

    TRY IT #1 Find the exact value of

EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Exact Value Using the Formula for the Sum of Two Angles for Cosine
Find the exact value of

    Solution

As            we can evaluate          as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 835

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing calculator in degree mode.
     Analysis

Note that we could have also solved this problem using the fact that

       TRY IT #2 Find the exact value of

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine

The sum and difference formulas for sine can be derived in the same manner as those for cosine, and they resemble the
cosine formulas.

  Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine

  These formulas can be used to calculate the sines of sums and differences of angles.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given two angles, find the sine of the difference between the angles.

 1. Write the difference formula for sine.
 2. Substitute the given angles into the formula.
 3. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 3

Using Sum and Difference Identities to Evaluate the Difference of Angles
Use the sum and difference identities to evaluate the difference of the angles and show that part a equals part b.

           
836 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

            Solution

     Let's begin by writing the formula and substitute the given angles.

       Next, we need to find the values of the trigonometric expressions.
       Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify.

     Again, we write the formula and substitute the given angles.

       Next, we find the values of the trigonometric expressions.
       Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify.

EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Exact Value of an Expression Involving an Inverse Trigonometric Function

Find the exact value of                         Then check the answer with a graphing calculator.

Solution

The pattern displayed in this problem is        Let  and                   Then we can write

We will use the Pythagorean identities to find  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 837

Using the sum formula for sine,

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent

Finding exact values for the tangent of the sum or difference of two angles is a little more complicated, but again, it is a
matter of recognizing the pattern.
Finding the sum of two angles formula for tangent involves taking quotient of the sum formulas for sine and cosine and
simplifying. Recall,
Let's derive the sum formula for tangent.

We can derive the difference formula for tangent in a similar way.
  Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent
  The sum and difference formulas for tangent are:
838 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Given two angles, find the tangent of the sum of the angles.
          1. Write the sum formula for tangent.
          2. Substitute the given angles into the formula.
          3. Simplify.

         EXAMPLE 5
       Finding the Exact Value of an Expression Involving Tangent
       Find the exact value of

            Solution
       Let's first write the sum formula for tangent and then substitute the given angles into the formula.

       Next, we determine the individual function values within the formula:

       So we have

  TRY IT #3 Find the exact value of

EXAMPLE 6

Finding Multiple Sums and Differences of Angles  find
Given
                                                 
                                 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 839

     Solution
We can use the sum and difference formulas to identify the sum or difference of angles when the ratio of sine, cosine, or
tangent is provided for each of the individual angles. To do so, we construct what is called a reference triangle to help
find each component of the sum and difference formulas.

 To find            we begin with  and                       The side opposite has length 3, the hypotenuse has

length 5, and  is in the first quadrant. See Figure 4. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the length of side

                                        Figure 4

Since          and               the side adjacent to is     the hypotenuse is 13, and is in the third quadrant.

See Figure 5. Again, using the Pythagorean Theorem, we have

Since is in the third quadrant,
840 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

                                                      Figure 5

The next step is finding the cosine of and the sine of The cosine of is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse. We

can find it from the triangle in Figure 5:      We can also find the sine of from the triangle in Figure 5, as

opposite side over the hypotenuse:              Now we are ready to evaluate

 We can find                     in a similar manner. We substitute the values according to the formula.

 For          if                 and            then

If     and                       then

Then,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 841

 To find          we have the values we need. We can substitute them in and evaluate.

     Analysis
A common mistake when addressing problems such as this one is that we may be tempted to think that and are
angles in the same triangle, which of course, they are not. Also note that

Using Sum and Difference Formulas for Cofunctions

Now that we can find the sine, cosine, and tangent functions for the sums and differences of angles, we can use them to
do the same for their cofunctions. You may recall from Right Triangle Trigonometry that, if the sum of two positive
angles is those two angles are complements, and the sum of the two acute angles in a right triangle is so they are

also complements. In Figure 6, notice that if one of the acute angles is labeled as  then the other acute angle must be
labeled

Notice also that  which is opposite over hypotenuse. Thus, when two angles are complementary,

we can say that the sine of equals the cofunction of the complement of  Similarly, tangent and cotangent are
cofunctions, and secant and cosecant are cofunctions.

                                                                              Figure 6

From these relationships, the cofunction identities are formed. Recall that you first encountered these identities in The
Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions.
842 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

         Cofunction Identities
         The cofunction identities are summarized in Table 2.

                                                    Table 2

Notice that the formulas in the table may also justified algebraically using the sum and difference formulas. For example,
using
we can write

EXAMPLE 7

Finding a Cofunction with the Same Value as the Given Expression

Write  in terms of its cofunction.

     Solution                       Thus,
The cofunction of

TRY IT #4 Write                  in terms of its cofunction.

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas to Verify Identities

Verifying an identity means demonstrating that the equation holds for all values of the variable. It helps to be very
familiar with the identities or to have a list of them accessible while working the problems. Reviewing the general rules
presented earlier may help simplify the process of verifying an identity.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an identity, verify using sum and difference formulas.

   1. Begin with the expression on the side of the equal sign that appears most complex. Rewrite that expression until
        it matches the other side of the equal sign. Occasionally, we might have to alter both sides, but working on only
        one side is the most efficient.

   2. Look for opportunities to use the sum and difference formulas.
   3. Rewrite sums or differences of quotients as single quotients.
   4. If the process becomes cumbersome, rewrite the expression in terms of sines and cosines.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 843

  EXAMPLE 8
Verifying an Identity Involving Sine
Verify the identity

     Solution
We see that the left side of the equation includes the sines of the sum and the difference of angles.

We can rewrite each using the sum and difference formulas.

We see that the identity is verified.

  EXAMPLE 9
Verifying an Identity Involving Tangent
Verify the following identity.

     Solution
We can begin by rewriting the numerator on the left side of the equation.

We see that the identity is verified. In many cases, verifying tangent identities can successfully be accomplished by
writing the tangent in terms of sine and cosine.

       TRY IT #5 Verify the identity:

  EXAMPLE 10
Using Sum and Difference Formulas to Solve an Application Problem
Let and denote two non-vertical intersecting lines, and let denote the acute angle between and See
Figure 7. Show that

where and are the slopes of and respectively. (Hint: Use the fact that  and  )
844 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

                                                                                     Figure 7
            Solution
       Using the difference formula for tangent, this problem does not seem as daunting as it might.

         EXAMPLE 11
       Investigating a Guy-wire Problem
       For a climbing wall, a guy-wire is attached 47 feet high on a vertical pole. Added support is provided by another guy-
       wire attached 40 feet above ground on the same pole. If the wires are attached to the ground 50 feet from the pole,
       find the angle between the wires. See Figure 8.

                                                     Figure 8

Solution

Let's first summarize the information we can gather from the diagram. As only the sides adjacent to the right angle are

known, we can use the tangent function. Notice that              and  We can then use difference

formula for tangent.

Now, substituting the values we know into the formula, we have

Use the distributive property, and then simplify the functions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.2 · Sum and Difference Identities 845

Now we can calculate the angle in degrees.

     Analysis

Occasionally, when an application appears that includes a right triangle, we may think that solving is a matter of
applying the Pythagorean Theorem. That may be partially true, but it depends on what the problem is asking and what
information is given.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sum and difference identities.

     Sum and Difference Identities for Cosine (http://openstax.org/l/sumdifcos)
     Sum and Difference Identities for Sine (http://openstax.org/l/sumdifsin)
     Sum and Difference Identities for Tangent (http://openstax.org/l/sumdiftan)

        9.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain the basis for the   2. Is there only one way to         3. Explain to someone who has
    cofunction identities and                                          forgotten the even-odd
    when they apply.                evaluate             Explain       properties of sinusoidal
                                                                       functions how the addition
                                    how to set up the solution in      and subtraction formulas
                                    two different ways, and then       can determine this
                                    compute to make sure they          characteristic for
                                    give the same answer.                                  and
                                                                                            (Hint:
                                                                                        )

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

4.                             5.                                  6.

7.                             8.                                  9.

For the following exercises, rewrite in terms of    and

10.                            11.                                 12.
846 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

13.

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

14.                                             15.                                  16.
                                                                                              19.
17.                                             18.

For the following exercises, find the requested information.

20. Given that                   and            21. Given that                  and

                with and                                        with and

     both in the interval                            both in the interval

     find       and                                  find       and

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression.

22.                                             23.                                       24.

Graphical

For the following exercises, simplify the expression, and then graph both expressions as functions to verify the graphs
are identical. Confirm your answer using a graphing calculator.

25.                                   26.                                            27.

28.                                             29.                                  30.

31.                                   32.

For the following exercises, use a graph to determine whether the functions are the same or different. If they are the
same, show why. If they are different, replace the second function with one that is identical to the first. (Hint: think

                 )

33.

34.

35.                                                                        36.

37.                                                             38.

39.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 847

40.                                                                  41.

Technology

For the following exercises, find the exact value algebraically, and then confirm the answer with a calculator to the fourth
decimal point.

42.         43.                                                           44.

45.         46.

Extensions

For the following exercises, prove the identities provided.

47.         48.                                                                49.

50.                                                          51.

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the statements.

52.         53.

54.                                                          55. If  and are angles in the same triangle, then

                                                                  prove or disprove

56. If  and are angles in the same

     triangle, then prove or disprove

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use double-angle formulas to find exact values.
           Use double-angle formulas to verify identities.
           Use reduction formulas to simplify an expression.
           Use half-angle formulas to find exact values.
848 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 1 Bicycle and skateboard ramps for advanced riders have a steeper incline than those designed for novices.

Bicycle and skateboard ramps made for competition (see Figure 1) must vary in height depending on the skill level of the
competitors. For advanced competitors, the angle formed by the ramp and the ground should be such that

The angle is divided in half for novices. What is the steepness of the ramp for novices? In this section, we will investigate
three additional categories of identities that we can use to answer questions such as this one.

Using Double-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values

In the previous section, we used addition and subtraction formulas for trigonometric functions. Now, we take another

look at those same formulas. The double-angle formulas are a special case of the sum formulas, where  Deriving

the double-angle formula for sine begins with the sum formula,

If we let  then we have

Deriving the double-angle for cosine gives us three options. First, starting from the sum formula,

                                                and letting     we have

Using the Pythagorean properties, we can expand this double-angle formula for cosine and get two more variations. The
first variation is:

The second variation is:

Similarly, to derive the double-angle formula for tangent, replacing     in the sum formula gives

  Double-Angle Formulas
  The double-angle formulas are summarized as follows:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 849

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which it is located, use the double-angle formulas to find
the exact value.

 1. Draw a triangle to reflect the given information.
 2. Determine the correct double-angle formula.
 3. Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle.
 4. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 1

Using a Double-Angle Formula to Find the Exact Value Involving Tangent

Given that      and is in quadrant II, find the following:

  Solution      

If we draw a triangle to reflect the information given, we can find the values needed to solve the problems on the image.

We are given    such that is in quadrant II. The tangent of an angle is equal to the opposite side over the

adjacent side, and because is in the second quadrant, the adjacent side is on the x-axis and is negative. Use the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse:

Now we can draw a triangle similar to the one shown in Figure 2.

                  Figure 2
850 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

 Let's begin by writing the double-angle formula for sine.

We see that we to need to find                  and  Based on Figure 2, we see that the hypotenuse equals 5, so

       and                       Substitute these values into the equation, and simplify.

Thus,

 Write the double-angle formula for cosine.

Again, substitute the values of the sine and cosine into the equation, and simplify.

 Write the double-angle formula for tangent.                              Substitute this value into the equation,

In this formula, we need the tangent, which we were given as
and simplify.

TRY IT #1 Given                                 with in quadrant I, find

EXAMPLE 2

Using the Double-Angle Formula for Cosine without Exact Values

Use the double-angle formula for cosine to write     in terms of

Solution

     Analysis
This example illustrates that we can use the double-angle formula without having exact values. It emphasizes that the
pattern is what we need to remember and that identities are true for all values in the domain of the trigonometric
function.

Using Double-Angle Formulas to Verify Identities

Establishing identities using the double-angle formulas is performed using the same steps we used to derive the sum

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 851

and difference formulas. Choose the more complicated side of the equation and rewrite it until it matches the other side.
  EXAMPLE 3

Using the Double-Angle Formulas to Verify an Identity
Verify the following identity using double-angle formulas:

     Solution
We will work on the right side of the equal sign and rewrite the expression until it matches the left side.

     Analysis
This process is not complicated, as long as we recall the perfect square formula from algebra:

where  and  Part of being successful in mathematics is the ability to recognize patterns. While the

terms or symbols may change, the algebra remains consistent.

       TRY IT #2 Verify the identity:

  EXAMPLE 4
Verifying a Double-Angle Identity for Tangent
Verify the identity:

     Solution
In this case, we will work with the left side of the equation and simplify or rewrite until it equals the right side of the
equation.

     Analysis
Here is a case where the more complicated side of the initial equation appeared on the right, but we chose to work the
left side. However, if we had chosen the left side to rewrite, we would have been working backwards to arrive at the
equivalency. For example, suppose that we wanted to show

Let's work on the right side.
852 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

When using the identities to simplify a trigonometric expression or solve a trigonometric equation, there are usually
several paths to a desired result. There is no set rule as to what side should be manipulated. However, we should begin
with the guidelines set forth earlier.

TRY IT #3 Verify the identity:

Use Reduction Formulas to Simplify an Expression

The double-angle formulas can be used to derive the reduction formulas, which are formulas we can use to reduce the
power of a given expression involving even powers of sine or cosine. They allow us to rewrite the even powers of sine or
cosine in terms of the first power of cosine. These formulas are especially important in higher-level math courses,
calculus in particular. Also called the power-reducing formulas, three identities are included and are easily derived from
the double-angle formulas.

We can use two of the three double-angle formulas for cosine to derive the reduction formulas for sine and cosine. Let's

begin with                       Solve for

Next, we use the formula                        Solve for

The last reduction formula is derived by writing tangent in terms of sine and cosine:

Reduction Formulas
The reduction formulas are summarized as follows:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 853

EXAMPLE 5

Writing an Equivalent Expression Not Containing Powers Greater Than 1

Write an equivalent expression for         that does not involve any powers of sine or cosine greater than 1.

     Solution
We will apply the reduction formula for cosine twice.

     Analysis
The solution is found by using the reduction formula twice, as noted, and the perfect square formula from algebra.

  EXAMPLE 6
Using the Power-Reducing Formulas to Prove an Identity
Use the power-reducing formulas to prove

     Solution
We will work on simplifying the left side of the equation:

     Analysis
Note that in this example, we substituted

for        The formula states

We let     so

     TRY IT #4 Use the power-reducing formulas to prove that

Using Half-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values

The next set of identities is the set of half-angle formulas, which can be derived from the reduction formulas and we
can use when we have an angle that is half the size of a special angle. If we replace with the half-angle formula for

sine is found by simplifying the equation and solving for  Note that the half-angle formulas are preceded by a
854 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

       sign. This does not mean that both the positive and negative expressions are valid. Rather, it depends on the quadrant in
       which terminates.
       The half-angle formula for sine is derived as follows:

       To derive the half-angle formula for cosine, we have

       For the tangent identity, we have

         Half-Angle Formulas
         The half-angle formulas are as follows:

EXAMPLE 7

Using a Half-Angle Formula to Find the Exact Value of a Sine Function

Find           using a half-angle formula.

     Solution  we use the half-angle formula for sine:
Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 855

Remember that we can check the answer with a graphing calculator.

     Analysis                                       is positive.
Notice that we used only the positive root because

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which the angle lies, find the exact values of trigonometric
functions of half of the angle.

 1. Draw a triangle to represent the given information.
 2. Determine the correct half-angle formula.
 3. Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle.
 4. Simplify.

EXAMPLE 8

Finding Exact Values Using Half-Angle Identities

Given that    and lies in quadrant III, find the exact value of the following:

  Solution    

Using the given information, we can draw the triangle shown in Figure 3. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we find the

hypotenuse to be 17. Therefore, we can calculate    and

                                                    Figure 3
856 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

 Before we start, we must remember that if is in quadrant III, then  so                                               This

means that the terminal side of is in quadrant II, since

To find   we begin by writing the half-angle formula for sine. Then we substitute the value of the cosine we

found from the triangle in Figure 3 and simplify.

We choose the positive value of                 because the angle terminates in quadrant II and sine is positive in quadrant II.

 To find  we will write the half-angle formula for cosine, substitute the value of the cosine we found from

the triangle in Figure 3, and simplify.

We choose the negative value of                 because the angle is in quadrant II because cosine is negative in quadrant II.

 To find  we write the half-angle formula for tangent. Again, we substitute the value of the cosine we found

from the triangle in Figure 3 and simplify.

We choose the negative value of                 because lies in quadrant II, and tangent is negative in quadrant II.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 857

TRY IT #5 Given that                          and lies in quadrant IV, find the exact value of

EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Measurement of a Half Angle
Now, we will return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section. A bicycle ramp is constructed for high-level
competition with an angle of formed by the ramp and the ground. Another ramp is to be constructed half as steep for

novice competition. If     for higher-level competition, what is the measurement of the angle for novice

competition?

     Solution
Since the angle for novice competition measures half the steepness of the angle for the high level competition, and

for high competition, we can find                   from the right triangle and the Pythagorean theorem so that we can

use the half-angle identities. See Figure 4.

We see that                                           Figure 4                                  Since                is in
the first quadrant, so is  We can use the half-angle formula for tangent:

We can take the inverse tangent to find the angle:  So the angle of the ramp for novice competition
is

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with double-angle, half-angle, and reduction
formulas.

Double-Angle Identities (http://openstax.org/l/doubleangiden)
Half-Angle Identities (http://openstax.org/l/halfangleident)
858 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

        9.3 SECTION EXERCISES                                        2. Explain how to determine the double-angle

Verbal                                                                    formula for           using the double-angle

1. Explain how to determine the reduction identities
    from the double-angle identity

                                                                          formulas for          and

3. We can determine the half-angle formula for                       4. For the half-angle formula given in the previous

                         by dividing the formula for                      exercise for          explain why dividing by 0 is

                by       Explain how to determine two                     not a concern. (Hint: examine the values of
     formulas for        that do not involve any square                   necessary for the denominator to be 0.)
     roots.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a)                   b)           and c)        without solving for
                                                                     6. If
5. If               and is in quadrant I.                                               and is in quadrant I.

7. If               and  is in quadrant III.                         8. If              and is in quadrant IV.

For the following exercises, find the values of the six trigonometric functions if the conditions provided hold.

9.                  and                                              10.                and

For the following exercises, simplify to one trigonometric expression.

11.                                             12.

For the following exercises, find the exact value using half-angle formulas.

13.                                             14.                             15.

16.                                             17.                             18.

19.

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a)                  b)            and c)        without solving for when

20. If              and is in                   21. If               and is in  22. If                and   is in
      quadrant IV.                                    quadrant III.
                                                                                        quadrant II.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         9.3 · Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 859

23. If              and is in
      quadrant II.

For the following exercises, use Figure 5 to find the requested half and double angles.

24. Find            and                                 Figure 5                   and
26. Find             and                                    25. Find                and

                                                            27. Find

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate.

28.                            29.                                       30.

31.                            32.                                       33.

For the following exercises, prove the given identity.

34.                            35.                                            36.

37.

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with an exponent no higher than 1.

38.                            39.                                       40.

41.                            42.                                       43.

44.

Technology

For the following exercises, reduce the equations to powers of one, and then check the answer graphically.

45.                            46.                                       47.

48.                            49.                                       50.

51.                            52.
860 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

For the following exercises, algebraically find an equivalent function, only in terms of  and/or  and then check
the answer by graphing both functions.

53.                                             54.

Extensions

For the following exercises, prove the identities.

55.                                             56.       57.

58.                                                  59.

60.                                                  61.

62.
63.

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Express products as sums.
           Express sums as products.

                                          Figure 1 The UCLA marching band (credit: Eric Chan, Flickr).
A band marches down the field creating an amazing sound that bolsters the crowd. That sound travels as a wave that
can be interpreted using trigonometric functions. For example, Figure 2 represents a sound wave for the musical note A.
In this section, we will investigate trigonometric identities that are the foundation of everyday phenomena such as
sound waves.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    9.4 · Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 861

                                                                              Figure 2

Expressing Products as Sums

We have already learned a number of formulas useful for expanding or simplifying trigonometric expressions, but
sometimes we may need to express the product of cosine and sine as a sum. We can use the product-to-sum formulas,
which express products of trigonometric functions as sums. Let's investigate the cosine identity first and then the sine
identity.

Expressing Products as Sums for Cosine

We can derive the product-to-sum formula from the sum and difference identities for cosine. If we add the two
equations, we get:

Then, we divide by to isolate the product of cosines:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a product of cosines, express as a sum.
   1. Write the formula for the product of cosines.
   2. Substitute the given angles into the formula.
   3. Simplify.

  EXAMPLE 1
Writing the Product as a Sum Using the Product-to-Sum Formula for Cosine
Write the following product of cosines as a sum:

     Solution
We begin by writing the formula for the product of cosines:

We can then substitute the given angles into the formula and simplify.

       TRY IT #1 Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum or difference:

Expressing the Product of Sine and Cosine as a Sum

Next, we will derive the product-to-sum formula for sine and cosine from the sum and difference formulas for sine. If we
add the sum and difference identities, we get:
862 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

       Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of cosine and sine:

         EXAMPLE 2
       Writing the Product as a Sum Containing only Sine or Cosine
       Express the following product as a sum containing only sine or cosine and no products:

            Solution
       Write the formula for the product of sine and cosine. Then substitute the given values into the formula and simplify.

              TRY IT #2 Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum:

      Expressing Products of Sines in Terms of Cosine

       Expressing the product of sines in terms of cosine is also derived from the sum and difference identities for cosine. In
       this case, we will first subtract the two cosine formulas:

       Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of sines:

       Similarly we could express the product of cosines in terms of sine or derive other product-to-sum formulas.
         The Product-to-Sum Formulas
         The product-to-sum formulas are as follows:

EXAMPLE 3

Express the Product as a Sum or Difference

Write      as a sum or difference.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    9.4 · Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 863

     Solution
We have the product of cosines, so we begin by writing the related formula. Then we substitute the given angles and
simplify.

TRY IT #3 Use the product-to-sum formula to evaluate

Expressing Sums as Products

Some problems require the reverse of the process we just used. The sum-to-product formulas allow us to express sums

of sine or cosine as products. These formulas can be derived from the product-to-sum identities. For example, with a few

substitutions, we can derive the sum-to-product identity for sine. Let  and

Then,

Thus, replacing and in the product-to-sum formula with the substitute expressions, we have

The other sum-to-product identities are derived similarly.
  Sum-to-Product Formulas
  The sum-to-product formulas are as follows:

  EXAMPLE 4

Writing the Difference of Sines as a Product
Write the following difference of sines expression as a product:
864 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

            Solution
       We begin by writing the formula for the difference of sines.

       Substitute the values into the formula, and simplify.

TRY IT #4 Use the sum-to-product formula to write the sum as a product:

EXAMPLE 5

Evaluating Using the Sum-to-Product Formula

Evaluate                         Check the answer with a graphing calculator.

     Solution
We begin by writing the formula for the difference of cosines.

Then we substitute the given angles and simplify.

  EXAMPLE 6
Proving an Identity
Prove the identity:

     Solution
We will start with the left side, the more complicated side of the equation, and rewrite the expression until it matches the
right side.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    9.4 · Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 865

     Analysis
Recall that verifying trigonometric identities has its own set of rules. The procedures for solving an equation are not the
same as the procedures for verifying an identity. When we prove an identity, we pick one side to work on and make
substitutions until that side is transformed into the other side.

  EXAMPLE 7
Verifying the Identity Using Double-Angle Formulas and Reciprocal Identities
Verify the identity

     Solution
For verifying this equation, we are bringing together several of the identities. We will use the double-angle formula and
the reciprocal identities. We will work with the right side of the equation and rewrite it until it matches the left side.

    TRY IT #5 Verify the identity

    MEDIA
    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the product-to-sum and sum-to-product
    identities.
    Sum to Product Identities (http://openstax.org/l/sumtoprod)
    Sum to Product and Product to Sum Identities (http://openstax.org/l/sumtpptsum)

        9.4 SECTION EXERCISES                                             2. Provide two different methods of calculating
                                                                                                            one of which uses the product
Verbal
                                                                              to sum. Which method is easier?
1. Starting with the product to sum formula
                                                                 explain  4. Describe a situation where we would convert an
                                                                              equation from a product to a sum, and give an
    how to determine the formula for                                          example.

3. Describe a situation where we would convert an
    equation from a sum to a product and give an
    example.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, rewrite the product as a sum or difference.

5.         6.                                                             7.

8.         9.                                                             10.
866 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum or difference as a product.

11.                                             12.                       13.

14.                                             15.                       16.

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the following using a sum or difference of two functions. Evaluate
exactly.

17.                                             18.                       19.

20.                                             21.

For the following exercises, evaluate the product using a sum or difference of two functions. Leave in terms of sine and
cosine.

22.                                             23.                       24.

25.                                             26.

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two functions. Leave in terms of sine and cosine.

27.                                             28.                       29.

30.                                             31.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

32.                                                  33.

34.                                                  35.

36.                                                  37.

38.

Numeric

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two functions or the product as a sum of two functions. Give
your answer in terms of sines and cosines. Then evaluate the final answer numerically, rounded to four decimal places.

39.                                             40.                       41.

42.                                             43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.4 · Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 867

Technology

For the following exercises, algebraically determine whether each of the given equation is an identity. If it is not an
identity, replace the right-hand side with an expression equivalent to the left side. Verify the results by graphing both
expressions on a calculator.

44.                                                    45.

46.                                                    47.

48.

For the following exercises, simplify the expression to one term, then graph the original function and your simplified
version to verify they are identical.

49.                                                    50.

51.                                                    52.

53.

Extensions

For the following exercises, prove the following sum-to-product formulas.

54.                                               55.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

56.                                                    57.

58.                                                    59.

60.                                                    61.

62.
63.
868 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

    9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations

      Learning Objectives

       In this section, you will:
                  Solve linear trigonometric equations in sine and cosine.
                  Solve equations involving a single trigonometric function.
                  Solve trigonometric equations using a calculator.
                  Solve trigonometric equations that are quadratic in form.
                  Solve trigonometric equations using fundamental identities.
                  Solve trigonometric equations with multiple angles.
                  Solve right triangle problems.

Figure 1 Egyptian pyramids standing near a modern city. (credit: Oisin Mulvihill)

Thales of Miletus (circa 625-547 BC) is known as the founder of geometry. The legend is that he calculated the height of
the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt using the theory of similar triangles, which he developed by measuring the shadow of
his staff. He reasoned that when the height of his staff's shadow was exactly equal to the actual height of the staff, then
the height of the nearby pyramid's shadow must also be equal to the height of the actual pyramid. Since the structures
and their shadows were creating a right triangle with two equal sides, they were similar triangles. By measuring the
length of the pyramid's shadow at that moment, he could obtain the height of the pyramid. Based on proportions, this
theory has applications in a number of areas, including fractal geometry, engineering, and architecture. Often, the angle
of elevation and the angle of depression are found using similar triangles.

In earlier sections of this chapter, we looked at trigonometric identities. Identities are true for all values in the domain of
the variable. In this section, we begin our study of trigonometric equations to study real-world scenarios such as the
finding the dimensions of the pyramids.

Solving Linear Trigonometric Equations in Sine and Cosine

Trigonometric equations are, as the name implies, equations that involve trigonometric functions. Similar in many ways

to solving polynomial equations or rational equations, only specific values of the variable will be solutions, if there are

solutions at all. Often we will solve a trigonometric equation over a specified interval. However, just as often, we will be

asked to find all possible solutions, and as trigonometric functions are periodic, solutions are repeated within each

period. In other words, trigonometric equations may have an infinite number of solutions. Additionally, like rational

equations, the domain of the function must be considered before we assume that any solution is valid. The period of

both the sine function and the cosine function is In other words, every units, the y-values repeat. If we need to

find all possible solutions, then we must add  where is an integer, to the initial solution. Recall the rule that gives

the format for stating all possible solutions for a function where the period is

There are similar rules for indicating all possible solutions for the other trigonometric functions. Solving trigonometric
equations requires the same techniques as solving algebraic equations. We read the equation from left to right,
horizontally, like a sentence. We look for known patterns, factor, find common denominators, and substitute certain
expressions with a variable to make solving a more straightforward process. However, with trigonometric equations, we
also have the advantage of using the identities we developed in the previous sections.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 869

  EXAMPLE 1

Solving a Linear Trigonometric Equation Involving the Cosine Function
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation

     Solution
From the unit circle, we know that

These are the solutions in the interval  All possible solutions are given by

where is an integer.

EXAMPLE 2

Solving a Linear Equation Involving the Sine Function
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation

     Solution                                                                                  From Figure 2, we can
Solving for all possible values of t means that solutions include angles beyond the period of

see that the solutions are  and          But the problem is asking for all possible values that solve the equation.

Therefore, the answer is

where is an integer.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a trigonometric equation, solve using algebra.
   1. Look for a pattern that suggests an algebraic property, such as the difference of squares or a factoring

        opportunity.
   2. Substitute the trigonometric expression with a single variable, such as or
   3. Solve the equation the same way an algebraic equation would be solved.
   4. Substitute the trigonometric expression back in for the variable in the resulting expressions.
   5. Solve for the angle.

  EXAMPLE 3

Solve the Linear Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation exactly:

     Solution
Use algebraic techniques to solve the equation.
870 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

              TRY IT #1 Solve exactly the following linear equation on the interval

     Solving Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function

       When we are given equations that involve only one of the six trigonometric functions, their solutions involve using
       algebraic techniques and the unit circle (see Figure 2). We need to make several considerations when the equation
       involves trigonometric functions other than sine and cosine. Problems involving the reciprocals of the primary
       trigonometric functions need to be viewed from an algebraic perspective. In other words, we will write the reciprocal
       function, and solve for the angles using the function. Also, an equation involving the tangent function is slightly different
       from one containing a sine or cosine function. First, as we know, the period of tangent is not Further, the domain
       of tangent is all real numbers with the exception of odd integer multiples of unless, of course, a problem places its
       own restrictions on the domain.

         EXAMPLE 4
       Solving a Problem Involving a Single Trigonometric Function
       Solve the problem exactly:

            Solution
       As this problem is not easily factored, we will solve using the square root property. First, we use algebra to isolate
       Then we will find the angles.

EXAMPLE 5

Solving a Trigonometric Equation Involving Cosecant
Solve the following equation exactly:

     Solution                    over the interval
We want all values of for which

     Analysis  notice that all four solutions are in the third and fourth quadrants.
As

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 871

EXAMPLE 6

Solving an Equation Involving Tangent
Solve the equation exactly:

Solution

Recall that the tangent function has a period of On the interval          and at the angle of  the tangent has a value

of 1. However, the angle we want is     Thus, if                  then

Over the interval         we have two solutions:

       TRY IT #2 Find all solutions for                                   on the left side of the equals sign.

  EXAMPLE 7
Identify all Solutions to the Equation Involving Tangent
Identify all exact solutions to the equation

     Solution
We can solve this equation using only algebra. Isolate the expression

There are two angles on the unit circle that have a tangent value of      and

Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator

Not all functions can be solved exactly using only the unit circle. When we must solve an equation involving an angle
other than one of the special angles, we will need to use a calculator. Make sure it is set to the proper mode, either
degrees or radians, depending on the criteria of the given problem.

EXAMPLE 8

Using a Calculator to Solve a Trigonometric Equation Involving Sine

Use a calculator to solve the equation              where is in radians.

Solution

Make sure mode is set to radians. To find use the inverse sine function. On most calculators, you will need to push the

2ND button and then the SIN button to bring up the  function. What is shown on the screen is   The

calculator is ready for the input within the parentheses. For this problem, we enter           and press ENTER. Thus,

to four decimals places,

The solution is
The angle measurement in degrees is
872 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Analysis

Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or IV for the sine function, since that is the range of the

inverse sine. The other angle is obtained by using   Thus, the additional solution is

EXAMPLE 9

Using a Calculator to Solve a Trigonometric Equation Involving Secant

Use a calculator to solve the equation               giving your answer in radians.

     Solution
We can begin with some algebra.

Check that the MODE is in radians. Now use the inverse cosine function.

Since      and                   1.8235 is between these two numbers, thus           is in quadrant II. Cosine is also

negative in quadrant III. Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or II for the cosine function, since
that is the range of the inverse cosine. See Figure 2.

                                                                              Figure 2
So, we also need to find the measure of the angle in quadrant III. In quadrant II, the reference angle is

                                           The other solution in quadrant III is

The solutions are                               and

       TRY IT #3 Solve

Solving Trigonometric Equations in Quadratic Form

Solving a quadratic equation may be more complicated, but once again, we can use algebra as we would for any

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 873

quadratic equation. Look at the pattern of the equation. Is there more than one trigonometric function in the equation,
or is there only one? Which trigonometric function is squared? If there is only one function represented and one of the
terms is squared, think about the standard form of a quadratic. Replace the trigonometric function with a variable such
as or If substitution makes the equation look like a quadratic equation, then we can use the same methods for
solving quadratics to solve the trigonometric equations.

EXAMPLE 10

Solving a Trigonometric Equation in Quadratic Form
Solve the equation exactly:

Solution

We begin by using substitution and replacing cos with  It is not necessary to use substitution, but it may make the

problem easier to solve visually. Let  We have

The equation cannot be factored, so we will use the quadratic formula

Replace with  and solve.

Note that only the + sign is used. This is because we get an error when we solve             on a calculator,

since the domain of the inverse cosine function is     However, there is a second solution:

This terminal side of the angle lies in quadrant I. Since cosine is also positive in quadrant IV, the second solution is

  EXAMPLE 11                                                                        or imagine it, as we factor:
Solving a Trigonometric Equation in Quadratic Form by Factoring
Solve the equation exactly:

     Solution
Using grouping, this quadratic can be factored. Either make the real substitution,

Now set each factor equal to zero.
874 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Next solve for                   as the range of the sine function is     However,      giving the solution

     Analysis
Make sure to check all solutions on the given domain as some factors have no solution.

TRY IT #4       Solve                                [Hint: Make a substitution to express the equation only in
                terms of cosine.]

  EXAMPLE 12

Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Algebra
Solve exactly:

     Solution                                                                        The equation becomes
This problem should appear familiar as it is similar to a quadratic. Let
We begin by factoring:

Set each factor equal to zero.

Then, substitute back into the equation the original expression           for Thus,

The solutions within the domain                 are

If we prefer not to substitute, we can solve the equation by following the same pattern of factoring and setting each
factor equal to zero.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 875

Analysis

We can see the solutions on the graph in Figure 3. On the interval          the graph crosses the x-axis four times, at

the solutions noted. Notice that trigonometric equations that are in quadratic form can yield up to four solutions instead

of the expected two that are found with quadratic equations. In this example, each solution (angle) corresponding to a

positive sine value will yield two angles that would result in that value.

                                                                              Figure 3
We can verify the solutions on the unit circle in Figure 2 as well.

  EXAMPLE 13
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Quadratic in Form
Solve the equation quadratic in form exactly:

     Solution
We can factor using grouping. Solution values of can be found on the unit circle.

       TRY IT #5 Solve the quadratic equation

Solving Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental Identities

While algebra can be used to solve a number of trigonometric equations, we can also use the fundamental identities
because they make solving equations simpler. Remember that the techniques we use for solving are not the same as
876 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

       those for verifying identities. The basic rules of algebra apply here, as opposed to rewriting one side of the identity to
       match the other side. In the next example, we use two identities to simplify the equation.

         EXAMPLE 14
       Use Identities to Solve an Equation
       Use identities to solve exactly the trigonometric equation over the interval

            Solution
       Notice that the left side of the equation is the difference formula for cosine.

From the unit circle in Figure 2, we see that  when

  EXAMPLE 15

Solving the Equation Using a Double-Angle Formula
Solve the equation exactly using a double-angle formula:

     Solution
We have three choices of expressions to substitute for the double-angle of cosine. As it is simpler to solve for one
trigonometric function at a time, we will choose the double-angle identity involving only cosine:

So, if  then                     and           if    then

  EXAMPLE 16

Solving an Equation Using an Identity
Solve the equation exactly using an identity:

     Solution
If we rewrite the right side, we can write the equation in terms of cosine:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 877

Our solutions are

Solving Trigonometric Equations with Multiple Angles

Sometimes it is not possible to solve a trigonometric equation with identities that have a multiple angle, such as

or            When confronted with these equations, recall that               is a horizontal compression by a factor of 2 of

the function       On an interval of we can graph two periods of                        as opposed to one cycle of

    This compression of the graph leads us to believe there may be twice as many x-intercepts or solutions to

              compared to           This information will help us solve the equation.

EXAMPLE 17

Solving a Multiple Angle Trigonometric Equation

Solve exactly:             on

    Solution

We can see that this equation is the standard equation with a multiple of an angle. If          we know is in

quadrants I and IV. While           will only yield solutions in quadrants I and II, we recognize that the solutions to

the equation       will be in quadrants I and IV.

Therefore, the possible angles are  and            So,           or           which means that  or                  Does

this make sense? Yes, because

Are there any other possible answers? Let us return to our first step.

In quadrant I,     so          as noted. Let us revolve around the circle again:

so
One more rotation yields

                 so this value for is larger than so it is not a solution on

In quadrant IV,            so       as noted. Let us revolve around the circle again:
878 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

so
One more rotation yields

            so this value for is larger than so it is not a solution on

Our solutions are                               . Note that whenever we solve a problem in the form of  we must
go around the unit circle times.

Solving Right Triangle Problems

We can now use all of the methods we have learned to solve problems that involve applying the properties of right

triangles and the Pythagorean Theorem. We begin with the familiar Pythagorean Theorem,                  and model an

equation to fit a situation.

EXAMPLE 18

Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Model an Equation
Use the Pythagorean Theorem, and the properties of right triangles to model an equation that fits the problem.

One of the cables that anchors the center of the London Eye Ferris wheel to the ground must be replaced. The center of
the Ferris wheel is 69.5 meters above the ground, and the second anchor on the ground is 23 meters from the base of
the Ferris wheel. Approximately how long is the cable, and what is the angle of elevation (from ground up to the center
of the Ferris wheel)? See Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4
     Solution
Using the information given, we can draw a right triangle. We can find the length of the cable with the Pythagorean
Theorem.

The angle of elevation is formed by the second anchor on the ground and the cable reaching to the center of the
wheel. We can use the tangent function to find its measure. Round to two decimal places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 879

The angle of elevation is approximately        and the length of the cable is 73.2 meters.

  EXAMPLE 19

Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Model an Abstract Problem
OSHA safety regulations require that the base of a ladder be placed 1 foot from the wall for every 4 feet of ladder length.
Find the angle that a ladder of any length forms with the ground and the height at which the ladder touches the wall.

     Solution
For any length of ladder, the base needs to be a distance from the wall equal to one fourth of the ladder's length.
Equivalently, if the base of the ladder is "a" feet from the wall, the length of the ladder will be 4a feet. See Figure 5.

The side adjacent to is a and the hypotenuse is     Figure 5
                                                 Thus,

The elevation of the ladder forms an angle of    with the ground. The height at which the ladder touches the wall can
be found using the Pythagorean Theorem:

Thus, the ladder touches the wall at     feet from the ground.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving trigonometric equations.

Solving Trigonometric Equations I (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqI)
Solving Trigonometric Equations II (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqII)
Solving Trigonometric Equations III (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqIII)
Solving Trigonometric Equations IV (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqIV)
Solving Trigonometric Equations V (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqV)
Solving Trigonometric Equations VI (http://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqVI)
880 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

        9.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Will there always be                         2. When solving a                 3. When solving linear trig
    solutions to trigonometric                      trigonometric equation            equations in terms of only
    function equations? If not,                     involving more than one trig      sine or cosine, how do we
    describe an equation that                       function, do we always want       know whether there will be
    would not have a solution.                      to try to rewrite the             solutions?
    Explain why or why not.                         equation so it is expressed
                                                    in terms of one
                                                    trigonometric function? Why
                                                    or why not?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval

4.                                              5.                                6.

7.                                              8.                                9.

10.                                             11.                               12.

For the following exercises, solve exactly on

13.                                             14.                               15.

16.                                             17.                               18.

19.                                             20.                               21.

22.

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on

23.                                             24.                               25.

26.                                             27.

28.                                             29.                               30.

31.                                             32.

For the following exercises, solve with the methods shown in this section exactly on the interval

33.                                                       34.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 881

35.                                                         36.

37.         38.                                                    39.

40.

For the following exercises, solve exactly on the interval         Use the quadratic formula if the equations do not factor.
                                                                             43.
41.         42.                                                              46.
                                                                             49.
44.         45.

47.         48.

For the following exercises, find exact solutions on the interval  Look for opportunities to use trigonometric
identities.                                                        52.
                                                                   55.
50.         51.                                                    58.
                                                                   61.
53.         54.                                                    64.

56.         57.

59.         60.

62.         63.

65.

Graphical

For the following exercises, algebraically determine all solutions of the trigonometric equation exactly, then verify the
results by graphing the equation and finding the zeros.

66.         67.                                                    68.

69.                                                         70.

71.                                                         72.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find all solutions to four decimal places.

73.         74.                                                    75.
882 9 · Trigonometric Identities and Equations

76.

For the following exercises, solve the equations algebraically, and then use a calculator to find the values on the interval
          Round to four decimal places.

77.                                             78.                                 79.

80.                                             81.                                 82.

Extensions

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly to the equations on the interval

83.                                                  84.

85.                                                  86.

87.                                                  88.

89.                                                  90.

91.                                                  92.

Real-World Applications                         94. If a loading ramp is placed     95. If a loading ramp is placed
                                                      next to a truck, at a height        next to a truck, at a height
93. An airplane has only                              of 4 feet, and the ramp is          of 2 feet, and the ramp is
      enough gas to fly to a city                     15 feet long, what angle            20 feet long, what angle
      200 miles northeast of its                      does the ramp make with             does the ramp make with
      current location. If the pilot                  the ground?                         the ground?
      knows that the city is 25
      miles north, how many
      degrees north of east
      should the airplane fly?

96. A woman is watching a                       97. An astronaut is in a            98. A woman is standing 8
      launched rocket currently                       launched rocket currently           meters away from a
      11 miles in altitude. If she                    15 miles in altitude. If a          10-meter tall building. At
      is standing 4 miles from                        man is standing 2 miles             what angle is she looking
      the launch pad, at what                         from the launch pad, at             to the top of the building?
      angle is she looking up                         what angle is the astronaut
      from horizontal?                                looking down at him from
                                                      horizontal? (Hint: this is
                                                      called the angle of
                                                      depression.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            9.5 · Solving Trigonometric Equations 883

99. Issa is standing 10 meters        100. A 20-foot tall building has      101. A 90-foot tall building has
      away from a 6-meter tall                a shadow that is 55 feet              a shadow that is 2 feet
      building. Travis is at the top          long. What is the angle of            long. What is the angle of
      of the building looking                 elevation of the sun?                 elevation of the sun?
      down at Issa. At what angle
      is Travis looking at Issa?

102. A spotlight on the ground        103. A spotlight on the ground
        3 meters from a 2-meter               3 feet from a 5-foot tall
        tall man casts a 6 meter              woman casts a 15-foot tall
        shadow on a wall 6                    shadow on a wall 6 feet
        meters from the man. At               from the woman. At what
        what angle is the light?              angle is the light?

For the following exercises, find a solution to the following word problem algebraically. Then use a calculator to verify
the result. Round the answer to the nearest tenth of a degree.

104. A person does a                  105. A person does a                  106. A 23-foot ladder is
        handstand with their feet             handstand with her feet               positioned next to a
        touching a wall and their             touching a wall and her               house. If the ladder slips
        hands 1.5 feet away from              hands 3 feet away from                at 7 feet from the house
        the wall. If the person is 6          the wall. If the person is 5          when there is not enough
        feet tall, what angle do              feet tall, what angle do              traction, what angle
        their feet make with the              her feet make with the                should the ladder make
        wall?                                 wall?                                 with the ground to avoid
                                                                                    slipping?
884 9 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

double-angle formulas identities derived from the sum formulas for sine, cosine, and tangent in which the angles are

equal

even-odd identities set of equations involving trigonometric functions such that if                  the identity is

odd, and if               the identity is even

half-angle formulas identities derived from the reduction formulas and used to determine half-angle values of

trigonometric functions

product-to-sum formula a trigonometric identity that allows the writing of a product of trigonometric functions as a

sum or difference of trigonometric functions

Pythagorean identities set of equations involving trigonometric functions based on the right triangle properties

quotient identities pair of identities based on the fact that tangent is the ratio of sine and cosine, and cotangent is the

ratio of cosine and sine

reciprocal identities set of equations involving the reciprocals of basic trigonometric definitions

reduction formulas identities derived from the double-angle formulas and used to reduce the power of a

trigonometric function

sum-to-product formula a trigonometric identity that allows, by using substitution, the writing of a sum of

trigonometric functions as a product of trigonometric functions

Key Equations

Pythagorean identities

Even-odd identities

    Reciprocal identities

     Quotient identities
       Sum Formula for Cosine

   Difference Formula for Cosine
         Sum Formula for Sine

     Difference Formula for Sine

Access for free at openstax.org
                                9 · Chapter Review 885

    Sum Formula for Tangent
Difference Formula for Tangent

       Cofunction identities

Double-angle formulas
Reduction formulas
Half-angle formulas

Product-to-sum Formulas
Sum-to-product Formulas
886 9 · Chapter Review

Key Concepts

9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify
Trigonometric Expressions

  · There are multiple ways to represent a trigonometric expression. Verifying the identities illustrates how expressions
      can be rewritten to simplify a problem.

  · Graphing both sides of an identity will verify it. See Example 1.
  · Simplifying one side of the equation to equal the other side is another method for verifying an identity. See Example

      2 and Example 3.
  · The approach to verifying an identity depends on the nature of the identity. It is often useful to begin on the more

      complex side of the equation. See Example 4.
  · We can create an identity and then verify it. See Example 5.
  · Verifying an identity may involve algebra with the fundamental identities. See Example 6 and Example 7.
  · Algebraic techniques can be used to simplify trigonometric expressions. We use algebraic techniques throughout

      this text, as they consist of the fundamental rules of mathematics. See Example 8, Example 9, and Example 10.

9.2 Sum and Difference Identities

  · The sum formula for cosines states that the cosine of the sum of two angles equals the product of the cosines of the
      angles minus the product of the sines of the angles. The difference formula for cosines states that the cosine of the
      difference of two angles equals the product of the cosines of the angles plus the product of the sines of the angles.

  · The sum and difference formulas can be used to find the exact values of the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle. See
      Example 1 and Example 2.

  · The sum formula for sines states that the sine of the sum of two angles equals the product of the sine of the first
      angle and cosine of the second angle plus the product of the cosine of the first angle and the sine of the second
      angle. The difference formula for sines states that the sine of the difference of two angles equals the product of the
      sine of the first angle and cosine of the second angle minus the product of the cosine of the first angle and the sine
      of the second angle. See Example 3.

  · The sum and difference formulas for sine and cosine can also be used for inverse trigonometric functions. See
      Example 4.

  · The sum formula for tangent states that the tangent of the sum of two angles equals the sum of the tangents of the
      angles divided by 1 minus the product of the tangents of the angles. The difference formula for tangent states that
      the tangent of the difference of two angles equals the difference of the tangents of the angles divided by 1 plus the
      product of the tangents of the angles. See Example 5.

  · The Pythagorean Theorem along with the sum and difference formulas can be used to find multiple sums and
      differences of angles. See Example 6.

  · The cofunction identities apply to complementary angles and pairs of reciprocal functions. See Example 7.
  · Sum and difference formulas are useful in verifying identities. See Example 8 and Example 9.
  · Application problems are often easier to solve by using sum and difference formulas. See Example 10 and Example

      11.

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas

  · Double-angle identities are derived from the sum formulas of the fundamental trigonometric functions: sine,
      cosine, and tangent. See Example 1, Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4.

  · Reduction formulas are especially useful in calculus, as they allow us to reduce the power of the trigonometric term.
      See Example 5 and Example 6.

  · Half-angle formulas allow us to find the value of trigonometric functions involving half-angles, whether the original
      angle is known or not. See Example 7, Example 8, and Example 9.

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas

  · From the sum and difference identities, we can derive the product-to-sum formulas and the sum-to-product
      formulas for sine and cosine.

  · We can use the product-to-sum formulas to rewrite products of sines, products of cosines, and products of sine and
      cosine as sums or differences of sines and cosines. See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3.

  · We can also derive the sum-to-product identities from the product-to-sum identities using substitution.
  · We can use the sum-to-product formulas to rewrite sum or difference of sines, cosines, or products sine and cosine

      as products of sines and cosines. See Example 4.
  · Trigonometric expressions are often simpler to evaluate using the formulas. See Example 5.
  · The identities can be verified using other formulas or by converting the expressions to sines and cosines. To verify

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    9 · Exercises 887

     an identity, we choose the more complicated side of the equals sign and rewrite it until it is transformed into the
     other side. See Example 6 and Example 7.

9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations

  · When solving linear trigonometric equations, we can use algebraic techniques just as we do solving algebraic
      equations. Look for patterns, like the difference of squares, quadratic form, or an expression that lends itself well to
      substitution. See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3.

  · Equations involving a single trigonometric function can be solved or verified using the unit circle. See Example 4,
      Example 5, and Example 6, and Example 7.

  · We can also solve trigonometric equations using a graphing calculator. See Example 8 and Example 9.
  · Many equations appear quadratic in form. We can use substitution to make the equation appear simpler, and then

      use the same techniques we use solving an algebraic quadratic: factoring, the quadratic formula, etc. See Example
      10, Example 11, Example 12, and Example 13.
  · We can also use the identities to solve trigonometric equation. See Example 14, Example 15, and Example 16.
  · We can use substitution to solve a multiple-angle trigonometric equation, which is a compression of a standard
      trigonometric function. We will need to take the compression into account and verify that we have found all
      solutions on the given interval. See Example 17.
  · Real-world scenarios can be modeled and solved using the Pythagorean Theorem and trigonometric functions. See
      Example 18.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Solving Trigonometric Equations with Identities

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly that exist on the interval

1.                             2.                        3.

4.                             5.                        6.

For the following exercises, use basic identities to simplify the expression.

7.                                                  8.

For the following exercises, determine if the given identities are equivalent.

9.                                                  10.

Sum and Difference Identities

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

11.                                                 12.

13.                                                 14.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

15.                                                 16.
888 9 · Exercises

For the following exercise, simplify the expression.
17.

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

18.                                   19.

Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

20. Find                         and       given      21. Find                               and                     given
                                                      23.
          and is in the interval                                                             and is in the interval

22.

For the following exercises, use Figure 1 to find the desired quantities.

                                                                              Figure 1
24.

25.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

26.                                   27.

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with no powers.

28.                                   29.

Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the given expression using a sum or difference of two functions.
Write the exact answer.

30.                                   31.                                               32.

For the following exercises, evaluate the sum by using a product formula. Write the exact answer.

33.                                   34.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  9 · Exercises 889

For the following exercises, change the functions from a product to a sum or a sum to a product.

35.                              36.                                      37.

38.

Solving Trigonometric Equations

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval

39.                              40.

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval

41.                              42.                                      43.

44.                              45.

For the following exercises, simplify the equation algebraically as much as possible. Then use a calculator to find the

solutions on the interval  Round to four decimal places.

46.                              47.

For the following exercises, graph each side of the equation to find the approximate solutions on the interval

48.                                                          49.

Practice Test

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

1.                                                           2.

3.                                                           4.

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

5.                               6.                                       7.

8.                               9.                                       10.

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate.

11.                              12.

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions to the equation on

13.                                                          14.
890 9 · Exercises

15.                                                   16.

17. Rewrite the expression as a product instead of a
      sum:

For the following exercise, rewrite the product as a sum or difference.
18.

For the following exercise, rewrite the sum or difference as a product.

19.                                   20. Find all solutions of          21. Find the solutions of

                                                                                                    on

                                                                         the interval

                                                                         algebraically; then graph

                                                                         both sides of the equation

                                                                         to determine the answer.

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval

22.                                   23.                                24. Find                   and

                                                                                   given

                                                                         and is on the interval

25. Find                         and  26. Rewrite the expression
                                                    with no powers
          given
                                            greater than 1.
     and is in quadrant IV.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.      28.
27.
                                                      30. Plot the points and find a function of the form
29.                                                                                            that fits the given data.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   9 · Exercises 891

31. The displacement in                    32. A woman is standing 300          33. Two frequencies of sound are
      centimeters of a mass                      feet away from a 2000-foot           played on an instrument
      suspended by a spring is                   building. If she looks to the        governed by the equation
      modeled by the function                    top of the building, at what
                                    where        angle above horizontal is            What are the period and
                                                 she looking? A worker                frequency of the "fast" and
        is measured in seconds.                  looks down at her from the           "slow" oscillations? What is the
      Find the amplitude, period,                15th floor (1500 feet above          amplitude?
      and frequency of this                      her). At what angle is he
      displacement.                              looking down at her?
                                                 Round to the nearest tenth
                                                 of a degree.

34. The average monthly                    35. A spring attached to a           36. Water levels near a glacier
      snowfall in a small village                ceiling is pulled down 20            currently average 9 feet,
      in the Himalayas is 6                      cm. After 3 seconds,                 varying seasonally by 2
      inches, with the low of 1                  wherein it completes 6 full          inches above and below
      inch occurring in July.                    periods, the amplitude is            the average and reaching
      Construct a function that                  only 15 cm. Find the                 their highest point in
      models this behavior.                      function modeling the                January. Due to global
      During what period is there                position of the spring               warming, the glacier has
      more than 10 inches of                     seconds after being                  begun melting faster than
      snowfall?                                  released. At what time will          normal. Every year, the
                                                 the spring come to rest? In          water levels rise by a
                                                 this case, use 1 cm                  steady 3 inches. Find a
                                                 amplitude as rest.                   function modeling the
                                                                                      depth of the water
                                                                                      months from now. If the
                                                                                      docks are 2 feet above
                                                                                      current water levels, at
                                                                                      what point will the water
                                                                                      first rise above the docks?
892 9 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                          10 · Introduction 893

10  FURTHER APPLICATIONS OF TRIGONOMETRY

General Sherman, the world's largest living tree. (credit: Mike Baird, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines
  10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines
  10.3 Polar Coordinates
  10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs
  10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers
  10.6 Parametric Equations
  10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs
  10.8 Vectors

      Introduction to Further Applications of Trigonometry

The world's largest tree by volume, named General Sherman, stands 274.9 feet tall and resides in Northern California.1
Just how do scientists know its true height? A common way to measure the height involves determining the angle of
elevation, which is formed by the tree and the ground at a point some distance away from the base of the tree. This
method is much more practical than climbing the tree and dropping a very long tape measure.

In this chapter, we will explore applications of trigonometry that will enable us to solve many different kinds of
problems, including finding the height of a tree. We extend topics we introduced in Trigonometric Functions
(http://openstax.org/books/precalculus-2e/pages/5-introduction-to-trigonometric-functions) and investigate
applications more deeply and meaningfully.

10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use the Law of Sines to solve oblique triangles.
           Find the area of an oblique triangle using the sine function.
           Solve applied problems using the Law of Sines.

To ensure the safety of over 5,000 U.S. aircraft flying simultaneously during peak times, air traffic controllers monitor and
communicate with them after receiving data from the robust radar beacon system. Suppose two radar stations located
20 miles apart each detect an aircraft between them. The angle of elevation measured by the first station is 35 degrees,

1 Source: National Park Service. "The General Sherman Tree." http://www.nps.gov/seki/naturescience/sherman.htm. Accessed April 25, 2014.
894 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

       whereas the angle of elevation measured by the second station is 15 degrees. How can we determine the altitude of the
       aircraft? We see in Figure 1 that the triangle formed by the aircraft and the two stations is not a right triangle, so we
       cannot use what we know about right triangles. In this section, we will find out how to solve problems involving non-
       right triangles.

                                                                                     Figure 1

     Using the Law of Sines to Solve Oblique Triangles

       In any triangle, we can draw an altitude, a perpendicular line from one vertex to the opposite side, forming two right
       triangles. It would be preferable, however, to have methods that we can apply directly to non-right triangles without first
       having to create right triangles.
       Any triangle that is not a right triangle is an oblique triangle. Solving an oblique triangle means finding the
       measurements of all three angles and all three sides. To do so, we need to start with at least three of these values,
       including at least one of the sides. We will investigate three possible oblique triangle problem situations:
        1. ASA (angle-side-angle) We know the measurements of two angles and the included side. See Figure 2.

                                                                                         Figure 2
        2. AAS (angle-angle-side) We know the measurements of two angles and a side that is not between the known

             angles. See Figure 3.

                                                                                         Figure 3
        3. SSA (side-side-angle) We know the measurements of two sides and an angle that is not between the known sides.

             See Figure 4.

                                                                                         Figure 4
       Knowing how to approach each of these situations enables us to solve oblique triangles without having to drop a
       perpendicular to form two right triangles. Instead, we can use the fact that the ratio of the measurement of one of the
       angles to the length of its opposite side will be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side. Let's see
       how this statement is derived by considering the triangle shown in Figure 5.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 895

Using the right triangle relationships, we know that  Figure 5       Solving both equations for gives two
different expressions for                                       and

We then set the expressions equal to each other.

Similarly, we can compare the other ratios.

Collectively, these relationships are called the Law of Sines.

Note the standard way of labeling triangles: angle (alpha) is opposite side angle (beta) is opposite side and
angle (gamma) is opposite side See Figure 6.
While calculating angles and sides, be sure to carry the exact values through to the final answer. Generally, final answers
are rounded to the nearest tenth, unless otherwise specified.

                                                                            Figure 6
Law of Sines
Given a triangle with angles and opposite sides labeled as in Figure 6, the ratio of the measurement of an angle to the
length of its opposite side will be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side. All proportions will
be equal. The Law of Sines is based on proportions and is presented symbolically two ways.

To solve an oblique triangle, use any pair of applicable ratios.
896 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

         EXAMPLE 1
       Solving for Two Unknown Sides and Angle of an AAS Triangle
       Solve the triangle shown in Figure 7 to the nearest tenth.

                                                                              Figure 7

     Solution
The three angles must add up to 180 degrees. From this, we can determine that

To find an unknown side, we need to know the corresponding angle and a known ratio. We know that angle            and

its corresponding side           We can use the following proportion from the Law of Sines to find the length of

Similarly, to solve for we set up another proportion.

Therefore, the complete set of angles and sides is
       TRY IT #1 Solve the triangle shown in Figure 8 to the nearest tenth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 897

                                                                   Figure 8

Using The Law of Sines to Solve SSA Triangles

We can use the Law of Sines to solve any oblique triangle, but some solutions may not be straightforward. In some
cases, more than one triangle may satisfy the given criteria, which we describe as an ambiguous case. Triangles
classified as SSA, those in which we know the lengths of two sides and the measurement of the angle opposite one of
the given sides, may result in one or two solutions, or even no solution.

  Possible Outcomes for SSA Triangles

  Oblique triangles in the category SSA may have four different outcomes. Figure 9 illustrates the solutions with the
  known sides and and known angle

                                                                              Figure 9

  EXAMPLE 2
Solving an Oblique SSA Triangle
Solve the triangle in Figure 10 for the missing side and find the missing angle measures to the nearest tenth.

     Solution                                        Figure 10           we have the proportion
Use the Law of Sines to find angle and angle  and then side Solving for
898 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

However, in the diagram, angle appears to be an obtuse angle and may be greater than 90°. How did we get an acute
angle, and how do we find the measurement of Let's investigate further. Dropping a perpendicular from and
viewing the triangle from a right angle perspective, we have Figure 11. It appears that there may be a second triangle
that will fit the given criteria.

                                                                             Figure 11            (Remember

The angle supplementary to is approximately equal to 49.9°, which means that             we have
that the sine function is positive in both the first and second quadrants.) Solving for

We can then use these measurements to solve the other triangle. Since is supplementary to the sum of and we
have

Now we need to find and
We have

Finally,

To summarize, there are two triangles with an angle of 35°, an adjacent side of 8, and an opposite side of 6, as shown in
Figure 12.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 899

                                                                             Figure 12  We can see them in the first triangle (a)

However, we were looking for the values for the triangle with an obtuse angle
in Figure 12.

TRY IT #2  Given            and           find the missing side and angles. If there is more than one

           possible solution, show both.

  EXAMPLE 3

Solving for the Unknown Sides and Angles of a SSA Triangle
In the triangle shown in Figure 13, solve for the unknown side and angles. Round your answers to the nearest tenth.

                                          Figure 13

Solution

In choosing the pair of ratios from the Law of Sines to use, look at the information given. In this case, we know the angle

and its corresponding side  and we know side         We will use this proportion to solve for

To find apply the inverse sine function. The inverse sine will produce a single result, but keep in mind that there may
be two values for It is important to verify the result, as there may be two viable solutions, only one solution (the usual
case), or no solutions.

In this case, if we subtract from 180°, we find that there may be a second possible solution. Thus,
                                       To check the solution, subtract both angles, 131.7° and 85°, from 180°. This gives

which is impossible, and so
900 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry                                         Now, only side is needed. Use the

       To find the remaining missing values, we calculate
       Law of Sines to solve for by one of the proportions.

The complete set of solutions for the given triangle is

TRY IT #3  Given                                             find the missing side and angles. If there is more than one

           possible solution, show both. Round your answers to the nearest tenth.

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Triangles That Meet the Given Criteria
Find all possible triangles if one side has length 4 opposite an angle of 50°, and a second side has length 10.

     Solution
Using the given information, we can solve for the angle opposite the side of length 10. See Figure 14.

                                                             Figure 14

We can stop here without finding the value of Because the range of the sine function is  it is impossible for the

sine value to be 1.915. In fact, inputting                   in a graphing calculator generates an ERROR DOMAIN. Therefore,

no triangles can be drawn with the provided dimensions.

TRY IT #4 Determine the number of triangles possible given

Finding the Area of an Oblique Triangle Using the Sine Function

Now that we can solve a triangle for missing values, we can use some of those values and the sine function to find the

area of an oblique triangle. Recall that the area formula for a triangle is given as     where is base and is

height. For oblique triangles, we must find before we can use the area formula. Observing the two triangles in Figure

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 901

15, one acute and one obtuse, we can drop a perpendicular to represent the height and then apply the trigonometric

property       to write an equation for area in oblique triangles. In the acute triangle, we have

or          However, in the obtuse triangle, we drop the perpendicular outside the triangle and extend the base to

form a right triangle. The angle used in calculation is or

                                         Figure 15

Thus,
Similarly,

Area of an Oblique Triangle
The formula for the area of an oblique triangle is given by

This is equivalent to one-half of the product of two sides and the sine of their included angle.

  EXAMPLE 5                              and angle           Round the area to the nearest integer.

Finding the Area of an Oblique Triangle
Find the area of a triangle with sides

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

    TRY IT #5  Find the area of the triangle given           Round the area to the nearest
               tenth.

Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Sines

The more we study trigonometric applications, the more we discover that the applications are countless. Some are flat,
diagram-type situations, but many applications in calculus, engineering, and physics involve three dimensions and
motion.
902 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

         EXAMPLE 6
       Finding an Altitude
       Find the altitude of the aircraft in the problem introduced at the beginning of this section, shown in Figure 16. Round the
       altitude to the nearest tenth of a mile.

                                 Figure 16

     Solution                                                                                                         and then
To find the elevation of the aircraft, we first find the distance from one station to the aircraft, such as the side
use right triangle relationships to find the height of the aircraft,

Because the angles in the triangle add up to 180 degrees, the unknown angle must be 180°-15°-35°=130°. This angle is
opposite the side of length 20, allowing us to set up a Law of Sines relationship.

The distance from one station to the aircraft is about 14.98 miles.
Now that we know we can use right triangle relationships to solve for

The aircraft is at an altitude of approximately 3.9 miles.

TRY IT #6  The diagram shown in Figure 17 represents the height of a blimp flying over a football stadium.
           Find the height of the blimp if the angle of elevation at the southern end zone, point A, is 70°, the
           angle of elevation from the northern end zone, point is 62°, and the distance between the
           viewing points of the two end zones is 145 yards.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 903

                                                                                           Figure 17

    MEDIA
    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with trigonometric applications.
    Law of Sines: The Basics (http://openstax.org/l/sinesbasic)
    Law of Sines: The Ambiguous Case (http://openstax.org/l/sinesambiguous)

        10.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe the altitude of a    2. Compare right triangles and    3. When can you use the Law
    triangle.                        oblique triangles.                of Sines to find a missing
                                                                       angle?

4. In the Law of Sines, what is  5. What type of triangle results
    the relationship between         in an ambiguous case?
    the angle in the numerator
    and the side in the
    denominator?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, assume is opposite side  is opposite side and is opposite side Solve each triangle,
if possible. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.                    8.

6.                               7.

9.                               10.
904 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve for the missing side for each oblique triangle. Round each
answer to the nearest hundredth. Assume that angle is opposite side angle is opposite side and angle is
opposite side

11. Find side when                             12. Find side when   13. Find side when

For the following exercises, assume is opposite side is opposite side and is opposite side Determine whether
there is no triangle, one triangle, or two triangles. Then solve each triangle, if possible. Round each answer to the
nearest tenth.

14.                                            15.                  16.

17.                                            18.                  19.

20.                                            21.                  22.

23.

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve, if possible, the missing side or angle for each triangle or
triangles in the ambiguous case. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

24. Find angle when                            25. Find angle when  26. Find angle when

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle with the given measurements. Round each answer to the
nearest tenth.

27.                                            28.                  29.

30.

Graphical

For the following exercises, find the length of side  Round to the nearest tenth.
                                                                                33.
31.                              32.

Access for free at openstax.org
34.  35.                                                                      10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 905

                                                        36.

For the following exercises, find the measure of angle  if possible. Round to the nearest tenth.
                                                                                       39.
37.       38.

40.  41. Notice that is an obtuse 42.

          angle.

For the following exercise, solve the triangle. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

43.       44. For the following exercises, find 45.

               the area of each triangle. Round

               each answer to the nearest tenth.
906 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

46.                                            47.                     48.

49.

Extensions

50. Find the radius of the circle   51. Find the diameter of the       52. Find       in Figure 20.
      in Figure 18. Round to the          circle in Figure 19. Round
      nearest tenth.                      to the nearest tenth.        Round to the nearest tenth.

                                                                                      Figure 20

     Figure 18                                      Figure 19

53. Find in Figure 21. Round to the 54. Solve both triangles in Figure 22. 55. Find in the

     nearest tenth.                                 Round each answer to the nearest  parallelogram shown in

                                                    tenth.                            Figure 23.

                         Figure 21                                                    Figure 23

Access for free at openstax.org                             Figure 22
                                                                              10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 907

56. Solve the triangle in Figure 24. (Hint5: 7. Solve the triangle in Figure  58. In Figure 26,      is not a

Draw a perpendicular from to  25. (Hint: Draw a                               parallelogram. is obtuse. Solve

Round each answer to the      perpendicular from to                           both triangles. Round each answer

nearest tenth.                Round each answer                               to the nearest tenth.

                              to the nearest tenth.

Figure 24

                              Figure 25

                                                                                                 Figure 26

Real-World Applications                                  60. To determine how far a boat is from shore, two
                                                               radar stations 500 feet apart find the angles out to
59. A pole leans away from the sun at an angle of              the boat, as shown in Figure 28. Determine the
      to the vertical, as shown in Figure 27. When the         distance of the boat from station and the
      elevation of the sun is the pole casts a                 distance of the boat from shore. Round your
      shadow 42 feet long on the level ground. How             answers to the nearest whole foot.
      long is the pole? Round the answer to the nearest
      tenth.

                Figure 27

                                                                              Figure 28
908 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

61. Figure 29 shows a satellite orbiting Earth. The         62. A communications tower is located at the top of a
                                                                  steep hill, as shown in Figure 30. The angle of
satellite passes directly over two tracking stations              inclination of the hill is A guy wire is to be
                                                                  attached to the top of the tower and to the
and which are 69 miles apart. When the                            ground, 165 meters downhill from the base of the
                                                                  tower. The angle formed by the guy wire and the
satellite is on one side of the two stations, the                 hill is Find the length of the cable required for
                                                                  the guy wire to the nearest whole meter.
angles of elevation at and are measured to be

and  respectively. How far is the

satellite from station and how high is the

satellite above the ground? Round answers to the

nearest whole mile.

                                                            Figure 30

                                  Figure 29

63. The roof of a house is at a angle. An 8-foot solar
      panel is to be mounted on the roof and should be
      angled relative to the horizontal for optimal
      results. (See Figure 31). How long does the vertical
      support holding up the back of the panel need to be?
      Round to the nearest tenth.

                                 Figure 31

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.1 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 909

64. Similar to an angle of elevation, an angle of           65. A pilot is flying over a straight highway. He
      depression is the acute angle formed by a                   determines the angles of depression to two
      horizontal line and an observer's line of sight to          mileposts, 4.3 km apart, to be 32° and 56°, as
      an object below the horizontal. A pilot is flying           shown in Figure 33. Find the distance of the plane
      over a straight highway. He determines the angles           from point to the nearest tenth of a kilometer.
      of depression to two mileposts, 6.6 km apart, to
      be and as shown in Figure 32. Find the
      distance of the plane from point to the nearest
      tenth of a kilometer.

                                                                 Figure 33

                  Figure 32

66. In order to estimate the height of a building, two      67. In order to estimate the
      students stand at a certain distance from the               height of a building, two
      building at street level. From this point, they find        students stand at a certain
      the angle of elevation from the street to the top of        distance from the building
      the building to be 39°. They then move 300 feet             at street level. From this
      closer to the building and find the angle of                point, they find the angle
      elevation to be 50°. Assuming that the street is            of elevation from the street
      level, estimate the height of the building to the           to the top of the building
      nearest foot.                                               to be 35°. They then move
                                                                  250 feet closer to the
                                                                  building and find the angle
                                                                  of elevation to be 53°.
                                                                  Assuming that the street is
                                                                  level, estimate the height
                                                                  of the building to the
                                                                  nearest foot.

68. Points and are on        69. A man and a woman               70. Two search teams spot a
                                   standing miles apart                stranded climber on a
opposite sides of a lake.                                              mountain. The first search
                                   spot a hot air balloon at           team is 0.5 miles from the
Point is 97 meters from            the same time. If the angle         second search team, and
                                   of elevation from the man           both teams are at an
The measure of angle               to the balloon is 27°, and          altitude of 1 mile. The
                                   the angle of elevation from         angle of elevation from the
       is determined to be         the woman to the balloon            first search team to the
                                   is 41°, find the altitude of        stranded climber is 15°.
101°, and the measure of           the balloon to the nearest          The angle of elevation from
                                   foot.                               the second search team to
angle  is determined                                                   the climber is 22°. What is
                                                                       the altitude of the climber?
to be 53°. What is the                                                 Round to the nearest tenth
                                                                       of a mile.
distance from to

rounded to the nearest

whole meter?
910 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

71. A street light is mounted                  72. Three cities,  and
      on a pole. A 6-foot-tall man
      is standing on the street a              are located so that city is
      short distance from the
      pole, casting a shadow. The              due east of city If city
      angle of elevation from the
      tip of the man's shadow to               is located 35° west of north
      the top of his head of 28°.
      A 6-foot-tall woman is                   from city and is 100 miles
      standing on the same
      street on the opposite side              from city and 70 miles
      of the pole from the man.
      The angle of elevation from              from city how far is city
      the tip of her shadow to
      the top of her head is 28°.              from city Round the
      If the man and woman are
      20 feet apart, how far is the            distance to the nearest
      street light from the tip of
      the shadow of each                       tenth of a mile.
      person? Round the
      distance to the nearest
      tenth of a foot.

73. Two streets meet at an 80° angle. At the corner, a
      park is being built in the shape of a triangle. Find
      the area of the park if, along one road, the park
      measures 180 feet, and along the other road, the
      park measures 215 feet.

74. Brian's house is on a corner lot. Find the area of the              75. The Bermuda triangle is a
      front yard if the edges measure 40 and 56 feet, as                      region of the Atlantic
      shown in Figure 34.                                                     Ocean that connects
                                                                              Bermuda, Florida, and
                                      Figure 34                               Puerto Rico. Find the area
                                                                              of the Bermuda triangle if
                                                                              the distance from Florida
                                                                              to Bermuda is 1030 miles,
                                                                              the distance from Puerto
                                                                              Rico to Bermuda is 980
                                                                              miles, and the angle
                                                                              created by the two
                                                                              distances is 62°.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 911

76. A yield sign measures 30      77. Naomi bought a dining table whose
      inches on all three sides.        top is in the shape of a triangle. Find
      What is the area of the           the area of the table top if two of
      sign?                             the sides measure 4 feet and 4.5
                                        feet, and the smaller angles
                                        measure 32° and 42°, as shown in
                                        Figure 35.

                                                                           Figure 35

10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use the Law of Cosines to solve oblique triangles.
           Solve applied problems using the Law of Cosines.
           Use Heron's formula to find the area of a triangle.

Suppose a boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees, and travels another 8 miles as shown in Figure 1. How far
from port is the boat?

                                                                              Figure 1

Unfortunately, while the Law of Sines enables us to address many non-right triangle cases, it does not help us with
triangles where the known angle is between two known sides, a SAS (side-angle-side) triangle, or when all three sides
are known, but no angles are known, a SSS (side-side-side) triangle. In this section, we will investigate another tool for
solving oblique triangles described by these last two cases.

Using the Law of Cosines to Solve Oblique Triangles

The tool we need to solve the problem of the boat's distance from the port is the Law of Cosines, which defines the
relationship among angle measurements and side lengths in oblique triangles. Three formulas make up the Law of
Cosines. At first glance, the formulas may appear complicated because they include many variables. However, once the
912 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

pattern is understood, the Law of Cosines is easier to work with than most formulas at this mathematical level.

Understanding how the Law of Cosines is derived will be helpful in using the formulas. The derivation begins with the

Generalized Pythagorean Theorem, which is an extension of the Pythagorean Theorem to non-right triangles. Here is

how it works: An arbitrary non-right triangle       is placed in the coordinate plane with vertex at the origin, side

drawn along the x-axis, and vertex located at some point  in the plane, as illustrated in Figure 2. Generally,

triangles exist anywhere in the plane, but for this explanation we will place the triangle as noted.

We can drop a perpendicular from                                        Figure 2
identities, we know that                       to the x-axis (this is the altitude or height). Recalling the basic trigonometric

In terms of                      and           The  point located at has coordinates                       Using the
                                                                                                         using the
side         as one leg of a right triangle and as the second leg, we can find the length of hypotenuse

Pythagorean Theorem. Thus,

The formula derived is one of the three equations of the Law of Cosines. The other equations are found in a similar
fashion.

Keep in mind that it is always helpful to sketch the triangle when solving for angles or sides. In a real-world scenario, try
to draw a diagram of the situation. As more information emerges, the diagram may have to be altered. Make those
alterations to the diagram and, in the end, the problem will be easier to solve.

Law of Cosines

The Law of Cosines states that the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two

sides minus twice the product of the other two sides and the cosine of the included angle. For triangles labeled as in

Figure 3, with angles            and and opposite corresponding sides  and respectively, the Law of Cosines is

given as three equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 913

                                                                              Figure 3
  To solve for a missing side measurement, the corresponding opposite angle measure is needed.
  When solving for an angle, the corresponding opposite side measure is needed. We can use another version of the
  Law of Cosines to solve for an angle.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given two sides and the angle between them (SAS), find the measures of the remaining side and angles of a
  triangle.
   1. Sketch the triangle. Identify the measures of the known sides and angles. Use variables to represent the

        measures of the unknown sides and angles.
   2. Apply the Law of Cosines to find the length of the unknown side or angle.
   3. Apply the Law of Sines or Cosines to find the measure of a second angle.
   4. Compute the measure of the remaining angle.
  EXAMPLE 1
Finding the Unknown Side and Angles of a SAS Triangle
Find the unknown side and angles of the triangle in Figure 4.

                                                                              Figure 4
     Solution
First, make note of what is given: two sides and the angle between them. This arrangement is classified as SAS and
supplies the data needed to apply the Law of Cosines.
914 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

       Each one of the three laws of cosines begins with the square of an unknown side opposite a known angle. For this
       example, the first side to solve for is side as we know the measurement of the opposite angle

Because we are solving for a length, we use only the positive square root. Now that we know the length  we can use
the Law of Sines to fill in the remaining angles of the triangle. Solving for angle we have

The other possibility for would be                   In the original diagram, is adjacent to the longest side,

so is an acute angle and, therefore,           does not make sense. Notice that if we choose to apply the Law of Cosines,

we arrive at a unique answer. We do not have to consider the other possibilities, as cosine is unique for angles between

and  Proceeding with                     we can then find the third angle of the triangle.

The complete set of angles and sides is

TRY IT #1 Find the missing side and angles of the given triangle:

EXAMPLE 2

Solving for an Angle of a SSS Triangle

Find the angle for the given triangle if side  side  and side

     Solution                                                                                                 we have
For this example, we have no angles. We can solve for any angle using the Law of Cosines. To solve for angle

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 915

See Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5

     Analysis
Because the inverse cosine can return any angle between 0 and 180 degrees, there will not be any ambiguous cases
using this method.

TRY IT #2 Given  and  find the missing angles.

Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Cosines

Just as the Law of Sines provided the appropriate equations to solve a number of applications, the Law of Cosines is
applicable to situations in which the given data fits the cosine models. We may see these in the fields of navigation,
surveying, astronomy, and geometry, just to name a few.

  EXAMPLE 3

Using the Law of Cosines to Solve a Communication Problem
On many cell phones with GPS, an approximate location can be given before the GPS signal is received. This is
accomplished through a process called triangulation, which works by using the distances from two known points.
Suppose there are two cell phone towers within range of a cell phone. The two towers are located 6000 feet apart along
a straight highway, running east to west, and the cell phone is north of the highway. Based on the signal delay, it can be
determined that the signal is 5,050 feet from the first tower and 2,420 feet from the second tower. Determine the
position of the cell phone north and east of the first tower, and determine how far it is from the highway.

     Solution
For simplicity, we start by drawing a diagram similar to Figure 6 and labeling our given information.
916 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                               Figure 6

Using the Law of Cosines, we can solve for the angle Remember that the Law of Cosines uses the square of one side to

find the cosine of the opposite angle. For this example, let  and  Thus, corresponds to

the opposite side

To answer the questions about the phone's position north and east of the tower, and the distance to the highway, drop a
perpendicular from the position of the cell phone, as in Figure 7. This forms two right triangles, although we only need
the right triangle that includes the first tower for this problem.

Using the angle                                            Figure 7
                   and the basic trigonometric identities, we can find the solutions. Thus

The cell phone is approximately 4,638 feet east and 1998 feet north of the first tower, and 1998 feet from the highway.

  EXAMPLE 4
Calculating Distance Traveled Using a SAS Triangle
Returning to our problem at the beginning of this section, suppose a boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees,
and travels another 8 miles. How far from port is the boat? The diagram is repeated here in Figure 8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 917

                                                                              Figure 8

     Solution
The boat turned 20 degrees, so the obtuse angle of the non-right triangle is the supplemental angle,
With this, we can utilize the Law of Cosines to find the missing side of the obtuse triangle--the distance of the boat to
the port.

The boat is about 17.7 miles from port.

Using Heron's Formula to Find the Area of a Triangle

We already learned how to find the area of an oblique triangle when we know two sides and an angle. We also know the
formula to find the area of a triangle using the base and the height. When we know the three sides, however, we can use
Heron's formula instead of finding the height. Heron of Alexandria was a geometer who lived during the first century
A.D. He discovered a formula for finding the area of oblique triangles when three sides are known.

  Heron's Formula

  Heron's formula finds the area of oblique triangles in which sides and are known.

where  is one half of the perimeter of the triangle, sometimes called the semi-perimeter.

  EXAMPLE 5

Using Heron's Formula to Find the Area of a Given Triangle
Find the area of the triangle in Figure 9 using Heron's formula.
918 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                               Figure 9

     Solution
First, we calculate

Then we apply the formula.

The area is approximately 29.4 square units.

TRY IT #3  Use Heron's formula to find the area of a triangle with sides of lengths
           and

  EXAMPLE 6

Applying Heron's Formula to a Real-World Problem
A Chicago city developer wants to construct a building consisting of artist's lofts on a triangular lot bordered by Rush
Street, Wabash Avenue, and Pearson Street. The frontage along Rush Street is approximately 62.4 meters, along Wabash
Avenue it is approximately 43.5 meters, and along Pearson Street it is approximately 34.1 meters. How many square
meters are available to the developer? See Figure 10 for a view of the city property.

                                               Figure 10

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 919

     Solution             which is one-half of the perimeter.
Find the measurement for

Apply Heron's formula.

The developer has about 711.4 square meters.

     TRY IT #4 Find the area of a triangle given                             and

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the Law of Cosines.

     Law of Cosines (http://openstax.org/l/lawcosines)
     Law of Cosines: Applications (http://openstax.org/l/cosineapp)
     Law of Cosines: Applications 2 (http://openstax.org/l/cosineapp2)

        10.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. If you are looking for a      2. If you are looking for a       3. Explain what represents in
    missing side of a triangle,      missing angle of a triangle,      Heron's formula.
    what do you need to know         what do you need to know
    when using the Law of            when using the Law of
    Cosines?                         Cosines?

4. Explain the relationship      5. When must you use the Law
    between the Pythagorean          of Cosines instead of the
    Theorem and the Law of           Pythagorean Theorem?
    Cosines.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, assume is opposite side is opposite side   and is opposite side         If possible, solve
each triangle for the unknown side. Round to the nearest tenth.

6.                               7.                                8.

9.                               10.                               11.

12.                              13.                                    14.

15.
920 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use the Law of Cosines to solve for the missing angle of the oblique triangle. Round to the
nearest tenth.

16.                              find 17.                                        18.                find
      angle                                       find angle
                                                                                      angle

19.                                            20.
      find angle                                     find angle

For the following exercises, solve the triangle. Round to the nearest tenth.

21.                                            22.                               23.

24.                                            25.                               26.

For the following exercises, use Heron's formula to find the area of the triangle. Round to the nearest hundredth.

27. Find the area of a triangle                28. Find the area of a triangle   29.
      with sides of length 18 in,
      21 in, and 32 in. Round to                    with sides of length 20 cm,
      the nearest tenth.
                                                    26 cm, and 37 cm. Round to

                                                    the nearest tenth.

30.                                                                     31.

Graphical

For the following exercises, find the length of side             Round to the nearest tenth.
                                                                                               34.
32.                                33.

35.                                            36.                                    37.

Access for free at openstax.org
For the following exercises, find the measurement of angle                       10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 921

38.       39.                                                    40.

41.  42. Find the measure of each angle in

          the triangle shown in Figure 11.

          Round to the nearest tenth.

               Figure 11

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown side. Round to the nearest tenth.

43.  44.                                                    45.

46.
922 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle. Round to the nearest hundredth.

47.                                            48.                                  49.

50.                                            51.

Extensions                                     53. The sides of a                   54. The sides of a
                                                     parallelogram are 11 feet            parallelogram are 28
52. A parallelogram has sides                        and 17 feet. The longer              centimeters and 40
      of length 16 units and 10                      diagonal is 22 feet. Find the        centimeters. The measure
      units. The shorter diagonal                    length of the shorter                of the larger angle is 100°.
      is 12 units. Find the                          diagonal.                            Find the length of the
      measure of the longer                                                               shorter diagonal.
      diagonal.

55. A regular octagon is                       56. A regular pentagon is
      inscribed in a circle with a                   inscribed in a circle of
      radius of 8 inches. (See                       radius 12 cm. (See Figure
      Figure 12.) Find the                           13.) Find the perimeter of
      perimeter of the octagon.                      the pentagon. Round to
                                                     the nearest tenth of a
                                                     centimeter.

     Figure 12

                                                    Figure 13

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             10.2 · Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 923

For the following exercises, suppose that                               represents the relationship of three sides of a
triangle and the cosine of an angle.

57. Draw the triangle.        58. Find the length of the third
                                    side.

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle.

59.                                      60.                            61.

Real-World Applications

62. A surveyor has taken the             63. A satellite calculates the distances 64. An airplane flies 220 miles

     measurements shown in Figure 14. and angle shown in Figure 15 (not      with a heading of 40°, and

     Find the distance across the lake.       to scale). Find the distance between then flies 180 miles with a

     Round answers to the nearest tenth. the two cities. Round answers to the heading of 170°. How far is

                                              nearest tenth.                 the plane from its starting

                                                                             point, and at what

                                                                             heading? Round answers

                                                                             to the nearest tenth.

     Figure 14

                                                             Figure 15
924 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

65. A 113-foot tower is located on a hill 66. Two ships left a port at the         67. The graph in Figure 17 represents
                                                                                         two boats departing at the same
that is inclined 34° to the horizontal, same time. One ship                              time from the same dock. The first
                                                                                         boat is traveling at 18 miles per
as shown in Figure 16. A guy-wire is traveled at a speed of 18                           hour at a heading of 327° and the
                                                                                         second boat is traveling at 4 miles
to be attached to the top of the               miles per hour at a                       per hour at a heading of 60°. Find
                                                                                         the distance between the two boats
tower and anchored at a point 98               heading of 320°. The other                after 2 hours.

feet uphill from the base of the               ship traveled at a speed of

tower. Find the length of wire                 22 miles per hour at a

needed.                                        heading of 194°. Find the

                                               distance between the two

                                               ships after 10 hours of

                                               travel.

         Figure 16

                                                                                   Figure 17

68. A triangular swimming                      69. A pilot flies in a straight     70. Los Angeles is 1,744 miles
      pool measures 40 feet on                       path for 1 hour 30 min. She         from Chicago, Chicago is
      one side and 65 feet on                        then makes a course                 714 miles from New York,
      another side. These sides                      correction, heading 10° to          and New York is 2,451
      form an angle that                             the right of her original           miles from Los Angeles.
      measures 50°. How long is                      course, and flies 2 hours in        Draw a triangle connecting
      the third side (to the                         the new direction. If she           these three cities, and find
      nearest tenth)?                                maintains a constant speed          the angles in the triangle.
                                                     of 680 miles per hour, how
                                                     far is she from her starting
                                                     position?

71. Philadelphia is 140 miles       72. Two planes leave the same                  73. Two airplanes take off in
      from Washington, D.C.,              airport at the same time.                      different directions. One
      Washington, D.C. is 442             One flies at 20° east of                       travels 300 mph due west
      miles from Boston, and              north at 500 miles per                         and the other travels 25°
      Boston is 315 miles from            hour. The second flies at                      north of west at 420 mph.
      Philadelphia. Draw a                30° east of south at 600                       After 90 minutes, how far
      triangle connecting these           miles per hour. How far                        apart are they, assuming
      three cities and find the           apart are the planes after 2                   they are flying at the same
      angles in the triangle.             hours?                                         altitude?

74. A parallelogram has sides                  75. The four sequential sides       76. The four sequential sides
      of length 15.4 units and 9.8                   of a quadrilateral have             of a quadrilateral have
      units. Its area is 72.9                        lengths 4.5 cm, 7.9 cm, 9.4         lengths 5.7 cm, 7.2 cm, 9.4
      square units. Find the                         cm, and 12.9 cm. The angle          cm, and 12.8 cm. The angle
      measure of the longer                          between the two smallest            between the two smallest
      diagonal.                                      sides is 117°. What is the          sides is 106°. What is the
                                                     area of this quadrilateral?         area of this quadrilateral?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.3 · Polar Coordinates 925

77. Find the area of a          78. Find the area of a
      triangular piece of land        triangular piece of land
      that measures 30 feet on        that measures 110 feet on
      one side and 42 feet on         one side and 250 feet on
      another; the included           another; the included
      angle measures 132°.            angle measures 85°. Round
      Round to the nearest            to the nearest whole
      whole square foot.              square foot.

10.3 Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Plot points using polar coordinates.
           Convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates.
           Convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
           Transform equations between polar and rectangular forms.
           Identify and graph polar equations by converting to rectangular equations.

Over 12 kilometers from port, a sailboat encounters rough weather and is blown off course by a 16-knot wind (see Figure
1). How can the sailor indicate his location to the Coast Guard? In this section, we will investigate a method of
representing location that is different from a standard coordinate grid.

                                Figure 1

Plotting Points Using Polar Coordinates

When we think about plotting points in the plane, we usually think of rectangular coordinates   in the Cartesian

coordinate plane. However, there are other ways of writing a coordinate pair and other types of grid systems. In this

section, we introduce to polar coordinates, which are points labeled  and plotted on a polar grid. The polar grid is

represented as a series of concentric circles radiating out from the pole, or the origin of the coordinate plane.

The polar grid is scaled as the unit circle with the positive x-axis now viewed as the polar axis and the origin as the pole.

The first coordinate is the radius or length of the directed line segment from the pole. The angle measured in

radians, indicates the direction of We move counterclockwise from the polar axis by an angle of and measure a

directed line segment the length of in the direction of Even though we measure first and then the polar point is

written with the r-coordinate first. For example, to plot the point   we would move units in the counterclockwise

direction and then a length of 2 from the pole. This point is plotted on the grid in Figure 2.
926 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                               Figure 2

EXAMPLE 1

Plotting a Point on the Polar Grid

Plot the point  on the polar grid.

     Solution
The angle is found by sweeping in a counterclockwise direction 90° from the polar axis. The point is located at a length
of 3 units from the pole in the direction, as shown in Figure 3.

                                               Figure 3

TRY IT #1 Plot the point                       in the polar grid.

EXAMPLE 2

Plotting a Point in the Polar Coordinate System with a Negative Component

Plot the point  on the polar grid.

     Solution   is located in the first quadrant. However,         We can approach plotting a point with a negative in
We know that
two ways:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           10.3 · Polar Coordinates 927

1. Plot the point  by moving in the counterclockwise direction and extending a directed line segment 2 units

     into the first quadrant. Then retrace the directed line segment back through the pole, and continue 2 units into the
     third quadrant;
2. Move in the counterclockwise direction, and draw the directed line segment from the pole 2 units in the negative

direction, into the third quadrant.

See Figure 4(a). Compare this to the graph of the polar coordinate  shown in Figure 4(b).

                                                  Figure 4

TRY IT #2 Plot the points               and              on the same polar grid.

Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates

When given a set of polar coordinates, we may need to convert them to rectangular coordinates. To do so, we can recall

the relationships that exist among the variables         and

Dropping a perpendicular from the point in the plane to the x-axis forms a right triangle, as illustrated in Figure 5. An

easy way to remember the equations above is to think of       as the adjacent side over the hypotenuse and  as

the opposite side over the hypotenuse.

                                                  Figure 5

Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates

To convert polar coordinates  to rectangular coordinates            let
928 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

...

     HOW TO

Given polar coordinates, convert to rectangular coordinates.

1. Given the polar coordinate                  write          and

2. Evaluate  and

3. Multiply  by to find the x-coordinate of the rectangular form.

4. Multiply  by to find the y-coordinate of the rectangular form.

EXAMPLE 3

Writing Polar Coordinates as Rectangular Coordinates

Write the polar coordinates        as rectangular coordinates.

     Solution
Use the equivalent relationships.

The rectangular coordinates are                See Figure 6.

                                                              Figure 6

EXAMPLE 4

Writing Polar Coordinates as Rectangular Coordinates

Write the polar coordinates                    as rectangular coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     10.3 · Polar Coordinates 929

     Solution
See Figure 7. Writing the polar coordinates as rectangular, we have

The rectangular coordinates are also

                                       Figure 7

TRY IT #3 Write the polar coordinates  as rectangular coordinates.

Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates

To convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, we will use two other familiar relationships. With this
conversion, however, we need to be aware that a set of rectangular coordinates will yield more than one polar point.

  Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates

  Converting from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates requires the use of one or more of the relationships
  illustrated in Figure 8.
930 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                               Figure 8

EXAMPLE 5

Writing Rectangular Coordinates as Polar Coordinates

Convert the rectangular coordinates            to polar coordinates.

     Solution                                  is in the first quadrant. To find  use the formula  This gives
We see that the original point

To find we substitute the values for and into the formula                         We know that must be positive, as is
in the first quadrant. Thus

So,        and  giving us the polar point             See Figure 9.

                                                                              Figure 9
     Analysis
There are other sets of polar coordinates that will be the same as our first solution. For example, the points

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               10.3 · Polar Coordinates 931

           and                will coincide with the original solution of         The point

indicates a move further counterclockwise by which is directly opposite The radius is expressed as
However, the angle is located in the third quadrant and, as is negative, we extend the directed line segment in the

opposite direction, into the first quadrant. This is the same point as       The point         is a move

further clockwise by  from The radius,      is the same.

Transforming Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms

We can now convert coordinates between polar and rectangular form. Converting equations can be more difficult, but it
can be beneficial to be able to convert between the two forms. Since there are a number of polar equations that cannot
be expressed clearly in Cartesian form, and vice versa, we can use the same procedures we used to convert points
between the coordinate systems. We can then use a graphing calculator to graph either the rectangular form or the
polar form of the equation.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given an equation in polar form, graph it using a graphing calculator.

   1. Change the MODE to POL, representing polar form.
   2. Press the Y= button to bring up a screen allowing the input of six equations:
   3. Enter the polar equation, set equal to
   4. Press GRAPH.

EXAMPLE 6

Writing a Cartesian Equation in Polar Form

Write the Cartesian equation  in polar form.

Solution

The goal is to eliminate and from the equation and introduce and Ideally, we would write the equation as a

function of To obtain the polar form, we will use the relationships between  and        Since  and

       we can substitute and solve for

Thus,                 and     should generate the same graph. See Figure 10.
932 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                         Figure 10 (a) Cartesian form     (b) Polar form
To graph a circle in rectangular form, we must first solve for

Note that this is two separate functions, since a circle fails the vertical line test. Therefore, we need to enter the positive

and negative square roots into the calculator separately, as two equations in the form             and

           Press GRAPH.

EXAMPLE 7

Rewriting a Cartesian Equation as a Polar Equation

Rewrite the Cartesian equation                      as a polar equation.

     Solution
This equation appears similar to the previous example, but it requires different steps to convert the equation.

We can still follow the same procedures we have already learned and make the following substitutions:

Therefore, the equations                       and  should give us the same graph. See Figure 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  10.3 · Polar Coordinates 933

                          Figure 11 (a) Cartesian form  (b) polar form

The Cartesian or rectangular equation is plotted on the rectangular grid, and the polar equation is plotted on the polar
grid. Clearly, the graphs are identical.

EXAMPLE 8

Rewriting a Cartesian Equation in Polar Form

Rewrite the Cartesian equation  as a polar equation.

Solution

We will use the relationships   and

TRY IT #4 Rewrite the Cartesian equation                in polar form.

Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting to Rectangular Equations

We have learned how to convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, and we have seen that the points are
indeed the same. We have also transformed polar equations to rectangular equations and vice versa. Now we will
demonstrate that their graphs, while drawn on different grids, are identical.

EXAMPLE 9

Graphing a Polar Equation by Converting to a Rectangular Equation

Covert the polar equation       to a rectangular equation, and draw its corresponding graph.

     Solution
The conversion is

Notice that the equation        drawn on the polar grid is clearly the same as the vertical line  drawn on the
934 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

rectangular grid (see Figure 12). Just as      is the standard form for a vertical line in rectangular form,         is

the standard form for a vertical line in polar form.

                                 Figure 12 (a) Polar grid (b) Rectangular coordinate system

A similar discussion would demonstrate that the graph of the function    will be the horizontal line                 In

fact,       is the standard form for a horizontal line in polar form, corresponding to the rectangular form

EXAMPLE 10

Rewriting a Polar Equation in Cartesian Form

Rewrite the polar equation                     as a Cartesian equation.

     Solution                                         We clear the fraction, and then use substitution. In order to
The goal is to eliminate and and introduce and
replace with and we must use the expression

The Cartesian equation is                      However, to graph it, especially using a graphing calculator or computer
program, we want to isolate

When our entire equation has been changed from and to and                we can stop, unless asked to solve for or simplify.
See Figure 13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            10.3 · Polar Coordinates 935

                                                                             Figure 13
The "hour-glass" shape of the graph is called a hyperbola. Hyperbolas have many interesting geometric features and
applications, which we will investigate further in Analytic Geometry.

     Analysis
In this example, the right side of the equation can be expanded and the equation simplified further, as shown above.
However, the equation cannot be written as a single function in Cartesian form. We may wish to write the rectangular
equation in the hyperbola's standard form. To do this, we can start with the initial equation.

TRY IT #5 Rewrite the polar equation                      in Cartesian form.

EXAMPLE 11

Rewriting a Polar Equation in Cartesian Form

Rewrite the polar equation            in Cartesian form.

Solution

This equation can also be written as
936 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polar coordinates.

     Introduction to Polar Coordinates (http://openstax.org/l/intropolar)
     Comparing Polar and Rectangular Coordinates (http://openstax.org/l/polarrect)

        10.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. How are polar coordinates                   2. How are the polar axes      3. Explain how polar
    different from rectangular                     different from the x- and      coordinates are graphed.
    coordinates?                                   y-axes of the Cartesian
                                                   plane?

4. How are the points                          5. Explain why the points

     and   related?                                 and        are

                                                    the same.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, convert the given polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates. Remember to consider the
quadrant in which the given point is located when determining for the point.

6.                                             7.                             8.

9.                                             10.

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates with
Remember to consider the quadrant in which the given point is located.

11.                                            12.                            13.

14.                                            15.

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian equation to a polar equation.

16.                                            17.                            18.

19.                                            20.                            21.

22.                                            23.                            24.

25.                                            26.                            27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 10.3 · Polar Coordinates 937

For the following exercises, convert the given polar equation to a Cartesian equation. Write in the standard form of a
conic if possible, and identify the conic section represented.

28.        29.                                                         30.

31.        32.                                                         33.

34.        35.                                                         36.

37.        38.                                                         39.

Graphical

For the following exercises, find the polar coordinates of the point.

40.             41.                                                         42.

43.             44.

For the following exercises, plot the points.

45.        46.                                                         47.

48.        49.                                                         50.
938 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

51.                                  52.                                       53.

54.

For the following exercises, convert the equation from rectangular to polar form and graph on the polar axis.

55.                                  56.                                       57.

58.                                            59.                             60.

61.

For the following exercises, convert the equation from polar to rectangular form and graph on the rectangular plane.

62.                                            63.                             64.

65.                                  66.                                       67.

68.

Technology                                     70. Use a graphing calculator   71. Use a graphing calculator
                                                     to find the rectangular
69. Use a graphing calculator                        coordinates of                 to find the polar
      to find the rectangular
      coordinates of                                 Round to the nearest           coordinates of         in
      Round to the nearest                           thousandth.
      thousandth.                                                                   degrees. Round to the

                                                                                    nearest thousandth.

72. Use a graphing calculator                  73. Use a graphing calculator

     to find the polar                              to find the polar

     coordinates of              in                 coordinates of         in

     degrees. Round to the                          radians. Round to the

     nearest hundredth.                             nearest hundredth.

Extensions                                     75. Describe the graph of       76. Describe the graph of

74. Describe the graph of

77. Describe the graph of                      78. What polar equations will
                                                     give an oblique line?

For the following exercise, graph the polar inequality.

79.                                  80.                                       81.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 939

82.           83.                                                 84.

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:
           Test polar equations for symmetry.
           Graph polar equations by plotting points.

The planets move through space in elliptical, periodic orbits about the sun, as shown in Figure 1. They are in constant

motion, so fixing an exact position of any planet is valid only for a moment. In other words, we can fix only a planet's

instantaneous position. This is one application of polar coordinates, represented as    We interpret as the distance

from the sun and as the planet's angular bearing, or its direction from a fixed point on the sun. In this section, we will

focus on the polar system and the graphs that are generated directly from polar coordinates.

Figure 1 Planets follow elliptical paths as they orbit around the Sun. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)

Testing Polar Equations for Symmetry

Just as a rectangular equation such as  describes the relationship between and on a Cartesian grid, a polar

equation describes a relationship between and on a polar grid. Recall that the coordinate pair        indicates that we

move counterclockwise from the polar axis (positive x-axis) by an angle of and extend a ray from the pole (origin)

units in the direction of All points that satisfy the polar equation are on the graph.

Symmetry is a property that helps us recognize and plot the graph of any equation. If an equation has a graph that is
symmetric with respect to an axis, it means that if we folded the graph in half over that axis, the portion of the graph on
one side would coincide with the portion on the other side. By performing three tests, we will see how to apply the
properties of symmetry to polar equations. Further, we will use symmetry (in addition to plotting key points, zeros, and
maximums of to determine the graph of a polar equation.

In the first test, we consider symmetry with respect to the line  (y-axis). We replace        with          to determine

if the new equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we are given the equation

This equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line

In the second test, we consider symmetry with respect to the polar axis ( -axis). We replace    with        or

     to determine equivalency between the tested equation and the original. For example, suppose we are given

the equation
940 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

The graph of this equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the polar axis.

In the third test, we consider symmetry with respect to the pole (origin). We replace  with         to determine if the

tested equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we are given the equation

The equation has failed the symmetry test, but that does not mean that it is not symmetric with respect to the pole.

Passing one or more of the symmetry tests verifies that symmetry will be exhibited in a graph. However, failing the

symmetry tests does not necessarily indicate that a graph will not be symmetric about the line      the polar axis, or

the pole. In these instances, we can confirm that symmetry exists by plotting reflecting points across the apparent axis
of symmetry or the pole. Testing for symmetry is a technique that simplifies the graphing of polar equations, but its
application is not perfect.

Symmetry Tests

A polar equation describes a curve on the polar grid. The graph of a polar equation can be evaluated for three types
of symmetry, as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 (a) A graph is symmetric with respect to the line   (y-axis) if replacing     with             yields an

equivalent equation. (b) A graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis (x-axis) if replacing  with      or

      yields an equivalent equation. (c) A graph is symmetric with respect to the pole (origin) if replacing

with       yields an equivalent equation.

      ...

           HOW TO

Given a polar equation, test for symmetry.

1. Substitute the appropriate combination of components for                   for      symmetry;          for polar

      axis symmetry; and         for symmetry with respect to the pole.

2. If the resulting equations are equivalent in one or more of the tests, the graph produces the expected symmetry.

EXAMPLE 1

Testing a Polar Equation for Symmetry

Test the equation                for symmetry.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 941

     Solution
Test for each of the three types of symmetry.

1) Replacing    with          yields the same result. Thus, the graph

                is symmetric with respect to the line

 2) Replacing with does not yield the same equation. Therefore,
the graph fails the test and may or may not be symmetric with respect

                                      to the polar axis.

3) Replacing with changes the equation and fails the test. The
   graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the pole.

Table 1

Analysis

Using a graphing calculator, we can see that the equation        is a circle centered at  with radius         and is

indeed symmetric to the line   We can also see that the graph is not symmetric with the polar axis or the pole. See

Figure 3.

                                                       Figure 3

TRY IT #1 Test the equation for symmetry:

Graphing Polar Equations by Plotting Points

To graph in the rectangular coordinate system we construct a table of and values. To graph in the polar coordinate
system we construct a table of and values. We enter values of into a polar equation and calculate However, using
the properties of symmetry and finding key values of and means fewer calculations will be needed.

Finding Zeros and Maxima

To find the zeros of a polar equation, we solve for the values of that result in  Recall that, to find the zeros of

polynomial functions, we set the equation equal to zero and then solve for We use the same process for polar

equations. Set  and solve for

For many of the forms we will encounter, the maximum value of a polar equation is found by substituting those values
942 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

of into the equation that result in the maximum value of the trigonometric functions. Consider      the

maximum distance between the curve and the pole is 5 units. The maximum value of the cosine function is 1 when

so our polar equation is                       and the value       will yield the maximum

Similarly, the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when        and if our polar equation is     the value

will yield the maximum We may find additional information by calculating values of when             These

points would be polar axis intercepts, which may be helpful in drawing the graph and identifying the curve of a polar
equation.

EXAMPLE 2

Finding Zeros and Maximum Values for a Polar Equation              and, if necessary, the polar axis intercepts of
Using the equation in Example 1, find the zeros and maximum

     Solution
To find the zeros, set equal to zero and solve for

Substitute any one of the values into the equation. We will use

The points   and       are the zeros of the equation. They all coincide, so only one point is visible on the graph.

This point is also the only polar axis intercept.

To find the maximum value of the equation, look at the maximum value of the trigonometric function  which

occurs when            resulting in                                Substitute for

Analysis

The point    will be the maximum value on the graph. Let's plot a few more points to verify the graph of a circle. See

Table 2 and Figure 4.

                                               0

                                                          Table 2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 943

                                       Table 2

                                                  Figure 4

TRY IT #2  Without converting to Cartesian coordinates, test the given equation for symmetry and find the
           zeros and maximum values of

Investigating Circles

Now we have seen the equation of a circle in the polar coordinate system. In the last two examples, the same equation
was used to illustrate the properties of symmetry and demonstrate how to find the zeros, maximum values, and plotted
points that produced the graphs. However, the circle is only one of many shapes in the set of polar curves.

There are five classic polar curves: cardioids, limaons, lemniscates, rose curves, and Archimedes' spirals. We will
briefly touch on the polar formulas for the circle before moving on to the classic curves and their variations.

Formulas for the Equation of a Circle

Some of the formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar coordinates are given by  and

where is the diameter of the circle or the distance from the pole to the farthest point on the circumference. The

radius is or one-half the diameter. For            the center is  For                      the center is

Figure 5 shows the graphs of these four circles.

                                                  Figure 5
944 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 3

Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation for a Circle
Sketch the graph of

    Solution

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph is symmetric about the polar axis. Next, we find the zeros

and maximum for                  First, set    and solve for . Thus, a zero occurs at          A key point to plot

is

To find the maximum value of     note that the maximum value of the cosine function is 1 when  Substitute
        into the equation:

The maximum value of the equation is 4. A key point to plot is

As            is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, we only need to calculate r-values for over the interval

Points in the upper quadrant can then be reflected to the lower quadrant. Make a table of values similar to Table 3. The

graph is shown in Figure 6.

                                 0

                                         4 3.46 2.83 2 0 -2 -2.83 -3.46 -4
                                 Table 3

                                                      Figure 6

Investigating Cardioids

While translating from polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates may seem simpler in some instances, graphing the
classic curves is actually less complicated in the polar system. The next curve is called a cardioid, as it resembles a heart.
This shape is often included with the family of curves called limaçons, but here we will discuss the cardioid on its own.

Formulas for a Cardioid

The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by  and                           where

    and       The cardioid graph passes through the pole, as we can see in Figure 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 945

                                                                            Figure 7

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the polar equation of a cardioid, sketch its graph.
 1. Check equation for the three types of symmetry.
 2. Find the zeros. Set
 3. Find the maximum value of the equation according to the maximum value of the trigonometric expression.
 4. Make a table of values for and
 5. Plot the points and sketch the graph.

EXAMPLE 4

Sketching the Graph of a Cardioid
Sketch the graph of

Solution

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph of this equation will be symmetric about the polar axis.

Next, we find the zeros and maximums. Setting       we have  The zero of the equation is located at

The graph passes through this point.

The maximum value of                   occurs when  is a maximum, which is when                       or when

Substitute  into the equation, and solve for

The point   is the maximum value on the graph.

We found that the polar equation is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, but as it extends to all four quadrants, we

need to plot values over the interval  The upper portion of the graph is then reflected over the polar axis. Next, we

make a table of values, as in Table 4, and then we plot the points and draw the graph. See Figure 8.

                                               4 3.41 2 1 0
                                       Table 4
946 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                               Figure 8

Investigating Limaçons

The word limaçon is Old French for "snail," a name that describes the shape of the graph. As mentioned earlier, the

cardioid is a member of the limaçon family, and we can see the similarities in the graphs. The other images in this

category include the one-loop limaçon and the two-loop (or inner-loop) limaçon. One-loop limaçons are sometimes

referred to as dimpled limaçons when           and convex limaçons when

Formulas for One-Loop Limaçons

The formulas that produce the graph of a dimpled one-loop limaçon are given by         and

where                                          All four graphs are shown in Figure 9.

                                                                 Figure 9 Dimpled limaçons

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a polar equation for a one-loop limaçon, sketch the graph.
   1. Test the equation for symmetry. Remember that failing a symmetry test does not mean that the shape will not

        exhibit symmetry. Often the symmetry may reveal itself when the points are plotted.
   2. Find the zeros.
   3. Find the maximum values according to the trigonometric expression.
   4. Make a table.
   5. Plot the points and sketch the graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 947

EXAMPLE 5

Sketching the Graph of a One-Loop Limaçon
Graph the equation

Solution

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that it fails all three symmetry tests, meaning that the graph may or

may not exhibit symmetry, so we cannot use the symmetry to help us graph it. However, this equation has a graph that

clearly displays symmetry with respect to the line           yet it fails all the three symmetry tests. A graphing calculator

will immediately illustrate the graph's reflective quality.

Next, we find the zeros and maximum, and plot the reflecting points to verify any symmetry. Setting  results in

being undefined. What does this mean? How could be undefined? The angle is undefined for any value of

Therefore, is undefined because there is no value of for which  Consequently, the graph does not pass

through the pole. Perhaps the graph does cross the polar axis, but not at the pole. We can investigate other intercepts

by calculating when

So, there is at least one polar axis intercept at               we will substitute      into the equation and solve
Next, as the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when
for Thus,
Make a table of the coordinates similar to Table 5.

                                   4 2.5 1.4 1 1.4 2.5 4 5.5 6.6 7 6.6 5.5 4
                          Table 5
The graph is shown in Figure 10.

                     Figure 10 One-loop limaçon

Analysis

This is an example of a curve for which making a table of values is critical to producing an accurate graph. The symmetry

tests fail; the zero is undefined. While it may be apparent that an equation involving  is likely symmetric with

respect to the line  evaluating more points helps to verify that the graph is correct.
948 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

TRY IT #3 Sketch the graph of

Another type of limaçon, the inner-loop limaçon, is named for the loop formed inside the general limaçon shape. It was
discovered by the German artist Albrecht Dürer(1471-1528), who revealed a method for drawing the inner-loop limaçon
in his 1525 book Underweysung der Messing. A century later, the father of mathematician Blaise Pascal, Étienne
Pascal(1588-1651), rediscovered it.

Formulas for Inner-Loop Limaçons

The formulas that generate the inner-loop limaçons are given by    and           where

and                The graph of the inner-loop limaçon passes through the pole twice: once for the outer loop, and

once for the inner loop. See Figure 11 for the graphs.

                                                        Figure 11

EXAMPLE 6

Sketching the Graph of an Inner-Loop Limaçon
Sketch the graph of

Solution

Testing for symmetry, we find that the graph of the equation is symmetric about the polar axis. Next, finding the zeros

reveals that when                The maximum is found when         or when       Thus, the maximum is

found at the point (7, 0).

Even though we have found symmetry, the zero, and the maximum, plotting more points will help to define the shape,
and then a pattern will emerge.

See Table 6.

                   7 6.3 4.5 2 -0.5 -2.3 -3 -2.3 -0.5 2 4.5 6.3 7

              Table 6

As expected, the values begin to repeat after  The graph is shown in Figure 12.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 949

                                     Figure 12 Inner-loop limaçon

Investigating Lemniscates
The lemniscate is a polar curve resembling the infinity symbol  or a figure 8. Centered at the pole, a lemniscate is

symmetrical by definition.

Formulas for Lemniscates

The formulas that generate the graph of a lemniscate are given by                  and              where
                                                                                        is symmetric with
The formula                    is symmetric with respect to the pole. The formula

respect to the pole, the line  and the polar axis. See Figure 13 for the graphs.

                                     Figure 13

EXAMPLE 7

Sketching the Graph of a Lemniscate
Sketch the graph of

     Solution                                            the polar axis, and the pole.
The equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line

Let's find the zeros. It should be routine by now, but we will approach this equation a little differently by making the
substitution
950 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

So, the point  is a zero of the equation.

Now let's find the maximum value. Since the maximum of   when        the maximum                     when
           Thus,

We have a maximum at (2, 0). Since this graph is symmetric with respect to the pole, the line        and the polar axis,
we only need to plot points in the first quadrant.
Make a table similar to Table 7.

                                                                              0

                                                                                                  0

                                                                    Table 7
Plot the points on the graph, such as the one shown in Figure 14.

                                               Figure 14 Lemniscate

Analysis

Making a substitution such as                  is a common practice in mathematics because it can make calculations simpler.

However, we must not forget to replace the substitution term with the original term at the end, and then solve for the

unknown.

Some of the points on this graph may not show up using the Trace function on the TI-84 graphing calculator, and the

calculator table may show an error for these same points of This is because there are no real square roots for these

values of In other words, the corresponding r-values of  are complex numbers because there is a negative

number under the radical.

Investigating Rose Curves

The next type of polar equation produces a petal-like shape called a rose curve. Although the graphs look complex, a
simple polar equation generates the pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 951

Rose Curves

The formulas that generate the graph of a rose curve are given by                  and         where  If is

even, the curve has petals. If is odd, the curve has petals. See Figure 15.

                                                         Figure 15

EXAMPLE 8

Sketching the Graph of a Rose Curve (n Even)
Sketch the graph of

Solution

Testing for symmetry, we find again that the symmetry tests do not tell the whole story. The graph is not only symmetric

with respect to the polar axis, but also with respect to the line   and the pole.

Now we will find the zeros. First make the substitution

The zero is  The point              is on the curve.
                               We know that the maximum value of
Next, we find the maximum                                                    when       Thus,

The point    is on the curve.

The graph of the rose curve has unique properties, which are revealed in Table 8.

                               0

                                       2 0 -2 0 2 0 -2
                               Table 8
952 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

As  when     it makes sense to divide values in the table by units. A definite pattern emerges. Look at the

range of r-values: 2, 0, -2, 0, 2, 0, -2, and so on. This represents the development of the curve one petal at a time.

Starting at  each petal extends out a distance of   and then turns back to zero times for a total of eight

petals. See the graph in Figure 16.

                                                                Figure 16 Rose curve, even

     Analysis
When these curves are drawn, it is best to plot the points in order, as in the Table 8. This allows us to see how the graph
hits a maximum (the tip of a petal), loops back crossing the pole, hits the opposite maximum, and loops back to the pole.
The action is continuous until all the petals are drawn.

       TRY IT #4 Sketch the graph of                               Next, find the zeros and maximum. We will

  EXAMPLE 9

Sketching the Graph of a Rose Curve (n Odd)
Sketch the graph of

     Solution
The graph of the equation shows symmetry with respect to the line
want to make the substitution

The maximum value is calculated at the angle where  is a maximum. Therefore,

Thus, the maximum value of the polar equation is 2. This is the length of each petal. As the curve for odd yields the
same number of petals as there will be five petals on the graph. See Figure 17.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 953

                                                 Figure 17 Rose curve, odd

Create a table of values similar to Table 9.

                                              0

                            0 1 -1.73 2 -1.73 1 0
                    Table 9

TRY IT #5 Sketch the graph of

Investigating the Archimedes' Spiral

The final polar equation we will discuss is the Archimedes' spiral, named for its discoverer, the Greek mathematician
Archimedes (c. 287 BCE-c. 212 BCE), who is credited with numerous discoveries in the fields of geometry and mechanics.

Archimedes' Spiral

The formula that generates the graph of the Archimedes' spiral is given by  for  As increases,

increases at a constant rate in an ever-widening, never-ending, spiraling path. See Figure 18.

           ...                                                Figure 18
                                                 sketch the graph.
              HOW TO

Given an Archimedes' spiral over
954 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

1. Make a table of values for and over the given domain.
2. Plot the points and sketch the graph.

EXAMPLE 10

Sketching the Graph of an Archimedes' Spiral

Sketch the graph of  over

     Solution
As is equal to the plot of the Archimedes' spiral begins at the pole at the point (0, 0). While the graph hints of
symmetry, there is no formal symmetry with regard to passing the symmetry tests. Further, there is no maximum value,
unless the domain is restricted.

Create a table such as Table 10.

                                                          0.785 1.57 3.14 4.71 5.50 6.28

                                                  Table 10

Notice that the r-values are just the decimal form of the angle measured in radians. We can see them on a graph in
Figure 19.

                                               Figure 19 Archimedes' spiral

     Analysis                                  In general, however, the domain of this function is   Graphing the
The domain of this polar curve is

equation of the Archimedes' spiral is rather simple, although the image makes it seem like it would be complex.

TRY IT #6 Sketch the graph of                  over the interval

Summary of Curves

We have explored a number of seemingly complex polar curves in this section. Figure 20 and Figure 21 summarize the
graphs and equations for each of these curves.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 955

                                Figure 20

                                                                      Figure 21

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of polar coordinates.

Graphing Polar Equations Part 1 (http://openstax.org/l/polargraph1)
Graphing Polar Equations Part 2 (http://openstax.org/l/polargraph2)
Animation: The Graphs of Polar Equations (http://openstax.org/l/polaranim)
Graphing Polar Equations on the TI-84 (http://openstax.org/l/polarTI84)

        10.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Describe the three types of  2. Which of the three types of   3. What are the steps to follow
    symmetry in polar graphs,       symmetries for polar graphs      when graphing polar
    and compare them to the         correspond to the                equations?
    symmetry of the Cartesian       symmetries with respect to
    plane.                          the x-axis, y-axis, and
                                    origin?

4. Describe the shapes of the   5. What part of the equation
    graphs of cardioids,            determines the shape of the
    limaçons, and lemniscates.      graph of a polar equation?
956 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Graphical

For the following exercises, test the equation for symmetry.

6.                                             7.             8.

9.                                             10.            11.

12.                                            13.            14.

15.

For the following exercises, graph the polar equation. Identify the name of the shape.

16.                                            17.            18.

19.                                            20.            21.

22.                                            23.            24.

25.                                            26.            27.

28.                                            29.            30.

31.                                            32.            33.

34.                                            35.            36.

37.                              38.                          39.

40.                                            41.            42.

43.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of the polar equation.

44.                                            45.            46.                       a cissoid

47.             , a              48.                          49.

     hippopede

50.                                            51.            52.

53.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          10.4 · Polar Coordinates: Graphs 957

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph each pair of polar equations on a domain of    and then
explain the differences shown in the graphs.

54.                                 55.                                 56.

57.                                 58.                                 59. On a graphing utility,

                                                                             graph                 on ,

                                                                                , , , , , and

                                                                             ,      Describe the

                                                                             effect of increasing the

                                                                             width of the domain.

60. On a graphing utility,          61. On a graphing utility,          62. On a graphing utility,
      graph and sketch                    graph each polar equation.          graph each polar equation.
                                          Explain the similarities and        Explain the similarities and
      on                                  differences you observe in          differences you observe in
                                          the graphs.                         the graphs.

63. On a graphing utility,
      graph each polar equation.
      Explain the similarities and
      differences you observe in
      the graphs.

Extensions

For the following exercises, draw each polar equation on the same set of polar axes, and find the points of intersection.

64.                                 65.                                 66.

67.                                 68.                                 69.            ,

70.                                 71.                                 72.         ,
958 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Plot complex numbers in the complex plane.
           Find the absolute value of a complex number.
           Write complex numbers in polar form.
           Convert a complex number from polar to rectangular form.
           Find products of complex numbers in polar form.
           Find quotients of complex numbers in polar form.
           Find powers of complex numbers in polar form.
           Find roots of complex numbers in polar form.

"God made the integers; all else is the work of man." This rather famous quote by nineteenth-century German
mathematician Leopold Kronecker sets the stage for this section on the polar form of a complex number. Complex
numbers were invented by people and represent over a thousand years of continuous investigation and struggle by
mathematicians such as Pythagoras, Descartes, De Moivre, Euler, Gauss, and others. Complex numbers answered
questions that for centuries had puzzled the greatest minds in science.

We first encountered complex numbers in Complex Numbers. In this section, we will focus on the mechanics of working
with complex numbers: translation of complex numbers from polar form to rectangular form and vice versa,
interpretation of complex numbers in the scheme of applications, and application of De Moivre's Theorem.

Plotting Complex Numbers in the Complex Plane

Plotting a complex number        is similar to plotting a real number, except that the horizontal axis represents the real

part of the number, and the vertical axis represents the imaginary part of the number,

...

     HOW TO

Given a complex number                         plot it in the complex plane.

1. Label the horizontal axis as the real axis and the vertical axis as the imaginary axis.
2. Plot the point in the complex plane by moving units in the horizontal direction and units in the vertical

     direction.

EXAMPLE 1

Plotting a Complex Number in the Complex Plane

Plot the complex number          in the complex plane.

     Solution
From the origin, move two units in the positive horizontal direction and three units in the negative vertical direction. See
Figure 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              10.5 · Polar Form of Complex Numbers 959

                                    Figure 1

TRY IT #1 Plot the point            in the complex plane.

Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number

The first step toward working with a complex number in polar form is to find the absolute value. The absolute value of a

complex number is the same as its magnitude, or It measures the distance from the origin to a point in the plane.

For example, the graph of  in Figure 2, shows

                                    Figure 2

Absolute Value of a Complex Number

Given  a complex number, the absolute value of is defined as

It is the distance from the origin to the point

Notice that the absolute value of a real number gives the distance of the number from 0, while the absolute value of a
complex number gives the distance of the number from the origin,
960 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

         EXAMPLE 2
       Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number with a Radical
       Find the absolute value of

            Solution
       Using the formula, we have

       See Figure 3.

                                                Figure 3

TRY IT #2 Find the absolute value of the complex number

EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number

Given      find

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

The absolute value is 5. See Figure 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    10.5 · Polar Form of Complex Numbers 961

                                                         Figure 4

TRY IT #3 Given  find

Writing Complex Numbers in Polar Form

The polar form of a complex number expresses a number in terms of an angle and its distance from the origin

Given a complex number in rectangular form expressed as            we use the same conversion formulas as we do to

write the number in trigonometric form:

We review these relationships in Figure 5.

                                                         Figure 5

We use the term modulus to represent the absolute value of a complex number, or the distance from the origin to the

point  The modulus, then, is the same as the radius in polar form. We use to indicate the angle of direction

(just as with polar coordinates). Substituting, we have

Polar Form of a Complex Number
Writing a complex number in polar form involves the following conversion formulas:
962 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Making a direct substitution, we have

where is the modulus and is the argument. We often use the abbreviation  to represent

EXAMPLE 4

Expressing a Complex Number Using Polar Coordinates
Express the complex number using polar coordinates.

     Solution                                      is the same as  Writing it in polar form, we have to calculate first.
On the complex plane, the number

Next, we look at If              and               then        In polar coordinates, the complex number  can be
written as                              or               See Figure 6.

                                                         Figure 6

TRY IT #4 Express                              as  in polar form.

  EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Polar Form of a Complex Number
Find the polar form of

     Solution
First, find the value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.5 · Polar Form of Complex Numbers 963

Find the angle using the formula:

Thus, the solution is

TRY IT #5 Write                      in polar form.

Converting a Complex Number from Polar to Rectangular Form

Converting a complex number from polar form to rectangular form is a matter of evaluating what is given and using the

distributive property. In other words, given                first evaluate the trigonometric functions  and

Then, multiply through by

EXAMPLE 6

Converting from Polar to Rectangular Form
Convert the polar form of the given complex number to rectangular form:

     Solution
We begin by evaluating the trigonometric expressions.

After substitution, the complex number is

We apply the distributive property:

The rectangular form of the given point in complex form is
964 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

    EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Rectangular Form of a Complex Number

Find the rectangular form of the complex number given  and

        Solution

If                and  we first determine                                            We then find  and

The rectangular form of the given number in complex form is
       TRY IT #6 Convert the complex number to rectangular form:

Finding Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form

Now that we can convert complex numbers to polar form we will learn how to perform operations on complex numbers
in polar form. For the rest of this section, we will work with formulas developed by French mathematician Abraham De
Moivre (1667-1754). These formulas have made working with products, quotients, powers, and roots of complex
numbers much simpler than they appear. The rules are based on multiplying the moduli and adding the arguments.

    Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form

    If                 and                             then the product of these numbers is given as:

    Notice that the product calls for multiplying the moduli and adding the angles.

    EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Product of Two Complex Numbers in Polar Form

Find the product of    given                           and

     Solution
Follow the formula

Finding Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form

The quotient of two complex numbers in polar form is the quotient of the two moduli and the difference of the two
arguments.

Access for free at openstax.org
Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form                                                     10.5 · Polar Form of Complex Numbers 965

If                            and                   then the quotient of these numbers is

Notice that the moduli are divided, and the angles are subtracted.

         ...

              HOW TO

Given two complex numbers in polar form, find the quotient.

1. Divide

2. Find                                                             Replace with  and replace with
3. Substitute the results into the formula:

4. Calculate the new trigonometric expressions and multiply through by

EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Quotient of Two Complex Numbers

Find the quotient of                         and

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

    TRY IT #7 Find the product and the quotient of                                and

Finding Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form

Finding powers of complex numbers is greatly simplified using De Moivre's Theorem. It states that, for a positive

integer    is found by raising the modulus to the power and multiplying the argument by It is the standard

method used in modern mathematics.

De Moivre's Theorem

If                    is a complex number, then

where is a positive integer.
966 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 10

Evaluating an Expression Using De Moivre's Theorem

Evaluate the expression          using De Moivre's Theorem.

     Solution                                                                                    in polar form.
Since De Moivre's Theorem applies to complex numbers written in polar form, we must first write
Let us find

Then we find Using the formula                 gives

Use De Moivre's Theorem to evaluate the expression.

Finding Roots of Complex Numbers in Polar Form

To find the nth root of a complex number in polar form, we use the Root Theorem or De Moivre's Theorem and raise
the complex number to a power with a rational exponent. There are several ways to represent a formula for finding
roots of complex numbers in polar form.

  The nth Root Theorem

  To find the root of a complex number in polar form, use the formula given as

where                                          We add        to in order to obtain the periodic roots.

  EXAMPLE 11

Finding the nth Root of a Complex Number
Evaluate the cube roots of

     Solution
We have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                10.5 · Polar Form of Complex Numbers 967

There will be three roots:     When  we have

When  we have

When  we have

Remember to find the common denominator to simplify fractions in situations like this one. For  the angle
simplification is

TRY IT #8 Find the four fourth roots of

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polar forms of complex numbers.
The Product and Quotient of Complex Numbers in Trigonometric Form (http://openstax.org/l/prodquocomplex)
De Moivre's Theorem (http://openstax.org/l/demoivre)

        10.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. A complex number is         2. What does the absolute        3. How is a complex number
    Explain each part.             value of a complex number        converted to polar form?
                                   represent?

4. How do we find the product  5. What is De Moivre's
    of two complex numbers?        Theorem and what is it used
                                   for?
968 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the absolute value of the given complex number.

6.                                             7.                       8.

9.                                             10.                      11.

For the following exercises, write the complex number in polar form.

12.                                            13.                      14.

15.                                            16.

For the following exercises, convert the complex number from polar to rectangular form.

17.                                            18.                      19.

20.                                            21.                      22.

For the following exercises, find                  in polar form.

23.                                                                24.

25.                                                                26.

27.                                                                28.

For the following exercises, find in polar form.

29.                                                                30.

31.                                                                32.

33.                                                                34.

For the following exercises, find the powers of each complex number in polar form.

35. Find when                                  36. Find when            37. Find when

38. Find when                                  39. Find when            40. Find when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    10.6 · Parametric Equations 969

For the following exercises, evaluate each root.

41. Evaluate the cube root of    42. Evaluate the square root of  43. Evaluate the cube root of
      when                               when                           when

44. Evaluate the square root of  45. Evaluate the square root of
        when                             when

Graphical

For the following exercises, plot the complex number in the complex plane.

46.                              47.                              48.

49.                              50.                              51.

52.                              53.                              54.

55.

Technology

For the following exercises, find all answers rounded to the nearest hundredth.

56. Use the rectangular to       57. Use the rectangular to       58. Use the rectangular to

     polar feature on the             polar feature on the                  polar feature on the

     graphing calculator to           graphing calculator to                graphing calculator to

     change  to polar                 change      to polar                  change      to polar

     form.                            form.                                 form.

59. Use the polar to             60. Use the polar to             61. Use the polar to

     rectangular feature on the       rectangular feature on the            rectangular feature on the

     graphing calculator to           graphing calculator to                graphing calculator to

     change             to            change             to                 change             to

     rectangular form.                rectangular form.                     rectangular form.

10.6 Parametric Equations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Parameterize a curve.
           Eliminate the parameter.
           Find a rectangular equation for a curve defined parametrically.
           Find parametric equations for curves defined by rectangular equations.

Consider the path a moon follows as it orbits a planet, which simultaneously rotates around the sun, as seen in Figure 1.
At any moment, the moon is located at a particular spot relative to the planet. But how do we write and solve the
equation for the position of the moon when the distance from the planet, the speed of the moon's orbit around the
planet, and the speed of rotation around the sun are all unknowns? We can solve only for one variable at a time.
970 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                                  Figure 1

In this section, we will consider sets of equations given by and where is the independent variable of time. We
can use these parametric equations in a number of applications when we are looking for not only a particular position
but also the direction of the movement. As we trace out successive values of the orientation of the curve becomes
clear. This is one of the primary advantages of using parametric equations: we are able to trace the movement of an
object along a path according to time. We begin this section with a look at the basic components of parametric
equations and what it means to parameterize a curve. Then we will learn how to eliminate the parameter, translate the
equations of a curve defined parametrically into rectangular equations, and find the parametric equations for curves
defined by rectangular equations.

Parameterizing a Curve

When an object moves along a curve--or curvilinear path--in a given direction and in a given amount of time, the

position of the object in the plane is given by the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate. However, both and vary over

time and so are functions of time. For this reason, we add another variable, the parameter, upon which both and are

dependent functions. In the example in the section opener, the parameter is time, The position of the moon at time,

is represented as the function                 and the position of the moon at time, is represented as the function

Together, and are called parametric equations, and generate an ordered pair          Parametric equations

primarily describe motion and direction.

When we parameterize a curve, we are translating a single equation in two variables, such as and  into an

equivalent pair of equations in three variables,  and One of the reasons we parameterize a curve is because the

parametric equations yield more information: specifically, the direction of the object's motion over time.

When we graph parametric equations, we can observe the individual behaviors of and of There are a number of

shapes that cannot be represented in the form     meaning that they are not functions. For example, consider the

graph of a circle, given as                    Solving for gives  or two equations:                                  and

                          If we graph and together, the graph will not pass the vertical line test, as shown in Figure 2.
Thus, the equation for the graph of a circle is not a function.

                                                  Figure 2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10.6 · Parametric Equations 971

However, if we were to graph each equation on its own, each one would pass the vertical line test and therefore would
represent a function. In some instances, the concept of breaking up the equation for a circle into two functions is similar
to the concept of creating parametric equations, as we use two functions to produce a non-function. This will become
clearer as we move forward.

    Parametric Equations

    Suppose is a number on an interval, The set of ordered pairs,      where  and                     forms a

    plane curve based on the parameter The equations              and  are the parametric equations.

    EXAMPLE 1

Parameterizing a Curve    letting  Graph both equations.
Parameterize the curve

    Solution

If  then to find we replace the variable with the expression given in         In other words,

Make a table of values similar to Table 1, and sketch the graph.

                                                        Table 1

See the graphs in Figure 3. It may be helpful to use the TRACE feature of a graphing calculator to see how the points are
generated as increases.
972 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                       Figure 3 (a) Parametric                (b) Rectangular

     Analysis
The arrows indicate the direction in which the curve is generated. Notice the curve is identical to the curve of

    TRY IT #1 Construct a table of values and plot the parametric equations:

    EXAMPLE 2

Finding a Pair of Parametric Equations                        using the parameter        Plot some points
Find a pair of parametric equations that models the graph of
and sketch the graph.

    Solution

If      and we substitute for into the equation, then         Our pair of parametric equations is

To graph the equations, first we construct a table of values like that in Table 2. We can choose values around    from

    to         The values in the column will be the same as those in the column because  Calculate

values for the column

                                                     Table 2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               10.6 · Parametric Equations 973

The graph of  is a parabola facing downward, as shown in Figure 4. We have mapped the curve over the

interval      shown as a solid line with arrows indicating the orientation of the curve according to Orientation

refers to the path traced along the curve in terms of increasing values of As this parabola is symmetric with respect to

the line      the values of are reflected across the y-axis.

                                                          Figure 4

TRY IT #2 Parameterize the curve given by

EXAMPLE 3

Finding Parametric Equations That Model Given Criteria

An object travels at a steady rate along a straight path      to         in the same plane in four seconds. The

coordinates are measured in meters. Find parametric equations for the position of the object.

Solution

The parametric equations are simple linear expressions, but we need to view this problem in a step-by-step fashion. The

x-value of the object starts at meters and goes to 3 meters. This means the distance x has changed by 8 meters in 4

seconds, which is a rate of  or  We can write the x-coordinate as a linear function with respect to time as

              In the linear function template                       and

Similarly, the y-value of the object starts at 3 and goes to which is a change in the distance y of -4 meters in 4

seconds, which is a rate of  or           We can also write the y-coordinate as the linear function

Together, these are the parametric equations for the position of the object, where and are expressed in meters and
represents time:

Using these equations, we can build a table of values for and (see Table 3). In this example, we limited values of
to non-negative numbers. In general, any value of can be used.

                                 Table 3
974 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                                          Table 3
       From this table, we can create three graphs, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 (a) A graph of vs. representing the horizontal position over time. (b) A graph of vs. representing the
vertical position over time. (c) A graph of vs. representing the position of the object in the plane at time

     Analysis
Again, we see that, in Figure 5(c), when the parameter represents time, we can indicate the movement of the object
along the path with arrows.

Eliminating the Parameter

In many cases, we may have a pair of parametric equations but find that it is simpler to draw a curve if the equation
involves only two variables, such as and Eliminating the parameter is a method that may make graphing some
curves easier. However, if we are concerned with the mapping of the equation according to time, then it will be
necessary to indicate the orientation of the curve as well. There are various methods for eliminating the parameter
from a set of parametric equations; not every method works for every type of equation. Here we will review the methods
for the most common types of equations.

Eliminating the Parameter from Polynomial, Exponential, and Logarithmic Equations

For polynomial, exponential, or logarithmic equations expressed as two parametric equations, we choose the equation
that is most easily manipulated and solve for We substitute the resulting expression for into the second equation.
This gives one equation in and

EXAMPLE 4

Eliminating the Parameter in Polynomials

Given             and            eliminate the parameter, and write the parametric equations as a Cartesian

equation.

     Solution
We will begin with the equation for because the linear equation is easier to solve for

Next, substitute  for in

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.6 · Parametric Equations 975

The Cartesian form is

Analysis

This is an equation for a parabola in which, in rectangular terms, is dependent on From the curve's vertex at

the graph sweeps out to the right. See Figure 6. In this section, we consider sets of equations given by the functions

and  where is the independent variable of time. Notice, both and are functions of time; so in general is not a

function of

                                Figure 6

     TRY IT #3         Given the equations below, eliminate the parameter and write as a rectangular equation for as a
                       function of

EXAMPLE 5

Eliminating the Parameter in Exponential Equations

Eliminate the parameter and write as a Cartesian equation:  and

     Solution
Isolate

Substitute the expression into

The Cartesian form is
976 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

     Analysis                                                                                  The Cartesian equation,
The graph of the parametric equation is shown in Figure 7(a). The domain is restricted to

         is shown in Figure 7(b) and has only one restriction on the domain,

                                                   Figure 7

EXAMPLE 6

Eliminating the Parameter in Logarithmic Equations

Eliminate the parameter and write as a Cartesian equation:   and

     Solution
Solve the first equation for

Then, substitute the expression for into the equation.

The Cartesian form is

Analysis

To be sure that the parametric equations are equivalent to the Cartesian equation, check the domains. The parametric

equations restrict the domain on               to  we restrict the domain on to            The domain for the

parametric equation              is restricted to  we limit the domain on                  to

TRY IT #4 Eliminate the parameter and write as a rectangular equation.

Eliminating the Parameter from Trigonometric Equations

Eliminating the parameter from trigonometric equations is a straightforward substitution. We can use a few of the
familiar trigonometric identities and the Pythagorean Theorem.

First, we use the identities:

Solving for  and                 we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10.6 · Parametric Equations 977

Then, use the Pythagorean Theorem:
Substituting gives

  EXAMPLE 7                                                                   and sketch the graph.

Eliminating the Parameter from a Pair of Trigonometric Parametric Equations
Eliminate the parameter from the given pair of trigonometric equations where

Solution

Solving for  and     we have

Next, use the Pythagorean identity and make the substitutions.
The graph for the equation is shown in Figure 8.

                                       Figure 8

Analysis

Applying the general equations for conic sections (introduced in Analytic Geometry, we can identify  as an

ellipse centered at  Notice that when  the coordinates are         and when   the coordinates are

This shows the orientation of the curve with increasing values of

TRY IT #5 Eliminate the parameter from the given pair of parametric equations and write as a Cartesian
978 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

equation:                                      and

Finding Cartesian Equations from Curves Defined Parametrically

When we are given a set of parametric equations and need to find an equivalent Cartesian equation, we are essentially

"eliminating the parameter." However, there are various methods we can use to rewrite a set of parametric equations as

a Cartesian equation. The simplest method is to set one equation equal to the parameter, such as    In this case,

can be any expression. For example, consider the following pair of equations.

Rewriting this set of parametric equations is a matter of substituting for Thus, the Cartesian equation is

  EXAMPLE 8

Finding a Cartesian Equation Using Alternate Methods
Use two different methods to find the Cartesian equation equivalent to the given set of parametric equations.

     Solution
Method 1. First, let's solve the equation for Then we can substitute the result into the equation.

Now substitute the expression for into the equation.

Method 2. Solve the equation for and substitute this expression in the equation.
Make the substitution and then solve for

TRY IT #6 Write the given parametric equations as a Cartesian equation:           and

Finding Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by Rectangular Equations

Although we have just shown that there is only one way to interpret a set of parametric equations as a rectangular
equation, there are multiple ways to interpret a rectangular equation as a set of parametric equations. Any strategy we
may use to find the parametric equations is valid if it produces equivalency. In other words, if we choose an expression
to represent and then substitute it into the equation, and it produces the same graph over the same domain as the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   10.6 · Parametric Equations 979

rectangular equation, then the set of parametric equations is valid. If the domain becomes restricted in the set of
parametric equations, and the function does not allow the same values for as the domain of the rectangular equation,
then the graphs will be different.

EXAMPLE 9

Finding a Set of Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by Rectangular Equations
Find a set of equivalent parametric equations for

     Solution

An obvious choice would be to let   Then  But let's try something more interesting. What if we

let            Then we have

The set of parametric equations is
See Figure 9.

                                                                            Figure 9

     MEDIA
     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with parametric equations.
     Introduction to Parametric Equations (http://openstax.org/l/introparametric)
     Converting Parametric Equations to Rectangular Form (http://openstax.org/l/convertpara)
980 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

        10.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is a system of                         2. Some examples of a third      3. Explain how to eliminate a
    parametric equations?                          parameter are time, length,      parameter given a set of
                                                   speed, and scale. Explain        parametric equations.
                                                   when time is used as a
                                                   parameter.

4. What is a benefit of writing a              5. What is a benefit of using    6. Why are there many sets of
    system of parametric                           parametric equations?            parametric equations to
    equations as a Cartesian                                                        represent on Cartesian
    equation?                                                                       function?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter to rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation.

7.                                             8.                               9.

10.                                            11.                              12.

13.                                            14.                              15.

16.                                            17.                              18.

19.                                            20.                              21.

22.                                            23.                              24.

25.

For the following exercises, rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation by building an            table.

26.                                            27.                              28.

29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  10.6 · Parametric Equations 981

For the following exercises, parameterize (write parametric equations for) each Cartesian equation by setting      or

by setting

30.                                31.                                   32.

33.

For the following exercises, parameterize (write parametric equations for) each Cartesian equation by using

                 and               Identify the curve.

34.                                35.                                   36.

37.                                38. Parameterize the line from 39. Parameterize the line from

                                            to              so that               to          so that

                                        the line is at          at            the line is at  at

                                        and at              at                    and at      at

40. Parameterize the line from     41. Parameterize the line from

             to       so that the           to          so that the

     line is at       at                line is at      at          and

     and at      at                     at          at

Technology

For the following exercises, use the table feature in the graphing calculator to determine whether the graphs intersect.

42.                                             43.

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to complete the table of values for each set of parametric
equations.

44.                                45.                                   46.

     -1                                 1                                     -1

     0                                  2                                     0

     1                                  3                                     1

                                                                              2
982 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Extensions                                     48. Find two different sets of  49. Find two different sets of
                                                     parametric equations for        parametric equations for
47. Find two different sets of
      parametric equations for

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:
           Graph plane curves described by parametric equations by plotting points.
           Graph parametric equations.

While not every fan (or team manager) appreciates it, baseball and many other sports have become dependent on
analytics, which involve complex data recording and quantitative evaluation used to understand and predict behavior.
The earliest influence of analytics was mostly statistical; more recently, physics and other sciences have come into play.
Foremost among these is the focus on launch angle and exit velocity, which when at certain values can almost guarantee
a home run. On the other hand, emphasis on launch angle and focusing on home runs rather than overall hitting results
in far more outs. Consider the following situation: it is the bottom of the ninth inning, with two outs and two players on
base. The home team is losing by two runs. The batter swings and hits the baseball at 140 feet per second and at an
angle of approximately to the horizontal. How far will the ball travel? Will it clear the fence for a game-winning home
run? The outcome may depend partly on other factors (for example, the wind), but mathematicians can model the path
of a projectile and predict approximately how far it will travel using parametric equations. In this section, we'll discuss
parametric equations and some common applications, such as projectile motion problems.

                   Figure 1 Parametric equations can model the path of a projectile. (credit: Paul Kreher, Flickr)

Graphing Parametric Equations by Plotting Points

In lieu of a graphing calculator or a computer graphing program, plotting points to represent the graph of an equation is
the standard method. As long as we are careful in calculating the values, point-plotting is highly dependable.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a pair of parametric equations, sketch a graph by plotting points.
   1. Construct a table with three columns:
   2. Evaluate and for values of over the interval for which the functions are defined.
   3. Plot the resulting pairs

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 983

EXAMPLE 1

Sketching the Graph of a Pair of Parametric Equations by Plotting Points
Sketch the graph of the parametric equations

     Solution                    and  as in Table 1, and plot the points in a plane.
Construct a table of values for

                                                           Table 1  opening to the right. See Figure 2.
The graph is a parabola with vertex at the point

                                                                              Figure 2

     Analysis
As values for progress in a positive direction from 0 to 5, the plotted points trace out the top half of the parabola. As
values of become negative, they trace out the lower half of the parabola. There are no restrictions on the domain. The
984 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

       arrows indicate direction according to increasing values of The graph does not represent a function, as it will fail the
       vertical line test. The graph is drawn in two parts: the positive values for and the negative values for

              TRY IT #1 Sketch the graph of the parametric equations

         EXAMPLE 2
       Sketching the Graph of Trigonometric Parametric Equations
       Construct a table of values for the given parametric equations and sketch the graph:

     Solution                                                                                           Using angles
Construct a table like that in Table 2 using angle measure in radians as inputs for and evaluating and
with known sine and cosine values for makes calculations easier.

0

                                         Table 2
Figure 3 shows the graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 985

                                                                              Figure 3

By the symmetry shown in the values of and we see that the parametric equations represent an ellipse. The ellipse is
mapped in a counterclockwise direction as shown by the arrows indicating increasing values.

     Analysis
We have seen that parametric equations can be graphed by plotting points. However, a graphing calculator will save
some time and reveal nuances in a graph that may be too tedious to discover using only hand calculations.

Make sure to change the mode on the calculator to parametric (PAR). To confirm, the window should show

instead of

TRY IT #2 Graph the parametric equations:

EXAMPLE 3

Graphing Parametric Equations and Rectangular Form Together

Graph the parametric equations  and                First, construct the graph using data points generated from

the parametric form. Then graph the rectangular form of the equation. Compare the two graphs.

     Solution
Construct a table of values like that in Table 3.

            Table 3
986 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Plot the                          Table 3
          values from the table. See Figure 4.

                                                Figure 4

Next, translate the parametric equations to rectangular form. To do this, we solve for in either or  and then

substitute the expression for in the other equation. The result will be a function  if solving for as a function of

or  if solving for as a function of

Then, use the Pythagorean Theorem.

     Analysis
In Figure 5, the data from the parametric equations and the rectangular equation are plotted together. The parametric
equations are plotted in blue; the graph for the rectangular equation is drawn on top of the parametric in a dashed style
colored red. Clearly, both forms produce the same graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 987

                                     Figure 5

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing Parametric Equations and Rectangular Equations on the Coordinate System

Graph the parametric equations  and  and the rectangular equivalent                                     on the same
                                                                                                                        on
coordinate system.

     Solution
Construct a table of values for the parametric equations, as we did in the previous example, and graph
the same grid, as in Figure 6.

                                                                              Figure 6

     Analysis
With the domain on restricted, we only plot positive values of The parametric data is graphed in blue and the graph
of the rectangular equation is dashed in red. Once again, we see that the two forms overlap.

TRY IT #3           Sketch the graph of the parametric equations                  along with the
                    rectangular equation on the same grid.

Applications of Parametric Equations

Many of the advantages of parametric equations become obvious when applied to solving real-world problems.
Although rectangular equations in x and y give an overall picture of an object's path, they do not reveal the position of
an object at a specific time. Parametric equations, however, illustrate how the values of x and y change depending on t,
as the location of a moving object at a particular time.

A common application of parametric equations is solving problems involving projectile motion. In this type of motion, an
object is propelled forward in an upward direction forming an angle of to the horizontal, with an initial speed of
and at a height above the horizontal.
988 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

The path of an object propelled at an inclination of to the horizontal, with initial speed  and at a height above the
horizontal, is given by

where accounts for the effects of gravity and is the initial height of the object. Depending on the units involved in the

problem, use                     or            The equation for gives horizontal distance, and the equation for gives the

vertical distance.

...

     HOW TO

Given a projectile motion problem, use parametric equations to solve.

1. The horizontal distance is given by            Substitute the initial speed of the object for

2. The expression                indicates the angle at which the object is propelled. Substitute that angle in degrees for

3. The vertical distance is given by the formula                        The term                 represents the effect

of gravity. Depending on units involved, use          or                Again, substitute the initial speed for

and the height at which the object was propelled for

4. Proceed by calculating each term to solve for

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Parametric Equations to Describe the Motion of a Baseball
Solve the problem presented at the beginning of this section. Does the batter hit the game-winning home run? Assume
that the ball is hit with an initial velocity of 140 feet per second at an angle of to the horizontal, making contact 3 feet
above the ground.

 Find the parametric equations to model the path of the baseball.        Where is the ball after 2 seconds?
 How long is the ball in the air?  Is it a home run?

     Solution

                                                                                                              Thus,

Use the formulas to set up the equations. The horizontal position is found using the parametric equation for

The vertical position is found using the parametric equation for Thus,



Substitute 2 into the equations to find the horizontal and vertical positions of the ball.

After 2 seconds, the ball is 198 feet away from the batter's box and 137 feet above the ground.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 989

                                                                                                    Thus,

To calculate how long the ball is in the air, we have to find out when it will hit ground, or when

When  seconds, the ball has hit the ground. (The quadratic equation can be solved in various ways, but this

problem was solved using a computer math program.)



We cannot confirm that the hit was a home run without considering the size of the outfield, which varies from field to
field. However, for simplicity's sake, let's assume that the outfield wall is 400 feet from home plate in the deepest part
of the park. Let's also assume that the wall is 10 feet high. In order to determine whether the ball clears the wall, we
need to calculate how high the ball is when x = 400 feet. So we will set x = 400, solve for and input into

The ball is 141.8 feet in the air when it soars out of the ballpark. It was indeed a home run. See Figure 7.

                                                    Figure 7

MEDIA
Access the following online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphs of parametric equations.
Graphing Parametric Equations on the TI-84 (http://openstax.org/l/graphpara84)

        10.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What are two methods used  2. What is one difference in    3. Why are some graphs drawn
    to graph parametric           point-plotting parametric       with arrows?
    equations?                    equations compared to
                                  Cartesian equations?

4. Name a few common types    5. Why are parametric graphs
    of graphs of parametric       important in understanding
    equations.                    projectile motion?
990 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph each set of parametric equations by making a table of values. Include the orientation
on the graph.

6.                                                      7.

8.                                                  9.                      10.

11.

For the following exercises, sketch the curve and include the orientation.

12.                                            13.          14.

15.                              16.                        17.

18.                                            19.          20.

21.                              22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 991

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the orientation. Then, write the Cartesian equation.

23.                               24.                                25.

26.                               27.

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the orientation.

28.                               29.                                30.

31.                               32.                                33.

For the following exercises, use the parametric equations for integers a and b:

34. Graph on the domain           35. Graph on the domain            36. Graph on the domain

             where        and                  where        and                       where         and

             and include the           , and include the                         , and include the

     orientation.                      orientation.                       orientation.

37. Graph on the domain           38. If is 1 more than              39. Describe the graph if
                                        describe the effect the                        and
             where        and           values of and have on
                                        the graph of the
     , and include the                  parametric equations.

     orientation.

40. What happens if is 1          41. If the parametric equations
      more than Describe the                         and
      graph.
                                        have the graph of a
                                        horizontal parabola
                                        opening to the right, what
                                        would change the direction
                                        of the curve?

For the following exercises, describe the graph of the set of parametric equations.

42.          and is               43.          and is linear 44.                      and is

     linear                                                                   linear

45. Write the parametric          46. Write the parametric

     equations of a circle with        equations of an ellipse with

     center        radius 5, and       center        major axis of

     a counterclockwise                length 10, minor axis of

     orientation.                      length 6, and a

                                       counterclockwise

                                       orientation.
992 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph on the window  by  on the domain           for the

following values of and , and include the orientation.

47.                              48.                    49.

50.                                            51.      52.

Technology

For the following exercises, look at the graphs that were created by parametric equations of the form

Use the parametric mode on the graphing calculator to find the values of    and to achieve each graph.

53.

54.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           10.7 · Parametric Equations: Graphs 993

55.

56.

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph the given parametric equations.

a.

b.

c.

57. Graph all three sets of    58. Graph all three sets of    59. Graph all three sets of
      parametric equations on        parametric equations on        parametric equations on
      the domain                     the domain                     the domain
994 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

60. The graph of each set of                   61. Explain the effect on the        62. Explain the effect on the
      parametric equations                                                                graph of the parametric
      appears to "creep" along                 graph of the parametric                    equation when we
      one of the axes. What                                                               changed the domain.
      controls which axis the                  equation when we
      graph creeps along?
                                               switched      and              .

Extensions                                                       64. A skateboarder riding on a level surface at a

63. An object is thrown in the air with vertical velocity         constant speed of 9 ft/s throws a ball in the air,
      of 20 ft/s and horizontal velocity of 15 ft/s. The
      object's height can be described by the equation            the height of which can be described by the
                                 , while the object moves
      horizontally with constant velocity 15 ft/s. Write          equation                 Write
      parametric equations for the object's position,
      and then eliminate time to write height as a                parametric equations for the ball's position, and
      function of horizontal position.
                                                                  then eliminate time to write height as a function

                                                                  of horizontal position.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A dart is thrown upward with an initial velocity of 65 ft/s at an angle of
elevation of 52°. Consider the position of the dart at any time Neglect air resistance.

65. Find parametric equations                  66. Find all possible values of      67. When will the dart hit the
      that model the problem                         that represent the                   ground?
      situation.                                     situation.

68. Find the maximum height                    69. At what time will the dart
      of the dart.                                   reach maximum height?

For the following exercises, look at the graphs of each of the four parametric equations. Although they look unusual and
beautiful, they are so common that they have names, as indicated in each exercise. Use a graphing utility to graph each
on the indicated domain.

70. An epicycloid:                             on the            71. A hypocycloid:                                 on the

domain              .                                             domain             .

72. A hypotrochoid:                                      on      73. A rose:               on the domain

the domain             .                                                         .

10.8 Vectors

Learning Objectives

In this section you will:
           View vectors geometrically.
           Find magnitude and direction.
           Perform vector addition and scalar multiplication.
           Find the component form of a vector.
           Find the unit vector in the direction of .
           Perform operations with vectors in terms of and .
           Find the dot product of two vectors.

An airplane is flying at an airspeed of 200 miles per hour headed on a SE bearing of 140°. A north wind (from north to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                           10.8 · Vectors 995

south) is blowing at 16.2 miles per hour, as shown in Figure 1. What are the ground speed and actual bearing of the
plane?

                                                 Figure 1

Ground speed refers to the speed of a plane relative to the ground. Airspeed refers to the speed a plane can travel
relative to its surrounding air mass. These two quantities are not the same because of the effect of wind. In an earlier
section, we used triangles to solve a similar problem involving the movement of boats. Later in this section, we will find
the airplane's groundspeed and bearing, while investigating another approach to problems of this type. First, however,
let's examine the basics of vectors.

A Geometric View of Vectors

A vector is a specific quantity drawn as a line segment with an arrowhead at one end. It has an initial point, where it
begins, and a terminal point, where it ends. A vector is defined by its magnitude, or the length of the line, and its
direction, indicated by an arrowhead at the terminal point. Thus, a vector is a directed line segment. There are various
symbols that distinguish vectors from other quantities:

· Lower case, boldfaced type, with or without an arrow on top such as

· Given initial point and terminal point a vector can be represented as  The arrowhead on top is what

indicates that it is not just a line, but a directed line segment.

· Given an initial point of  and terminal point  a vector may be represented as

This last symbol  has special significance. It is called the standard position. The position vector has an initial point

and a terminal point         To change any vector into the position vector, we think about the change in the

x-coordinates and the change in the y-coordinates. Thus, if the initial point of a vector is  and the terminal

point is          then the position vector is found by calculating

In Figure 2, we see the original vector and the position vector

                                                 Figure 2
996 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Properties of Vectors

A vector is a directed line segment with an initial point and a terminal point. Vectors are identified by magnitude, or

the length of the line, and direction, represented by the arrowhead pointing toward the terminal point. The position

vector has an initial point at                 and is identified by its terminal point

EXAMPLE 1

Find the Position Vector                       and terminal point is                    Find the position vector.
Consider the vector whose initial point is

     Solution
The position vector is found by subtracting one x-coordinate from the other x-coordinate, and one y-coordinate from the
other y-coordinate. Thus

The position vector begins at        and terminates at            The graphs of both vectors are shown in Figure 3.

                                                        Figure 3

We see that the position vector is

EXAMPLE 2

Drawing a Vector with the Given Criteria and Its Equivalent Position Vector

Find the position vector given that vector has an initial point at                      and a terminal point at  then graph both

vectors in the same plane.

     Solution
The position vector is found using the following calculation:

Thus, the position vector begins at            and terminates at    See Figure 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       10.8 · Vectors 997

                         Figure 4

    TRY IT #1 Draw a vector that connects from the origin to the point

Finding Magnitude and Direction

To work with a vector, we need to be able to find its magnitude and its direction. We find its magnitude using the
Pythagorean Theorem or the distance formula, and we find its direction using the inverse tangent function.

  Magnitude and Direction of a Vector

Given a position vector  the magnitude is found by                      The direction is equal to the angle

formed with the x-axis, or with the y-axis, depending on the application. For a position vector, the direction is found

by                       as illustrated in Figure 5.

                                                                            Figure 5

Two vectors v and u are considered equal if they have the same magnitude and the same direction. Additionally, if
both vectors have the same position vector, they are equal.

  EXAMPLE 3                                                        and terminal point  Draw the

Finding the Magnitude and Direction of a Vector
Find the magnitude and direction of the vector with initial point
vector.

     Solution
First, find the position vector.
998 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

       We use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the magnitude.

       The direction is given as
       However, the angle terminates in the fourth quadrant, so we add 360° to obtain a positive angle. Thus,

                                      See Figure 6.

                                          Figure 6

EXAMPLE 4

Showing That Two Vectors Are Equal

Show that vector v with initial point at  and terminal point at  is equal to vector u with initial point at

       and terminal point at              Draw the position vector on the same grid as v and u. Next, find the magnitude

and direction of each vector.

Solution

As shown in Figure 7, draw the vector     starting at initial   and terminal point  Draw the vector with initial

point      and terminal point             Find the standard position for each.

Next, find and sketch the position vector for v and u. We have

Since the position vectors are the same, v and u are the same.

An alternative way to check for vector equality is to show that the magnitude and direction are the same for both
vectors. To show that the magnitudes are equal, use the Pythagorean Theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           10.8 · Vectors 999

As the magnitudes are equal, we now need to verify the direction. Using the tangent function with the position vector
gives

However, we can see that the position vector terminates in the second quadrant, so we add  Thus, the direction is

                     Figure 7

Performing Vector Addition and Scalar Multiplication

Now that we understand the properties of vectors, we can perform operations involving them. While it is convenient to

think of the vector  as an arrow or directed line segment from the origin to the point     vectors can be

situated anywhere in the plane. The sum of two vectors u and v, or vector addition, produces a third vector u+ v, the

resultant vector.

To find u + v, we first draw the vector u, and from the terminal end of u, we drawn the vector v. In other words, we have
the initial point of v meet the terminal end of u. This position corresponds to the notion that we move along the first
vector and then, from its terminal point, we move along the second vector. The sum u + v is the resultant vector because
it results from addition or subtraction of two vectors. The resultant vector travels directly from the beginning of u to the
end of v in a straight path, as shown in Figure 8.

                                                                              Figure 8

Vector subtraction is similar to vector addition. To find u - v, view it as u + (-v). Adding -v is reversing direction of v and
adding it to the end of u. The new vector begins at the start of u and stops at the end point of -v. See Figure 9 for a
visual that compares vector addition and vector subtraction using parallelograms.
1000 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

                                                              Figure 9

EXAMPLE 5

Adding and Subtracting Vectors

Given              and                          find two new vectors u + v, and u - v.

     Solution
To find the sum of two vectors, we add the components. Thus,

See Figure 10(a).                                                                       Thus,
To find the difference of two vectors, add the negative components of to

See Figure 10(b).

                                 Figure 10 (a) Sum of two vectors (b) Difference of two vectors

Multiplying By a Scalar

While adding and subtracting vectors gives us a new vector with a different magnitude and direction, the process of
multiplying a vector by a scalar, a constant, changes only the magnitude of the vector or the length of the line. Scalar
multiplication has no effect on the direction unless the scalar is negative, in which case the direction of the resulting
vector is opposite the direction of the original vector.

Scalar Multiplication

Scalar multiplication involves the product of a vector and a scalar. Each component of the vector is multiplied by the

scalar. Thus, to multiply                       by , we have

Only the magnitude changes, unless is negative, and then the vector reverses direction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      10.8 · Vectors 1001

EXAMPLE 6

Performing Scalar Multiplication

Given vector       find 3v,       and -v.

     Solution                                              then
See Figure 11 for a geometric interpretation. If

                                                           Figure 11

     Analysis                                              is half the length of v, and -v is the same length of v, but in
Notice that the vector 3v is three times the length of v,
the opposite direction.

TRY IT #2 Find the scalar multiple 3 given

EXAMPLE 7

Using Vector Addition and Scalar Multiplication to Find a New Vector

Given         and                 find a new vector w = 3u + 2v.

     Solution
First, we must multiply each vector by the scalar.

Then, add the two together.
1002 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

So,

Finding Component Form

In some applications involving vectors, it is helpful for us to be able to break a vector down into its components. Vectors

are comprised of two components: the horizontal component is the direction, and the vertical component is the

direction. For example, we can see in the graph in Figure 12 that the position vector    comes from adding the

vectors v1 and v2. We have v1 with initial point  and terminal point

We also have v2 with initial point              and terminal point

Therefore, the position vector is

Using the Pythagorean Theorem, the magnitude of v1 is 2, and the magnitude of v2 is 3. To find the magnitude of v, use
the formula with the position vector.

The magnitude of v is            To find the direction, we use the tangent function

                                                          Figure 12

Thus, the magnitude of is           and the direction is            off the horizontal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           10.8 · Vectors 1003

  EXAMPLE 8                                           and terminal point

Finding the Components of the Vector
Find the components of the vector with initial point

     Solution
First find the standard position.

See the illustration in Figure 13.

The horizontal component is                            Figure 13
                                    and the vertical component is

Finding the Unit Vector in the Direction of v

In addition to finding a vector's components, it is also useful in solving problems to find a vector in the same direction as
the given vector, but of magnitude 1. We call a vector with a magnitude of 1 a unit vector. We can then preserve the
direction of the original vector while simplifying calculations.

Unit vectors are defined in terms of components. The horizontal unit vector is written as  and is directed along

the positive horizontal axis. The vertical unit vector is written as  and is directed along the positive vertical axis.

See Figure 14.

                                                                           Figure 14

The Unit Vectors

If is a nonzero vector, then is a unit vector in the direction of Any vector divided by its magnitude is a unit
vector. Notice that magnitude is always a scalar, and dividing by a scalar is the same as multiplying by the reciprocal
of the scalar.
1004 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

          EXAMPLE 9
        Finding the Unit Vector in the Direction of v
        Find a unit vector in the same direction as

             Solution
        First, we will find the magnitude.

        Then we divide each component by which gives a unit vector in the same direction as v:

        or, in component form

        See Figure 15.

                                                                             Figure 15  is given as
Verify that the magnitude of the unit vector equals 1. The magnitude of

The vector u  i  j is the unit vector in the same direction as v

Performing Operations with Vectors in Terms of i and j

So far, we have investigated the basics of vectors: magnitude and direction, vector addition and subtraction, scalar
multiplication, the components of vectors, and the representation of vectors geometrically. Now that we are familiar
with the general strategies used in working with vectors, we will represent vectors in rectangular coordinates in terms of
i and j.

Access for free at openstax.org
Vectors in the Rectangular Plane          and terminal point                                                               10.8 · Vectors 1005
Given a vector with initial point
                                                                            v is written as
The position vector from  to              where             and              is written as v = ai + bj. This vector

sum is called a linear combination of the vectors i and j.

The magnitude of v = ai + bj is given as                    See Figure 16.

                                                 Figure 16

EXAMPLE 10

Writing a Vector in Terms of i and j      and terminal point                write the vector in terms of and
Given a vector with initial point

     Solution
Begin by writing the general form of the vector. Then replace the coordinates with the given values.

EXAMPLE 11

Writing a Vector in Terms of i and j Using Initial and Terminal Points

Given initial point       and terminal point                write the vector in terms of and

     Solution
Begin by writing the general form of the vector. Then replace the coordinates with the given values.

TRY IT #3 Write the vector with initial point                    and terminal point                   in terms of and

Performing Operations on Vectors in Terms of i and j

When vectors are written in terms of and we can carry out addition, subtraction, and scalar multiplication by
performing operations on corresponding components.
1006 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

          Adding and Subtracting Vectors in Rectangular Coordinates
          Given v = ai + bj and u = ci + dj, then

EXAMPLE 12

Finding the Sum of the Vectors

Find the sum of                  and

     Solution
According to the formula, we have

Calculating the Component Form of a Vector: Direction

We have seen how to draw vectors according to their initial and terminal points and how to find the position vector. We

have also examined notation for vectors drawn specifically in the Cartesian coordinate plane using            For any of

these vectors, we can calculate the magnitude. Now, we want to combine the key points, and look further at the ideas of

magnitude and direction.

Calculating direction follows the same straightforward process we used for polar coordinates. We find the direction of
the vector by finding the angle to the horizontal. We do this by using the basic trigonometric identities, but with
replacing

Vector Components in Terms of Magnitude and Direction

Given a position vector               and a direction angle

Thus,                                 and magnitude is expressed as

EXAMPLE 13

Writing a Vector in Terms of Magnitude and Direction
Write a vector with length 7 at an angle of 135° to the positive x-axis in terms of magnitude and direction.

Solution

Using the conversion formulas         and                            we find that

This vector can be written as                                or simplified as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      10.8 · Vectors 1007

TRY IT #4    A vector travels from the origin to the point         Write the vector in terms of magnitude and
             direction.

Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors

As we discussed earlier in the section, scalar multiplication involves multiplying a vector by a scalar, and the result is a
vector. As we have seen, multiplying a vector by a number is called scalar multiplication. If we multiply a vector by a
vector, there are two possibilities: the dot product and the cross product. We will only examine the dot product here; you
may encounter the cross product in more advanced mathematics courses.

The dot product of two vectors involves multiplying two vectors together, and the result is a scalar.

Dot Product

The dot product of two vectors           and  is the sum of the product of the horizontal components and

the product of the vertical components.

To find the angle between the two vectors, use the formula below.

EXAMPLE 14

Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors

Find the dot product of         and

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

  EXAMPLE 15
Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors and the Angle between Them
Find the dot product of v1 = 5i + 2j and v2 = 3i + 7j. Then, find the angle between the two vectors.

     Solution
Finding the dot product, we multiply corresponding components.

To find the angle between them, we use the formula
1008 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

        See Figure 17.

                                                     Figure 17

EXAMPLE 16

Finding the Angle between Two Vectors

Find the angle between                          and

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

See Figure 18.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                           10.8 · Vectors 1009

                                                                             Figure 18
  EXAMPLE 17
Finding Ground Speed and Bearing Using Vectors
We now have the tools to solve the problem we introduced in the opening of the section.
An airplane is flying at an airspeed of 200 miles per hour headed on a SE bearing of 140°. A north wind (from north to
south) is blowing at 16.2 miles per hour. What are the ground speed and actual bearing of the plane? See Figure 19.

                                             Figure 19

     Solution                       in the diagram, and we need to find the angle  in order to calculate the adjusted
The ground speed is represented by
bearing, which will be

Notice in Figure 19, that angle  must be equal to angle  by the rule of alternating interior angles, so angle

is 140°. We can find by the Law of Cosines:

The ground speed is approximately 213 miles per hour. Now we can calculate the bearing using the Law of Sines.
1010 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Therefore, the plane has a SE bearing of 140°+2.8°=142.8°. The ground speed is 212.7 miles per hour.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with vectors.

     Introduction to Vectors (http://openstax.org/l/introvectors)
     Vector Operations (http://openstax.org/l/vectoroperation)
     The Unit Vector (http://openstax.org/l/unitvector)

        10.8 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What are the characteristics                 2. How is a vector more           3. What are and and what
    of the letters that are                         specific than a line              do they represent?
    commonly used to                                segment?
    represent vectors?

4. What is component form?                      5. When a unit vector is

                                                expressed as      which

                                                letter is the coefficient of the

                                                and which the

Algebraic

6. Given a vector with initial                  7. Given a vector with initial    8. Given a vector with initial

     point  and terminal                        point         and terminal        point    and terminal

     point             find an                  point             find an         point             find an

     equivalent vector whose                    equivalent vector whose           equivalent vector whose

     initial point is  Write                    initial point is  Write           initial point is  Write

     the vector in component                    the vector in component           the vector in component

     form                                       form                              form

For the following exercises, determine whether the two vectors and are equal, where                 has an initial point   and a
terminal point and has an initial point and a terminal point .                                                        and

9.                                                    and         10.

11.                                                        and 12.                                                and

13.                                             and               14. Given initial point           and terminal point

                                                                                  write the vector in terms of and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        10.8 · Vectors 1011

15. Given initial point             and terminal point

                      write the vector in terms of and

For the following exercises, use the vectors u = i + 5j, v = -2i- 3j, and w = 4i - j.

16. Find u + (v - w)                17. Find 4v + 2u

For the following exercises, use the given vectors to compute u + v, u - v, and 2u - 3v.

18.                                 19.                                20. Let v = -4i + 3j. Find a

                                                                              vector that is half the

                                                                              length and points in the

                                                                              same direction as

21. Let v = 5i + 2j. Find a vector
      that is twice the length and
      points in the opposite
      direction as

For the following exercises, find a unit vector in the same direction as the given vector.

22. a = 3i + 4j                     23. b = -2i + 5j                   24. c = 10i - j

25.                                 26. u = 100i + 200j                27. u = -14i + 2j

For the following exercises, find the magnitude and direction of the vector,

28.                                 29.                                30.

31.                                 32. Given u = 3i - 4j and v = -2i 33. Given u = -i - j and v = i +

                                         + 3j, calculate                      5j, calculate

34. Given               and         35. Given u                 and v
                 calculate                            calculate

Graphical

For the following exercises, given draw 3v and

36.                                 37.                                38.
1012 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch u + v, u - v, and 2u.

39.                              40.                                  41.

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch 2u + v.

42.                                             43.

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch u - 3v.

44.                                             45.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              10.8 · Vectors 1013

For the following exercises, write the vector shown in component form.

46.                                 47.                                  48. Given initial point

                                                                                     and terminal

                                                                              point               write

                                                                              the vector in terms of

                                                                              and then draw the vector

                                                                              on the graph.

49. Given initial point             50. Given initial point

            and terminal                        and terminal

     point               write           point               write

     the vector in terms of              the vector in terms of

     and Draw the points and             and Draw the points and

     the vector on the graph.            the vector on the graph.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use the given magnitude and direction in standard position, write the vector in component
form.

51.                                 52.                                  53.

54.                                 55. A 60-pound box is resting        56. A 25-pound box is resting
                                          on a ramp that is inclined           on a ramp that is inclined
57. Find the magnitude of the             12°. Rounding to the                 8°. Rounding to the nearest
      horizontal and vertical             nearest tenth,                       tenth,
      components of a vector
      with magnitude 8 pounds           Find the magnitude of                Find the magnitude of
      pointed in a direction of
      27° above the horizontal.           the normal (perpendicular)           the normal (perpendicular)
      Round to the nearest                component of the force.              component of the force.
      hundredth.
                                        Find the magnitude of                Find the magnitude of

                                          the component of the force           the component of the force
                                          that is parallel to the ramp.        that is parallel to the ramp.

                                    58. Find the magnitude of the        59. Find the magnitude of the
                                          horizontal and vertical              horizontal and vertical
                                          components of the vector             components of a vector
                                          with magnitude 4 pounds              with magnitude 5 pounds
                                          pointed in a direction of            pointed in a direction of
                                          127° above the horizontal.           55° above the horizontal.
                                          Round to the nearest                 Round to the nearest
                                          hundredth.                           hundredth.

60. Find the magnitude of the
      horizontal and vertical
      components of the vector
      with magnitude 1 pound
      pointed in a direction of 8°
      above the horizontal.
      Round to the nearest
      hundredth.
1014 10 · Further Applications of Trigonometry

Real-World Applications                         62. A boat leaves the marina        63. A man starts walking from
                                                      and sails 6 miles north,            home and walks 4 miles
61. A woman leaves home and                           then 2 miles northeast.             east, 2 miles southeast, 5
      walks 3 miles west, then 2                      How far from the marina is          miles south, 4 miles
      miles southwest. How far                        the boat, and in what               southwest, and 2 miles
      from home is she, and in                        direction must it sail to           east. How far has he
      what direction must she                         head directly back to the           walked? If he walked
      walk to head directly                           marina?                             straight home, how far
      home?                                                                               would he have to walk?

64. A woman starts walking                      65. A man starts walking from       66. A woman starts walking
      from home and walks 4                           home and walks 3 miles at           from home and walks 6
      miles east, 7 miles                             20° north of west, then 5           miles at 40° north of east,
      southeast, 6 miles south, 5                     miles at 10° west of south,         then 2 miles at 15° east of
      miles southwest, and 3                          then 4 miles at 15° north of        south, then 5 miles at 30°
      miles east. How far has she                     east. If he walked straight         south of west. If she
      walked? If she walked                           home, how far would he              walked straight home, how
      straight home, how far                          have to the walk, and in            far would she have to walk,
      would she have to walk?                         what direction?                     and in what direction?

67. An airplane is heading                      68. An airplane is heading          69. An airplane needs to head
      north at an airspeed of 600                     north at an airspeed of 500         due north, but there is a
      km/hr, but there is a wind                      km/hr, but there is a wind          wind blowing from the
      blowing from the                                blowing from the                    southwest at 60 km/hr. The
      southwest at 80 km/hr.                          northwest at 50 km/hr.              plane flies with an airspeed
      How many degrees off                            How many degrees off                of 550 km/hr. To end up
      course will the plane end                       course will the plane end           flying due north, how many
      up flying, and what is the                      up flying, and what is the          degrees west of north will
      plane's speed relative to                       plane's speed relative to           the pilot need to fly the
      the ground?                                     the ground?                         plane?

70. An airplane needs to head                   71. As part of a video game,        72. As part of a video game,
      due north, but there is a
      wind blowing from the                     the point  is rotated               the point  is rotated
      northwest at 80 km/hr. The
      plane flies with an airspeed              counterclockwise about the          counterclockwise about the
      of 500 km/hr. To end up
      flying due north, how many                origin through an angle of          origin through an angle of
      degrees west of north will
      the pilot need to fly the                 35°. Find the new                   40°. Find the new
      plane?
                                                coordinates of this point.          coordinates of this point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             10.8 · Vectors 1015

73. Two children are throwing       74. Two children are throwing        75. A 50-pound object rests on
      a ball back and forth               a ball back and forth                a ramp that is inclined 19°.
      straight across the back            straight across the back             Find the magnitude of the
      seat of a car. The ball is          seat of a car. The ball is           components of the force
      being thrown 10 mph                 being thrown 8 mph                   parallel to and
      relative to the car, and the        relative to the car, and the         perpendicular to (normal)
      car is traveling 25 mph             car is traveling 45 mph              the ramp to the nearest
      down the road. If one child         down the road. If one child          tenth of a pound.
      doesn't catch the ball, and         doesn't catch the ball, and
      it flies out the window, in         it flies out the window, in
      what direction does the             what direction does the
      ball fly (ignoring wind             ball fly (ignoring wind
      resistance)?                        resistance)?

76. Suppose a body has a force      77. Suppose a body has a force       78. The condition of
      of 10 pounds acting on it to        of 10 pounds acting on it to         equilibrium is when the
      the right, 25 pounds acting         the right, 25 pounds acting          sum of the forces acting on
      on it upward, and 5 pounds          on it 135° from the                  a body is the zero vector.
      acting on it 45° from the           horizontal, and 5 pounds             Suppose a body has a force
      horizontal. What single             acting on it directed 150°           of 2 pounds acting on it to
      force is the resultant force        from the horizontal. What            the right, 5 pounds acting
      acting on the body?                 single force is the resultant        on it upward, and 3 pounds
                                          force acting on the body?            acting on it 45° from the
                                                                               horizontal. What single
                                                                               force is needed to produce
                                                                               a state of equilibrium on
                                                                               the body?

79. Suppose a body has a force
      of 3 pounds acting on it to
      the left, 4 pounds acting on
      it upward, and 2 pounds
      acting on it 30° from the
      horizontal. What single
      force is needed to produce
      a state of equilibrium on
      the body? Draw the vector.
1016 10 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

altitude a perpendicular line from one vertex of a triangle to the opposite side, or in the case of an obtuse triangle, to

the line containing the opposite side, forming two right triangles

ambiguous case a scenario in which more than one triangle is a valid solution for a given oblique SSA triangle

Archimedes' spiral a polar curve given by      When multiplied by a constant, the equation appears as               As

the curve continues to widen in a spiral path over the domain.

argument the angle associated with a complex number; the angle between the line from the origin to the point and

the positive real axis

cardioid a member of the limaçon family of curves, named for its resemblance to a heart; its equation is given as

                and                     where

convex limaon a type of one-loop limaçon represented by                    and                     such that

De Moivre's Theorem formula used to find the power or nth roots of a complex number; states that, for a positive

integer     is found by raising the modulus to the power and multiplying the angles by

dimpled limaon a type of one-loop limaçon represented by                   and                      such that

dot product given two vectors, the sum of the product of the horizontal components and the product of the vertical

components

Generalized Pythagorean Theorem an extension of the Law of Cosines; relates the sides of an oblique triangle and is

used for SAS and SSS triangles

initial point the origin of a vector

inner-loop limaçon a polar curve similar to the cardioid, but with an inner loop; passes through the pole twice;

represented by                     and         where

Law of Cosines states that the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides

minus twice the product of the other two sides and the cosine of the included angle

Law of Sines states that the ratio of the measurement of one angle of a triangle to the length of its opposite side is

equal to the remaining two ratios of angle measure to opposite side; any pair of proportions may be used to solve for

a missing angle or side

lemniscate a polar curve resembling a figure 8 and given by the equation                     and

magnitude the length of a vector; may represent a quantity such as speed, and is calculated using the Pythagorean

Theorem

modulus the absolute value of a complex number, or the distance from the origin to the point        also called the

amplitude

oblique triangle any triangle that is not a right triangle

one-loop limaon a polar curve represented by                and                 such that                      and

may be dimpled or convex; does not pass through the pole

parameter a variable, often representing time, upon which and are both dependent

polar axis on the polar grid, the equivalent of the positive x-axis on the rectangular grid

polar coordinates on the polar grid, the coordinates of a point labeled    where indicates the angle of rotation

from the polar axis and represents the radius, or the distance of the point from the pole in the direction of

polar equation an equation describing a curve on the polar grid.

polar form of a complex number a complex number expressed in terms of an angle and its distance from the origin

can be found by using conversion formulas                                  and

pole the origin of the polar grid

resultant a vector that results from addition or subtraction of two vectors, or from scalar multiplication

rose curve a polar equation resembling a flower, given by the equations              and                    when is even

there are petals, and the curve is highly symmetrical; when is odd there are petals.

scalar a quantity associated with magnitude but not direction; a constant

scalar multiplication the product of a constant and each component of a vector

standard position the placement of a vector with the initial point at      and the terminal point           represented by

the change in the x-coordinates and the change in the y-coordinates of the original vector

terminal point the end point of a vector, usually represented by an arrow indicating its direction

unit vector a vector that begins at the origin and has magnitude of 1; the horizontal unit vector runs along the x-axis

and is defined as                the vertical unit vector runs along the y-axis and is defined as

vector a quantity associated with both magnitude and direction, represented as a directed line segment with a starting

point (initial point) and an end point (terminal point)

vector addition the sum of two vectors, found by adding corresponding components

Access for free at openstax.org
                              10 · Chapter Review 1017

Key Equations

  Law of Sines

  Area for oblique triangles

Law of Cosines
Heron's formula

  Conversion formulas

Key Concepts

10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines

  · The Law of Sines can be used to solve oblique triangles, which are non-right triangles.
  · According to the Law of Sines, the ratio of the measurement of one of the angles to the length of its opposite side

      equals the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side.
  · There are three possible cases: ASA, AAS, SSA. Depending on the information given, we can choose the appropriate

      equation to find the requested solution. See Example 1.
  · The ambiguous case arises when an oblique triangle can have different outcomes.
  · There are three possible cases that arise from SSA arrangement--a single solution, two possible solutions, and no

      solution. See Example 2 and Example 3.
  · The Law of Sines can be used to solve triangles with given criteria. See Example 4.
  · The general area formula for triangles translates to oblique triangles by first finding the appropriate height value.

      See Example 5.
  · There are many trigonometric applications. They can often be solved by first drawing a diagram of the given

      information and then using the appropriate equation. See Example 6.

10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines

  · The Law of Cosines defines the relationship among angle measurements and lengths of sides in oblique triangles.
  · The Generalized Pythagorean Theorem is the Law of Cosines for two cases of oblique triangles: SAS and SSS.

      Dropping an imaginary perpendicular splits the oblique triangle into two right triangles or forms one right triangle,
      which allows sides to be related and measurements to be calculated. See Example 1 and Example 2.
  · The Law of Cosines is useful for many types of applied problems. The first step in solving such problems is generally
      to draw a sketch of the problem presented. If the information given fits one of the three models (the three
      equations), then apply the Law of Cosines to find a solution. See Example 3 and Example 4.
  · Heron's formula allows the calculation of area in oblique triangles. All three sides must be known to apply Heron's
      formula. See Example 5 and See Example 6.
1018 10 · Chapter Review

10.3 Polar Coordinates

· The polar grid is represented as a series of concentric circles radiating out from the pole, or origin.

· To plot a point in the form                    move in a counterclockwise direction from the polar axis by an angle of

and then extend a directed line segment from the pole the length of in the direction of If is negative, move in a

clockwise direction, and extend a directed line segment the length of in the direction of See Example 1.

· If is negative, extend the directed line segment in the opposite direction of See Example 2.

· To convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates, use the formulas            and                 See

Example 3 and Example 4.

· To convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, use one or more of the formulas:

                                          and         See Example 5.

· Transforming equations between polar and rectangular forms means making the appropriate substitutions based

on the available formulas, together with algebraic manipulations. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8.

· Using the appropriate substitutions makes it possible to rewrite a polar equation as a rectangular equation, and

then graph it in the rectangular plane. See Example 9, Example 10, and Example 11.

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs

· It is easier to graph polar equations if we can test the equations for symmetry with respect to the line      the

polar axis, or the pole.

· There are three symmetry tests that indicate whether the graph of a polar equation will exhibit symmetry. If an

equation fails a symmetry test, the graph may or may not exhibit symmetry. See Example 1.

· Polar equations may be graphed by making a table of values for and

· The maximum value of a polar equation is found by substituting the value that leads to the maximum value of the

trigonometric expression.

· The zeros of a polar equation are found by setting  and solving for See Example 2.

· Some formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar coordinates are given by            and                    See

Example 3.

· The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by                 and                      for

and                       See Example 4.

· The formulas that produce the graphs of a one-loop limaçon are given by                  and                  for

            See Example 5.

· The formulas that produce the graphs of an inner-loop limaçon are given by                and                           for

            and                  See Example 6.

· The formulas that produce the graphs of a lemniscates are given by                  and                       where

See Example 7.

· The formulas that produce the graphs of rose curves are given by            and                 where                if is

even, there are petals, and if is odd, there are petals. See Example 8 and Example 9.

· The formula that produces the graph of an Archimedes' spiral is given by             See Example 10.

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers

· Complex numbers in the form             are plotted in the complex plane similar to the way rectangular coordinates are

plotted in the rectangular plane. Label the x-axis as the real axis and the y-axis as the imaginary axis. See Example 1.

· The absolute value of a complex number is the same as its magnitude. It is the distance from the origin to the point:

            See Example 2 and Example 3.

· To write complex numbers in polar form, we use the formulas                          and                      Then,

                                     See Example 4 and Example 5.
· To convert from polar form to rectangular form, first evaluate the trigonometric functions. Then, multiply through

    by See Example 6 and Example 7.
· To find the product of two complex numbers, multiply the two moduli and add the two angles. Evaluate the

    trigonometric functions, and multiply using the distributive property. See Example 8.
· To find the quotient of two complex numbers in polar form, find the quotient of the two moduli and the difference

    of the two angles. See Example 9.
· To find the power of a complex number raise to the power and multiply by See Example 10.
· Finding the roots of a complex number is the same as raising a complex number to a power, but using a rational

    exponent. See Example 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10 · Chapter Review 1019

10.6 Parametric Equations

· Parameterizing a curve involves translating a rectangular equation in two variables, and into two equations in
   three variables, x, y, and t. Often, more information is obtained from a set of parametric equations. See Example 1,
    Example 2, and Example 3.

· Sometimes equations are simpler to graph when written in rectangular form. By eliminating an equation in and
      is the result.

· To eliminate solve one of the equations for and substitute the expression into the second equation. See
    Example 4, Example 5, Example 6, and Example 7.

· Finding the rectangular equation for a curve defined parametrically is basically the same as eliminating the
    parameter. Solve for in one of the equations, and substitute the expression into the second equation. See Example
    8.

· There are an infinite number of ways to choose a set of parametric equations for a curve defined as a rectangular
    equation.

· Find an expression for such that the domain of the set of parametric equations remains the same as the original
    rectangular equation. See Example 9.

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs

· When there is a third variable, a third parameter on which and depend, parametric equations can be used.

· To graph parametric equations by plotting points, make a table with three columns labeled        and       Choose

values for in increasing order. Plot the last two columns for and See Example 1 and Example 2.

· When graphing a parametric curve by plotting points, note the associated t-values and show arrows on the graph

indicating the orientation of the curve. See Example 3 and Example 4.

· Parametric equations allow the direction or the orientation of the curve to be shown on the graph. Equations that

are not functions can be graphed and used in many applications involving motion. See Example 5.

· Projectile motion depends on two parametric equations:                  and                           Initial

velocity is symbolized as       represents the initial angle of the object when thrown, and represents the height at

which the object is propelled.

10.8 Vectors

· The position vector has its initial point at the origin. See Example 1.
· If the position vector is the same for two vectors, they are equal. See Example 2.
· Vectors are defined by their magnitude and direction. See Example 3.
· If two vectors have the same magnitude and direction, they are equal. See Example 4.
· Vector addition and subtraction result in a new vector found by adding or subtracting corresponding elements. See

    Example 5.
· Scalar multiplication is multiplying a vector by a constant. Only the magnitude changes; the direction stays the

    same. See Example 6 and Example 7.
· Vectors are comprised of two components: the horizontal component along the positive x-axis, and the vertical

   component along the positive y-axis. See Example 8.
· The unit vector in the same direction of any nonzero vector is found by dividing the vector by its magnitude.

· The magnitude of a vector in the rectangular coordinate system is                See Example 9.

· In the rectangular coordinate system, unit vectors may be represented in terms of and where represents the

horizontal component and represents the vertical component. Then, v = ai + bj is a scalar multiple of by real

numbers       See Example 10 and Example 11.

· Adding and subtracting vectors in terms of i and j consists of adding or subtracting corresponding coefficients of i

and corresponding coefficients of j. See Example 12.

· A vector v = ai + bj is written in terms of magnitude and direction as                     See Example 13.

· The dot product of two vectors is the product of the terms plus the product of the terms. See Example 14.

· We can use the dot product to find the angle between two vectors. Example 15 and Example 16.

· Dot products are useful for many types of physics applications. See Example 17.
1020 10 · Exercises

Exercises

Review Exercises

Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines

For the following exercises, assume is opposite side  is opposite side and is opposite side Solve each triangle,
if possible. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.                        3. Solve the triangle.

1.                                 2.

4. Find the area of the triangle.  5. A pilot is flying over a straight
                                       highway. He determines the angles
                                       of depression to two mileposts, 2.1
                                       km apart, to be 25° and 49°, as
                                       shown in Figure 1. Find the
                                       distance of the plane from point
                                       and the elevation of the plane.

                                       Figure 1

Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines    Solve the triangle in Figure  8. Find the area of a triangle
6. Solve the triangle, rounding 7.     2, rounding to the nearest        with sides of length 8.3, 6.6,
                                       tenth.                            and 9.1.
    to the nearest tenth,
    assuming is opposite side

          is opposite side and
    s opposite side

                                       Figure 2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       10 · Exercises 1021

9. To find the distance between two
    cities, a satellite calculates the
    distances and angle shown in
    Figure 3 (not to scale). Find the
    distance between the cities. Round
    answers to the nearest tenth.

             Figure 3

Polar Coordinates                11. Plot the point with polar       12. Convert         to
10. Plot the point with polar          coordinates
                                                                          rectangular coordinates.
      coordinates

13. Convert  to                  14. Convert         to polar        15. Convert         to polar
                                       coordinates.                        coordinates.
     rectangular coordinates.

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian equation to a polar equation.

16.                              17.                                 18.

For the following exercises, convert the given polar equation to a Cartesian equation.

19.                              20.

For the following exercises, convert to rectangular form and graph.

21.                              22.

Polar Coordinates: Graphs

For the following exercises, test each equation for symmetry.

23.                              24.                                 25. Sketch a graph of the polar
                                                                           equation
                                                                           Label the axis intercepts.

26. Sketch a graph of the polar  27. Sketch a graph of the polar
      equation                         equation
1022 10 · Exercises

Polar Form of Complex Numbers
For the following exercises, find the absolute value of each complex number.

28.                              29.

Write the complex number in polar form.

30.                              31.

For the following exercises, convert the complex number from polar to rectangular form.

32.                              33.

For the following exercises, find the product     in polar form.

34.                              35.

For the following exercises, find the quotient    in polar form.

36.                              37.

For the following exercises, find the powers of each complex number in polar form.

38. Find when                    39. Find when

For the following exercises, evaluate each root.

40. Evaluate the cube root of    41. Evaluate the square root of
      when                               when

For the following exercises, plot the complex number in the complex plane.

42.                              43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       10 · Exercises 1023

Parametric Equations
For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter to rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation.

44.                               45.                                 46. Parameterize (write a

                                                                           parametric equation for)

                                                                           each Cartesian equation by

                                                                           using                 and

                                                                                            for

47. Parameterize the line from

           to        so that the

     line is at      at

     and         at

Parametric Equations: Graphs

For the following exercises, make a table of values for each set of parametric equations, graph the equations, and
include an orientation; then write the Cartesian equation.

48.                               49.                                 50.

51. A ball is launched with an initial velocity of 80 feet
      per second at an angle of 40° to the horizontal.
      The ball is released at a height of 4 feet above the
      ground.

    Find the parametric equations to model the

      path of the ball.

    Where is the ball after 3 seconds?
    How long is the ball in the air?

Vectors

For the following exercises, determine whether the two vectors, and   are equal, where has an initial point            and a
terminal point and has an initial point and a terminal point                                                      and

52.                                    and                  53.

For the following exercises, use the vectors                     and              to evaluate the expression.

54. u - v                         55. 2v - u + w

For the following exercises, find a unit vector in the same direction as the given vector.

56. a = 8i - 6j                   57. b = -3i - j
1024 10 · Exercises

For the following exercises, find the magnitude and direction of the vector.

58.                               59.

For the following exercises, calculate

60. u = -2i + j and v = 3i + 7j   61. u = i + 4j and v = 4i + 3j         62. Given v       draw v,
                                                                               2v, and v.

63. Given the vectors shown in Figure 46,4. Given initial point

     sketch u + v, u - v and 3v.               and terminal

                                        point                     write

                                        the vector in terms of

                                        and Draw the points and

                                        the vector on the graph.

                     Figure 4

Practice Test                     2. Find the area of the triangle  3. A pilot flies in a straight path
                                      in Figure 1. Round each           for 2 hours. He then makes
1. Assume is opposite side            answer to the nearest tenth.      a course correction, heading
          is opposite side and                                          15° to the right of his
                                                    Figure 1            original course, and flies 1
    is opposite side Solve the                                          hour in the new direction. If
    triangle, if possible, and                                          he maintains a constant
    round each answer to the                                            speed of 575 miles per hour,
    nearest tenth, given                                                how far is he from his
                                                                        starting position?

4. Convert           to polar     5. Convert   to                        6. Convert the polar equation
                                                                             to a Cartesian equation:
     coordinates, and then plot         rectangular coordinates.

     the point.

7. Convert to rectangular form    8. Test the equation for          9. Graph
    and graph:                        symmetry:

10. Graph                         11. Find the absolute value of         12. Write the complex number
                                        the complex number                     in polar form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 10 · Exercises 1025

13. Convert the complex
      number from polar to
      rectangular form:

Given              and                evaluate each expression.
14.
                                 15.                                      16.
17.
                                 18. Plot the complex number              19. Eliminate the parameter
                                                 in the complex                 to rewrite the following
                                                                                parametric equations as a
                                       plane.                                   Cartesian equation:

20. Parameterize (write a        21. Graph the set of                     22. A ball is launched with an
      parametric equation for)         parametric equations and                 initial velocity of 95 feet per
      the following Cartesian          find the Cartesian                       second at an angle of 52°
      equation by using                equation:                                to the horizontal. The ball
                           and                                                  is released at a height of
                                                                                3.5 feet above the ground.

                                                                              Find the parametric

                                                                                equations to model the
                                                                                path of the ball.

                                                                              Where is the ball after 2

                                                                                seconds?

                                                                              How long is the ball in

                                                                                the air?

For the following exercises, use the vectors u = i - 3j and v = 2i + 3j.

23. Find 2u - 3v.                24. Calculate                            25. Find a unit vector in the
                                                                                same direction as

26. Given vector has an initial

point              and

terminal point

                   write the

vector in terms of and

On the graph, draw and
1026 10 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                           11 · Introduction 1027

11  SYSTEMS OF EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES

Enigma machines like this one were used by government and military officials for enciphering and deciphering top-
secret communications during World War II. By varying the combinations of the plugboard and the settings of the
rotors, encoders could add complex encryption to their messages. Notice that the three rotors each contain 26 pins, one
for each letter of the alphabet; later versions had four and five rotors. (credit: modification of "Enigma Machine" by
School of Mathematics, University of Manchester/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables
  11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables
  11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables
  11.4 Partial Fractions
  11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations
  11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination
  11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses
  11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule

      Introduction to Systems of Equations and Inequalities

At the start of the Second World War, British military and intelligence officers recognized that defeating Nazi Germany
would require the Allies to know what the enemy was planning. This task was complicated by the fact that the German
military transmitted all of its communications through a presumably uncrackable code created by a machine called
Enigma. The Germans had been encoding their messages with this machine since the early 1930s, and were so confident
in its security that they used it for everyday military communications as well as highly important strategic messages.
Concerned about the increasing military threat, other European nations began working to decipher the Enigma codes.
Poland was the first country to make significant advances when it trained and recruited a new group of codebreakers:
math students from Pozna University. With the help of intelligence obtained by French spies, Polish mathematicians,
led by Marian Rejewski, were able to decipher initial codes and later to understand the wiring of the machines;
eventually they create replicas. However, the German military eventually increased the complexity of the machines by
adding additional rotors, requiring a new method of decryption.

The machine attached letters on a keyboard to three, four, or five rotors (depending on the version), each with 26
starting positions that could be set prior to encoding; a decryption code (called a cipher key) essentially conveyed these
settings to the message recipient, and allowed people to interpret the message using another Enigma machine. Even
with the simpler three-rotor scrambler, there were 17,576 different combinations of starting positions (26 x 26 x 26); plus
the machine had numerous other methods of introducing variation. Not long after the war started, the British recruited
a team of brilliant codebreakers to crack the Enigma code. The codebreakers, led by Alan Turing, used what they knew
1028 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        about the Enigma machine to build a mechanical computer that could crack the code. And that knowledge of what the
        Germans were planning proved to be a key part of the ultimate Allied victory of Nazi Germany in 1945.
        The Enigma is perhaps the most famous cryptographic device ever known. It stands as an example of the pivotal role
        cryptography has played in society. Now, technology has moved cryptanalysis to the digital world.
        Many ciphers are designed using invertible matrices as the method of message transference, as finding the inverse of a
        matrix is generally part of the process of decoding. In addition to knowing the matrix and its inverse, the receiver must
        also know the key that, when used with the matrix inverse, will allow the message to be read.
        In this chapter, we will investigate matrices and their inverses, and various ways to use matrices to solve systems of
        equations. First, however, we will study systems of equations on their own: linear and nonlinear, and then partial
        fractions. We will not be breaking any secret codes here, but we will lay the foundation for future courses.

    11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables

       Learning Objectives

        In this section, you will:
                   Solve systems of equations by graphing.
                   Solve systems of equations by substitution.
                   Solve systems of equations by addition.
                   Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing two variables.
                   Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing two variables.

                                                                     Figure 1 (credit: Thomas Sørenes)
        A skateboard manufacturer introduces a new line of boards. The manufacturer tracks its costs, which is the amount it
        spends to produce the boards, and its revenue, which is the amount it earns through sales of its boards. How can the
        company determine if it is making a profit with its new line? How many skateboards must be produced and sold before a
        profit is possible? In this section, we will consider linear equations with two variables to answer these and similar
        questions.

     Introduction to Systems of Equations

        In order to investigate situations such as that of the skateboard manufacturer, we need to recognize that we are dealing
        with more than one variable and likely more than one equation. A system of linear equations consists of two or more
        linear equations made up of two or more variables such that all equations in the system are considered simultaneously.
        To find the unique solution to a system of linear equations, we must find a numerical value for each variable in the
        system that will satisfy all equations in the system at the same time. Some linear systems may not have a solution and
        others may have an infinite number of solutions. In order for a linear system to have a unique solution, there must be at
        least as many equations as there are variables. Even so, this does not guarantee a unique solution.
        In this section, we will look at systems of linear equations in two variables, which consist of two equations that contain
        two different variables. For example, consider the following system of linear equations in two variables.

        The solution to a system of linear equations in two variables is any ordered pair that satisfies each equation
        independently. In this example, the ordered pair (4, 7) is the solution to the system of linear equations. We can verify the
        solution by substituting the values into each equation to see if the ordered pair satisfies both equations. Shortly we will
        investigate methods of finding such a solution if it exists.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1029

In addition to considering the number of equations and variables, we can categorize systems of linear equations by the
number of solutions. A consistent system of equations has at least one solution. A consistent system is considered to
be an independent system if it has a single solution, such as the example we just explored. The two lines have different
slopes and intersect at one point in the plane. A consistent system is considered to be a dependent system if the
equations have the same slope and the same y-intercepts. In other words, the lines coincide so the equations represent
the same line. Every point on the line represents a coordinate pair that satisfies the system. Thus, there are an infinite
number of solutions.

Another type of system of linear equations is an inconsistent system, which is one in which the equations represent
two parallel lines. The lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. There are no points common to both lines;
hence, there is no solution to the system.

Types of Linear Systems

There are three types of systems of linear equations in two variables, and three types of solutions.

· An independent system has exactly one solution pair         The point where the two lines intersect is the only

solution.

· An inconsistent system has no solution. Notice that the two lines are parallel and will never intersect.

· A dependent system has infinitely many solutions. The lines are coincident. They are the same line, so every

coordinate pair on the line is a solution to both equations.

Figure 2 compares graphical representations of each type of system.

                                                                            Figure 2

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a system of linear equations and an ordered pair, determine whether the ordered pair is a solution.
 1. Substitute the ordered pair into each equation in the system.
 2. Determine whether true statements result from the substitution in both equations; if so, the ordered pair is a

      solution.

EXAMPLE 1

Determining Whether an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to a System of Equations

Determine whether the ordered pair  is a solution to the given system of equations.
1030 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

     Solution                    into both equations.
Substitute the ordered pair

The ordered pair  satisfies both equations, so it is the solution to the system.

     Analysis
We can see the solution clearly by plotting the graph of each equation. Since the solution is an ordered pair that satisfies
both equations, it is a point on both of the lines and thus the point of intersection of the two lines. See Figure 3.

                                                       Figure 3

TRY IT #1 Determine whether the ordered pair                     is a solution to the following system.

Solving Systems of Equations by Graphing

There are multiple methods of solving systems of linear equations. For a system of linear equations in two variables, we
can determine both the type of system and the solution by graphing the system of equations on the same set of axes.

  EXAMPLE 2
Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables by Graphing
Solve the following system of equations by graphing. Identify the type of system.

     Solution
Solve the first equation for

Solve the second equation for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1031

Graph both equations on the same set of axes as in Figure 4.

                                                    Figure 4

The lines appear to intersect at the point          We can check to make sure that this is the solution to the system by

substituting the ordered pair into both equations.

The solution to the system is the ordered pair      so the system is independent.

TRY IT #2 Solve the following system of equations by graphing.

Q&A  Can graphing be used if the system is inconsistent or dependent?

     Yes, in both cases we can still graph the system to determine the type of system and solution. If the two
     lines are parallel, the system has no solution and is inconsistent. If the two lines are identical, the system
     has infinite solutions and is a dependent system.

Solving Systems of Equations by Substitution

Solving a linear system in two variables by graphing works well when the solution consists of integer values, but if our
solution contains decimals or fractions, it is not the most precise method. We will consider two more methods of solving
a system of linear equations that are more precise than graphing. One such method is solving a system of equations by
the substitution method, in which we solve one of the equations for one variable and then substitute the result into the
second equation to solve for the second variable. Recall that we can solve for only one variable at a time, which is the
reason the substitution method is both valuable and practical.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a system of two equations in two variables, solve using the substitution method.

 1. Solve one of the two equations for one of the variables in terms of the other.
 2. Substitute the expression for this variable into the second equation, then solve for the remaining variable.
 3. Substitute that solution into either of the original equations to find the value of the first variable. If possible,

      write the solution as an ordered pair.
 4. Check the solution in both equations.
1032 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          EXAMPLE 3
        Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables by Substitution
        Solve the following system of equations by substitution.

     Solution
First, we will solve the first equation for

Now we can substitute the expression         for in the second equation.

Now, we substitute  into the first equation and solve for

Our solution is                              into both equations.
Check the solution by substituting

TRY IT #3 Solve the following system of equations by substitution.

Q&A  Can the substitution method be used to solve any linear system in two variables?

     Yes, but the method works best if one of the equations contains a coefficient of 1 or -1 so that we do not
     have to deal with fractions.

Solving Systems of Equations in Two Variables by the Addition Method

A third method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method. In this method, we add two terms with
the same variable, but opposite coefficients, so that the sum is zero. Of course, not all systems are set up with the two
terms of one variable having opposite coefficients. Often we must adjust one or both of the equations by multiplication
so that one variable will be eliminated by addition.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a system of equations, solve using the addition method.

 1. Write both equations with x- and y-variables on the left side of the equal sign and constants on the right.
 2. Write one equation above the other, lining up corresponding variables. If one of the variables in the top equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1033

        has the opposite coefficient of the same variable in the bottom equation, add the equations together, eliminating
        one variable. If not, use multiplication by a nonzero number so that one of the variables in the top equation has
        the opposite coefficient of the same variable in the bottom equation, then add the equations to eliminate the
        variable.
   3. Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
   4. Substitute that value into one of the original equations and solve for the second variable.
   5. Check the solution by substituting the values into the other equation.

  EXAMPLE 4
Solving a System by the Addition Method
Solve the given system of equations by addition.

     Solution
Both equations are already set equal to a constant. Notice that the coefficient of in the second equation, -1, is the
opposite of the coefficient of in the first equation, 1. We can add the two equations to eliminate without needing to
multiply by a constant.

Now that we have eliminated we can solve the resulting equation for

Then, we substitute this value for into one of the original equations and solve for

The solution to this system is
Check the solution in the first equation.

     Analysis
We gain an important perspective on systems of equations by looking at the graphical representation. See Figure 5 to
find that the equations intersect at the solution. We do not need to ask whether there may be a second solution because
observing the graph confirms that the system has exactly one solution.
1034 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                                                                              Figure 5

  EXAMPLE 5
Using the Addition Method When Multiplication of One Equation Is Required
Solve the given system of equations by the addition method.

     Solution
Adding these equations as presented will not eliminate a variable. However, we see that the first equation has in it
and the second equation has So if we multiply the second equation by the x-terms will add to zero.

Now, let's add them.

For the last step, we substitute                 into one of the original equations and solve for

Our solution is the ordered pair                 See Figure 6. Check the solution in the original second equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1035

                                                                              Figure 6
       TRY IT #4 Solve the system of equations by addition.

  EXAMPLE 6
Using the Addition Method When Multiplication of Both Equations Is Required
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition.

     Solution
One equation has and the other has The least common multiple is so we will have to multiply both equations
by a constant in order to eliminate one variable. Let's eliminate by multiplying the first equation by and the second
equation by

Then, we add the two equations together.

Substitute       into the original first equation.

The solution is  Check it in the other equation.
1036 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        See Figure 7.

                                                                              Figure 7

  EXAMPLE 7
Using the Addition Method in Systems of Equations Containing Fractions
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition.

     Solution
First clear each equation of fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator.

Now multiply the second equation by so that we can eliminate the x-variable.
Add the two equations to eliminate the x-variable and solve the resulting equation.

Substitute  into the first equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1037

The solution is  Check it in the other equation.

TRY IT #5 Solve the system of equations by addition.

Identifying Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Two Variables

Now that we have several methods for solving systems of equations, we can use the methods to identify inconsistent
systems. Recall that an inconsistent system consists of parallel lines that have the same slope but different -intercepts.
They will never intersect. When searching for a solution to an inconsistent system, we will come up with a false
statement, such as

  EXAMPLE 8

Solving an Inconsistent System of Equations
Solve the following system of equations.

     Solution                                                                         the most obvious step is to use
We can approach this problem in two ways. Because one equation is already solved for
substitution.

Clearly, this statement is a contradiction because  Therefore, the system has no solution.

The second approach would be to first manipulate the equations so that they are both in slope-intercept form. We
manipulate the first equation as follows.

We then convert the second equation expressed to slope-intercept form.

Comparing the equations, we see that they have the same slope but different y-intercepts. Therefore, the lines are
parallel and do not intersect.
1038 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

             Analysis
        Writing the equations in slope-intercept form confirms that the system is inconsistent because all lines will intersect
        eventually unless they are parallel. Parallel lines will never intersect; thus, the two lines have no points in common. The
        graphs of the equations in this example are shown in Figure 8.

                                                                                      Figure 8
               TRY IT #6 Solve the following system of equations in two variables.

     Expressing the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing Two
     Variables

        Recall that a dependent system of equations in two variables is a system in which the two equations represent the same
        line. Dependent systems have an infinite number of solutions because all of the points on one line are also on the other
        line. After using substitution or addition, the resulting equation will be an identity, such as

          EXAMPLE 9
        Finding a Solution to a Dependent System of Linear Equations
        Find a solution to the system of equations using the addition method.

             Solution
        With the addition method, we want to eliminate one of the variables by adding the equations. In this case, let's focus on
        eliminating If we multiply both sides of the first equation by then we will be able to eliminate the -variable.

        Now add the equations.

        We can see that there will be an infinite number of solutions that satisfy both equations.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1039

     Analysis
If we rewrote both equations in the slope-intercept form, we might know what the solution would look like before
adding. Let's look at what happens when we convert the system to slope-intercept form.

See Figure 9. Notice the results are the same. The general solution to the system is

                                                                       Figure 9
TRY IT #7 Solve the following system of equations in two variables.

Using Systems of Equations to Investigate Profits

Using what we have learned about systems of equations, we can return to the skateboard manufacturing problem at the

beginning of the section. The skateboard manufacturer's revenue function is the function used to calculate the amount

of money that comes into the business. It can be represented by the equation     where quantity and price.

The revenue function is shown in orange in Figure 10.

The cost function is the function used to calculate the costs of doing business. It includes fixed costs, such as rent and
salaries, and variable costs, such as utilities. The cost function is shown in blue in Figure 10. The -axis represents
quantity in hundreds of units. The y-axis represents either cost or revenue in hundreds of dollars.
1040 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                                                   Figure 10

The point at which the two lines intersect is called the break-even point. We can see from the graph that if 700 units are
produced, the cost is $3,300 and the revenue is also $3,300. In other words, the company breaks even if they produce
and sell 700 units. They neither make money nor lose money.

The shaded region to the right of the break-even point represents quantities for which the company makes a profit. The

shaded region to the left represents quantities for which the company suffers a loss. The profit function is the revenue

function minus the cost function, written as                  Clearly, knowing the quantity for which the cost equals

the revenue is of great importance to businesses.

EXAMPLE 10

Finding the Break-Even Point and the Profit Function Using Substitution

Given the cost function                          and the revenue function                find the break-even point and

the profit function.

     Solution
Write the system of equations using to replace function notation.

Substitute the expression                        from the first equation into the second equation and solve for

Then, we substitute              into either the cost function or the revenue function.

The break-even point is
The profit function is found using the formula

The profit function is

     Analysis
The cost to produce 50,000 units is $77,500, and the revenue from the sales of 50,000 units is also $77,500. To make a
profit, the business must produce and sell more than 50,000 units. See Figure 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1041

                                       Figure 11

We see from the graph in Figure 12 that the profit function has a negative value until    when the graph

crosses the x-axis. Then, the graph emerges into positive y-values and continues on this path as the profit function is a

straight line. This illustrates that the break-even point for businesses occurs when the profit function is 0. The area to the

left of the break-even point represents operating at a loss.

                                       Figure 12

EXAMPLE 11

Writing and Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables

The cost of a ticket to the circus is  for children and       for adults. On a certain day, attendance at the circus is

and the total gate revenue is          How many children and how many adults bought tickets?

     Solution
Let c = the number of children and a = the number of adults in attendance.

The total number of people is          We can use this to write an equation for the number of people at the circus that
day.

The revenue from all children can be found by multiplying     by the number of children,  The revenue from all
                                                                                                We can use this to
adults can be found by multiplying     by the number of adults,  The total revenue is

write an equation for the revenue.

We now have a system of linear equations in two variables.

In the first equation, the coefficient of both variables is 1. We can quickly solve the first equation for either or We will
1042 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        solve for

Substitute the expression                        in the second equation for and solve for

Substitute    into the first equation to solve for

We find that  children and adults bought tickets to the circus that day.

TRY IT #8     Meal tickets at the circus cost       for children and                       for adults. If             meal tickets were

              bought for a total of              how many children and how many adults bought meal tickets?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with systems of linear equations.

Solving Systems of Equations Using Substitution (http://openstax.org/l/syssubst)
Solving Systems of Equations Using Elimination (http://openstax.org/l/syselim)
Applications of Systems of Equations (http://openstax.org/l/sysapp)

        11.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can a system of linear                        2. If you are performing a          3. If you are solving a break-
    equations have exactly two                       break-even analysis for a           even analysis and get a
    solutions? Explain why or                        business and their cost and         negative break-even point,
    why not.                                         revenue equations are               explain what this signifies
                                                     dependent, explain what             for the company?
                                                     this means for the
                                                     company's profit margins.

4. If you are solving a break-                   5. Given a system of equations,
    even analysis and there is                       explain at least two different
    no break-even point, explain                     methods of solving that
    what this means for the                          system.
    company. How should they
    ensure there is a break-even
    point?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1043

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the given ordered pair is a solution to the system of equations.

6.         and  7.   and                                         8.   and

9.         and  10.  and

For the following exercises, solve each system by substitution.

11.             12.                                              13.

14.             15.                                              16.

17.             18.                                              19.

20.

For the following exercises, solve each system by addition.

21.             22.                                              23.

24.             25.                                              26.

27.             28.                                              29.

30.

For the following exercises, solve each system by any method.

31.             32.                                              33.

34.             35.                                              36.
1044 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

37.                                              38.        39.

40.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the system of equations and state whether the system is consistent, inconsistent, or
dependent and whether the system has one solution, no solution, or infinite solutions.

41.                                              42.        43.

44.                                              45.

Technology

For the following exercises, use the intersect function on a graphing device to solve each system. Round all answers to
the nearest hundredth.

46.                                              47.        48.

49.                                              50.

Extensions

For the following exercises, solve each system in terms of  and where  are nonzero numbers. Note

that  and

51.                                              52.        53.

54.                                              55.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                11.1 · Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1045

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, solve for the desired quantity.

56. A stuffed animal business         57. An Ethiopian restaurant               58. A cell phone factory has a
      has a total cost of                   has a cost of production                  cost of production
      production                                                      and a                                            and
      and a revenue function                revenue function                          a revenue function
                    Find the break-                         When does the                                 What is the
      even point.                           company start to turn a                   break-even point?
                                            profit?

59. A musician charges                60. A guitar factory has a cost
                                            of production
      where is the total                                                    If
      number of attendees at the            the company needs to
      concert. The venue charges            break even after 150 units
      $80 per ticket. After how             sold, at what price should
      many people buy tickets               they sell each guitar?
      does the venue break even,            Round up to the nearest
      and what is the value of              dollar, and write the
      the total tickets sold at that        revenue function.
      point?

For the following exercises, use a system of linear equations with two variables and two equations to solve.

61. Find two numbers whose            62. A number is 9 more than               63. The startup cost for a
      sum is 28 and difference is           another number. Twice the                 restaurant is $120,000, and
      13.                                   sum of the two numbers is                 each meal costs $10 for the
                                            10. Find the two numbers.                 restaurant to make. If each
                                                                                      meal is then sold for $15,
                                                                                      after how many meals
                                                                                      does the restaurant break
                                                                                      even?

64. A moving company                  65. A total of 1,595 first- and           66. 276 students enrolled in an
      charges a flat rate of $150,          second-year college                       introductory chemistry
      and an additional $5 for              students gathered at a pep                class. By the end of the
      each box. If a taxi service           rally. The number of first-               semester, 5 times the
      would charge $20 for each             years exceeded the                        number of students passed
      box, how many boxes                   number of second-years by                 as failed. Find the number
      would you need for it to be           15. How many students                     of students who passed,
      cheaper to use the moving             from each year group were                 and the number of
      company, and what would               in attendance?                            students who failed.
      be the total cost?
1046 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

67. There were 130 faculty at a                  68. A jeep and a pickup truck       69. If a scientist mixed 10%
      conference. If there were                        enter a highway running             saline solution with 60%
      18 more women than men                           east-west at the same exit          saline solution to get 25
      attending, how many of                           heading in opposite                 gallons of 40% saline
      each gender attended the                         directions. The jeep                solution, how many gallons
      conference?                                      entered the highway 30              of 10% and 60% solutions
                                                       minutes before the pickup           were mixed?
                                                       did, and traveled 7 mph
                                                       slower than the pickup.
                                                       After 2 hours from the time
                                                       the pickup entered the
                                                       highway, the cars were
                                                       306.5 miles apart. Find the
                                                       speed of each car,
                                                       assuming they were driven
                                                       on cruise control and
                                                       retained the same speed.

70. An investor earned triple                    71. An investor invested 1.1        72. If an investor invests a total
      the profits of what they                         million dollars into two
      earned last year. If they                        land investments. On the      of $25,000 into two bonds,
      made $500,000.48 total for                       first investment, Swan
      both years, how much did                         Peak, her return was a        one that pays 3% simple
      the investor earn in profits                     110% increase on the
      each year?                                       money she invested. On        interest, and the other that
                                                       the second investment,
                                                       Riverside Community, she      pays  interest, and the
                                                       earned 50% over what she
                                                       invested. If she earned $1    investor earns $737.50
                                                       million in profits, how       annual interest, how much
                                                       much did she invest in        was invested in each
                                                       each of the land deals?       account?

73. If an investor invests                       74. Blu-rays cost $5.96 more        75. A store clerk sold 60 pairs
      $23,000 into two bonds,                          than regular DVDs at All            of sneakers. The high-tops
      one that pays 4% in simple                       Bets Are Off Electronics.           sold for $98.99 and the
      interest, and the other                          How much would 6 Blu-               low-tops sold for $129.99. If
      paying 2% simple interest,                       rays and 2 DVDs cost if 5           the receipts for the two
      and the investor earns                           Blu-rays and 2 DVDs cost            types of sales totaled
      $710.00 annual interest,                         $127.73?                            $6,404.40, how many of
      how much was invested in                                                             each type of sneaker were
      each account?                                                                        sold?

76. A concert manager                            77. Admission into an
      counted 350 ticket receipts                      amusement park for 4
      the day after a concert. The                     children and 2 adults is
      price for a student ticket                       $116.90. For 6 children and
      was $12.50, and the price                        3 adults, the admission is
      for an adult ticket was                          $175.35. Assuming a
      $16.00. The register                             different price for children
      confirms that $5,075 was                         and adults, what is the
      taken in. How many                               price of the child's ticket
      student tickets and adult                        and the price of the adult
      tickets were sold?                               ticket?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1047

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve systems of three equations in three variables.
           Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing three variables.
           Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing three variables.

                Figure 1 (credit: "Elembis," Wikimedia Commons)

Jordi received an inheritance of $12,000 that he divided into three parts and invested in three ways: in a money-market
fund paying 3% annual interest; in municipal bonds paying 4% annual interest; and in mutual funds paying 7% annual
interest. Jordi invested $4,000 more in municipal funds than in municipal bonds. He earned $670 in interest the first year.
How much did Jordi invest in each type of fund?

Understanding the correct approach to setting up problems such as this one makes finding a solution a matter of
following a pattern. We will solve this and similar problems involving three equations and three variables in this section.
Doing so uses similar techniques as those used to solve systems of two equations in two variables. However, finding
solutions to systems of three equations requires a bit more organization and a touch of visualization.

Solving Systems of Three Equations in Three Variables

In order to solve systems of equations in three variables, known as three-by-three systems, the primary tool we will be

using is called Gaussian elimination, named after the prolific German mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss. While there is

no definitive order in which operations are to be performed, there are specific guidelines as to what type of moves can

be made. We may number the equations to keep track of the steps we apply. The goal is to eliminate one variable at a

time to achieve upper triangular form, the ideal form for a three-by-three system because it allows for straightforward

back-substitution to find a solution  which we call an ordered triple. A system in upper triangular form looks like

the following:

The third equation can be solved for and then we back-substitute to find and  To write the system in upper
triangular form, we can perform the following operations:

1. Interchange the order of any two equations.
2. Multiply both sides of an equation by a nonzero constant.
3. Add a nonzero multiple of one equation to another equation.

The solution set to a three-by-three system is an ordered triple       Graphically, the ordered triple defines the

point that is the intersection of three planes in space. You can visualize such an intersection by imagining any corner in a

rectangular room. A corner is defined by three planes: two adjoining walls and the floor (or ceiling). Any point where two

walls and the floor meet represents the intersection of three planes.
1048 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Number of Possible Solutions

Figure 2 and Figure 3 illustrate possible solution scenarios for three-by-three systems.

· Systems that have a single solution are those which, after elimination, result in a solution set consisting of an

ordered triple                   Graphically, the ordered triple defines a point that is the intersection of three planes in

space.

· Systems that have an infinite number of solutions are those which, after elimination, result in an expression that

is always true, such as                          Graphically, an infinite number of solutions represents a line or coincident plane

that serves as the intersection of three planes in space.

· Systems that have no solution are those that, after elimination, result in a statement that is a contradiction, such

as         Graphically, a system with no solution is represented by three planes with no point in common.

Figure 2 (a)Three planes intersect at a single point, representing a three-by-three system with a single solution. (b)
Three planes intersect in a line, representing a three-by-three system with infinite solutions.

Figure 3 All three figures represent three-by-three systems with no solution. (a) The three planes intersect with each
other, but not at a common point. (b) Two of the planes are parallel and intersect with the third plane, but not with
each other. (c) All three planes are parallel, so there is no point of intersection.

EXAMPLE 1

Determining Whether an Ordered Triple Is a Solution to a System

Determine whether the ordered triple             is a solution to the system.

Solution

We will check each equation by substituting in the values of the ordered triple for  and

The ordered triple               is indeed a solution to the system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1049

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a linear system of three equations, solve for three unknowns.
   1. Pick any pair of equations and solve for one variable.
   2. Pick another pair of equations and solve for the same variable.
   3. You have created a system of two equations in two unknowns. Solve the resulting two-by-two system.
   4. Back-substitute known variables into any one of the original equations and solve for the missing variable.

  EXAMPLE 2
Solving a System of Three Equations in Three Variables by Elimination
Find a solution to the following system:

     Solution                                                                                                    by adding
There will always be several choices as to where to begin, but the most obvious first step here is to eliminate
equations (1) and (2).

The second step is multiplying equation (1) by  and adding the result to equation (3). These two steps will eliminate
the variable

In equations (4) and (5), we have created a new two-by-two system. We can solve for by adding the two equations.

Choosing one equation from each new system, we obtain the upper triangular form:

Next, we back-substitute         into equation (4) and solve for

Finally, we can back-substitute  and            into equation (1). This will yield the solution for
1050 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities  See Figure 4.

        The solution is the ordered triple

                                                                              Figure 4

  EXAMPLE 3
Solving a Real-World Problem Using a System of Three Equations in Three Variables
In the problem posed at the beginning of the section, Jordi invested his inheritance of $12,000 in three different funds:
part in a money-market fund paying 3% interest annually; part in municipal bonds paying 4% annually; and the rest in
mutual funds paying 7% annually. Jordi invested $4,000 more in mutual funds than he invested in municipal bonds. The
total interest earned in one year was $670. How much did he invest in each type of fund?

     Solution
To solve this problem, we use all of the information given and set up three equations. First, we assign a variable to each
of the three investment amounts:

The first equation indicates that the sum of the three principal amounts is $12,000.
We form the second equation according to the information that Jordi invested $4,000 more in mutual funds than he
invested in municipal bonds.
The third equation shows that the total amount of interest earned from each fund equals $670.
Then, we write the three equations as a system.

To make the calculations simpler, we can multiply the third equation by 100. Thus,

Step 1. Interchange equation (2) and equation (3) so that the two equations with three variables will line up.

Step 2. Multiply equation (1) by and add to equation (2). Write the result as row 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1051

Step 3. Add equation (2) to equation (3) and write the result as equation (3).

Step 4. Solve for in equation (3). Back-substitute that value in equation (2) and solve for  Then, back-substitute the
values for and into equation (1) and solve for

Jordi invested $2,000 in a money-market fund, $3,000 in municipal bonds, and $7,000 in mutual funds.
       TRY IT #1 Solve the system of equations in three variables.

Identifying Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Three Variables

Just as with systems of equations in two variables, we may come across an inconsistent system of equations in three

variables, which means that it does not have a solution that satisfies all three equations. The equations could represent

three parallel planes, two parallel planes and one intersecting plane, or three planes that intersect the other two but not

at the same location. The process of elimination will result in a false statement, such as   or some other

contradiction.

EXAMPLE 4

Solving an Inconsistent System of Three Equations in Three Variables
Solve the following system.

     Solution                   we can see that we can eliminate by adding equation (1) to equation (2).
Looking at the coefficients of

Next, we multiply equation (1) by and add it to equation (3).
1052 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Then, we multiply equation (4) by 2 and add it to equation (5).

The final equation  is a contradiction, so we conclude that the system of equations in inconsistent and, therefore,
has no solution.

     Analysis
In this system, each plane intersects the other two, but not at the same location. Therefore, the system is inconsistent.

TRY IT #2 Solve the system of three equations in three variables.

Expressing the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing Three
Variables

We know from working with systems of equations in two variables that a dependent system of equations has an infinite
number of solutions. The same is true for dependent systems of equations in three variables. An infinite number of
solutions can result from several situations. The three planes could be the same, so that a solution to one equation will
be the solution to the other two equations. All three equations could be different but they intersect on a line, which has
infinite solutions. Or two of the equations could be the same and intersect the third on a line.

  EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Solution to a Dependent System of Equations
Find the solution to the given system of three equations in three variables.

     Solution                                    and add it to equation (2).
First, we can multiply equation (1) by

We do not need to proceed any further. The result we get is an identity,      which tells us that this system has an

infinite number of solutions. There are other ways to begin to solve this system, such as multiplying equation (3) by

and adding it to equation (1). We then perform the same steps as above and find the same result,

When a system is dependent, we can find general expressions for the solutions. Adding equations (1) and (3), we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1053

We then solve the resulting equation for

We back-substitute the expression for into one of the equations and solve for

So the general solution is  In this solution, can be any real number. The values of and are dependent
on the value selected for

     Analysis
As shown in Figure 5, two of the planes are the same and they intersect the third plane on a line. The solution set is
infinite, as all points along the intersection line will satisfy all three equations.

                                          Figure 5

Q&A  Does the generic solution to a dependent system always have to be written in terms of

     No, you can write the generic solution in terms of any of the variables, but it is common to write it in
     terms of x and if needed and

TRY IT #3 Solve the following system.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with systems of equations in three variables.

Ex 1: System of Three Equations with Three Unknowns Using Elimination (http://openstax.org/l/systhree)
Ex. 2: System of Three Equations with Three Unknowns Using Elimination (http://openstax.org/l/systhelim)
1054 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        11.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can a linear system of three                  2. If a given ordered triple        3. If a given ordered triple
    equations have exactly two                       solves the system of                does not solve the system of
    solutions? Explain why or                        equations, is that solution         equations, is there no
    why not                                          unique? If so, explain why. If      solution? If so, explain why.
                                                     not, give an example where          If not, give an example.
                                                     it is not unique.

4. Using the method of                           5. Can you explain whether
    addition, is there only one                      there can be only one
    way to solve the system?                         method to solve a linear
                                                     system of equations? If yes,
                                                     give an example of such a
                                                     system of equations. If not,
                                                     explain why not.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered triple given is the solution to the system of equations.

6.   and                                              7.                                  and

8.   and                                              9.                                  and

10.  and

For the following exercises, solve each system by elimination.

11.                                              12.                                 13.

14.                                              15.                                 16.

For the following exercises, solve each system by Gaussian elimination.

17.                                              18.                                 19.

Access for free at openstax.org
               11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1055

20.  21.  22.

23.  24.  25.

26.  27.  28.

29.  30.  31.

32.  33.  34.

35.  36.  37.

38.  39.  40.

41.  42.  43.

44.  45.
1056 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

       Extensions

        For the following exercises, solve the system for and

46.                                47.                                 48.

49.                                50.

Real-World Applications            52. Three numbers sum up to         53. At a family reunion, there
                                         147. The smallest number            were only blood relatives,
51. Three even numbers sum               is half the middle number,          consisting of children,
      up to 108. The smaller is          which is half the largest           parents, and grandparents,
      half the larger and the            number. What are the                in attendance. There were
      middle number is the               three numbers?                      400 people total. There
      larger. What are the three                                             were twice as many
      numbers?                                                               parents as grandparents,
                                                                             and 50 more children than
                                                                             parents. How many
                                                                             children, parents, and
                                                                             grandparents were in
                                                                             attendance?

54. An animal shelter has a        55. Your roommate, Shani,           56. Your roommate, John,
      total of 350 animals               offered to buy groceries for        offered to buy household
      comprised of cats, dogs,           you and your other                  supplies for you and your
      and rabbits. If the number         roommate. The total bill            other roommate. You live
      of rabbits is 5 less than          was $82. She forgot to save         near the border of three
      one-half the number of             the individual receipts but         states, each of which has a
      cats, and there are 20 more        remembered that your                different sales tax. The
      cats than dogs, how many           groceries were $0.05                total amount of money
      of each animal are at the          cheaper than half of her            spent was $100.75. Your
      shelter?                           groceries, and that your            supplies were bought with
                                         other roommate's                    5% tax, John's with 8% tax,
                                         groceries were $2.10 more           and your third roommate's
                                         than your groceries. How            with 9% sales tax. The total
                                         much was each of your               amount of money spent
                                         share of the groceries?             without taxes is $93.50. If
                                                                             your supplies before tax
                                                                             were $1 more than half of
                                                                             what your third
                                                                             roommate's supplies were
                                                                             before tax, how much did
                                                                             each of you spend? Give
                                                                             your answer both with and
                                                                             without taxes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         11.2 · Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1057

57. Three coworkers work for        58. At a carnival, $2,914.25 in      59. A local band sells out for
      the same employer. Their            receipts were taken at the           their concert. They sell all
      jobs are warehouse                  end of the day. The cost of          1,175 tickets for a total
      manager, office manager,            a child's ticket was $20.50,         purse of $28,112.50. The
      and truck driver. The sum           an adult ticket was $29.75,          tickets were priced at $20
      of the annual salaries of           and a senior citizen ticket          for student tickets, $22.50
      the warehouse manager               was $15.25. There were               for children, and $29 for
      and office manager is               twice as many senior                 adult tickets. If the band
      $82,000. The office                 citizens as adults in                sold twice as many adult as
      manager makes $4,000                attendance, and 20 more              children tickets, how many
      more than the truck driver          children than senior                 of each type was sold?
      annually. The annual                citizens. How many
      salaries of the warehouse           children, adult, and senior
      manager and the truck               citizen tickets were sold?
      driver total $78,000. What
      is the annual salary of each
      of the co-workers?

60. In a bag, a child has 325       61. Last year, at Haven's Pond       62. When his youngest child
      coins worth $19.50. There           Car Dealership, for a
      were three types of coins:          particular model of BMW,       moved out, Deandre sold
      pennies, nickels, and               Jeep, and Toyota, one could
      dimes. If the bag contained         purchase all three cars for    his home and made three
      the same number of                  a total of $140,000. This
      nickels as dimes, how               year, due to inflation, the    investments using gains
      many of each type of coin           same cars would cost
      was in the bag?                     $151,830. The cost of the      from the sale. He invested
                                          BMW increased by 8%, the
                                          Jeep by 5%, and the Toyota     $80,500 into three
                                          by 12%. If the price of last
                                          year's Jeep was $7,000 less    accounts, one that paid 4%
                                          than the price of last year's
                                          BMW, what was the price        simple interest, one that
                                          of each of the three cars
                                          last year?                     paid  simple interest,

                                                                         and one that paid

                                                                         simple interest. He earned
                                                                         $2,670 interest at the end
                                                                         of one year. If the amount
                                                                         of the money invested in
                                                                         the second account was
                                                                         four times the amount
                                                                         invested in the third
                                                                         account, how much was
                                                                         invested in each account?
1058 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

63. You inherit one million                      64. An entrepreneur sells a          65. The top three countries in
      dollars. You invest it all in                    portion of their business            oil consumption in a
      three accounts for one                           for one hundred thousand             certain year are as follows:
      year. The first account pays                     dollars and invests it all in        the United States, Japan,
      3% compounded annually,                          three accounts for one               and China. In millions of
      the second account pays                          year. The first account pays         barrels per day, the three
      4% compounded annually,                          4% compounded annually,              top countries consumed
      and the third account pays                       the second account pays              39.8% of the world's
      2% compounded annually.                          3% compounded annually,              consumed oil. The United
      After one year, you earn                         and the third account pays           States consumed 0.7%
      $34,000 in interest. If you                      2% compounded annually.              more than four times
      invest four times the                            After one year, the                  China's consumption. The
      money into the account                           entrepreneur earns $3,650            United States consumed
      that pays 3% compared to                         in interest. If they invested        5% more than triple
      2%, how much did you                             five times the money in the          Japan's consumption. What
      invest in each account?                          account that pays 4%                 percent of the world oil
                                                       compared to 3%, how                  consumption did the
                                                       much did they invest in              United States, Japan, and
                                                       each account?                        China consume?1

66. The top three countries in                   67. The top three sources of oil     68. The top three oil producers
      oil production in the same                       imports for the United               in the United States in a
      year are Saudi Arabia, the                       States in the same year              certain year are the Gulf of
      United States, and Russia.                       were Saudi Arabia, Mexico,           Mexico, Texas, and Alaska.
      In millions of barrels per                       and Canada. The three top            The three regions were
      day, the top three                               countries accounted for              responsible for 64% of the
      countries produced 31.4%                         47% of oil imports. The              United States oil
      of the world's produced oil.                     United States imported               production. The Gulf of
      Saudi Arabia and the                             1.8% more from Saudi                 Mexico and Texas
      United States combined for                       Arabia than they did from            combined for 47% of oil
      22.1% of the world's                             Mexico, and 1.7% more                production. Texas
      production, and Saudi                            from Saudi Arabia than               produced 3% more than
      Arabia produced 2% more                          they did from Canada.                Alaska. What percent of
      oil than Russia. What                            What percent of the United           United States oil
      percent of the world oil                         States oil imports were              production came from
      production did Saudi                             from these three                     these regions?4
      Arabia, the United States,                       countries?3
      and Russia produce?2

1 "Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001," accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html.
2 "Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001," accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html.
3 "Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001," accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html.
4 "USA: The coming global oil crisis," accessed April 6, 2014, http://www.oilcrisis.com/us/.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1059

69. At one time, in the United   70. Meat consumption in the
      States, 398 species of           United States can be
      animals were on the              broken into three
      endangered species list.         categories: red meat,
      The top groups were              poultry, and fish. If fish
      mammals, birds, and fish,        makes up 4% less than
      which comprised 55% of           one-quarter of poultry
      the endangered species.          consumption, and red
      Birds accounted for 0.7%         meat consumption is 18.2%
      more than fish, and fish         higher than poultry
      accounted for 1.5% more          consumption, what are the
      than mammals. What               percentages of meat
      percent of the endangered        consumption?5
      species came from
      mammals, birds, and fish?

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve a system of nonlinear equations using substitution.
           Solve a system of nonlinear equations using elimination.
           Graph a nonlinear inequality.
           Graph a system of nonlinear inequalities.

Halley's Comet (Figure 1) orbits the sun about once every 75 years. Its path can be considered to be a very elongated
ellipse. Other comets follow similar paths in space. These orbital paths can be studied using systems of equations. These
systems, however, are different from the ones we considered in the previous section because the equations are not
linear.

                                 Figure 1 Halley's Comet (credit: "NASA Blueshift"/Flickr)

In this section, we will consider the intersection of a parabola and a line, a circle and a line, and a circle and an ellipse.
The methods for solving systems of nonlinear equations are similar to those for linear equations.

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution

A system of nonlinear equations is a system of two or more equations in two or more variables containing at least one

equation that is not linear. Recall that a linear equation can take the form                Any equation that cannot

be written in this form in nonlinear. The substitution method we used for linear systems is the same method we will use

for nonlinear systems. We solve one equation for one variable and then substitute the result into the second equation to

solve for another variable, and so on. There is, however, a variation in the possible outcomes.

Intersection of a Parabola and a Line

There are three possible types of solutions for a system of nonlinear equations involving a parabola and a line.

5 "The United States Meat Industry at a Glance," accessed April 6, 2014, http://www.meatami.com/ht/d/sp/i/47465/pid/47465.
1060 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          Possible Types of Solutions for Points of Intersection of a Parabola and a Line
          Figure 2 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a parabola and a line.

             · No solution. The line will never intersect the parabola.
             · One solution. The line is tangent to the parabola and intersects the parabola at exactly one point.
             · Two solutions. The line crosses on the inside of the parabola and intersects the parabola at two points.

                                                                                      Figure 2

                       ...

                         HOW TO
          Given a system of equations containing a line and a parabola, find the solution.
           1. Solve the linear equation for one of the variables.
           2. Substitute the expression obtained in step one into the parabola equation.
           3. Solve for the remaining variable.
           4. Check your solutions in both equations.
          EXAMPLE 1
        Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Representing a Parabola and a Line
        Solve the system of equations.

             Solution
        Solve the first equation for and then substitute the resulting expression into the second equation.

        Expand the equation and set it equal to zero.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1061

Solving for gives         and  Next, substitute each value for into the first equation to solve for  Always

substitute the value into the linear equation to check for extraneous solutions.

The solutions are  and         which can be verified by substituting these        values into both of the original

equations. See Figure 3.

                               Figure 3

Q&A  Could we have substituted values for into the second equation to solve for in Example 1?
     Yes, but because is squared in the second equation this could give us extraneous solutions for
     For

     This gives us the same value as in the solution.
     For

                    Notice that is an extraneous solution.
       TRY IT #1 Solve the given system of equations by substitution.

Intersection of a Circle and a Line

Just as with a parabola and a line, there are three possible outcomes when solving a system of equations representing a
circle and a line.
1062 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          Possible Types of Solutions for the Points of Intersection of a Circle and a Line
          Figure 4 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a circle and a line.

             · No solution. The line does not intersect the circle.
             · One solution. The line is tangent to the circle and intersects the circle at exactly one point.
             · Two solutions. The line crosses the circle and intersects it at two points.

                                                                              Figure 4

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a system of equations containing a line and a circle, find the solution.
   1. Solve the linear equation for one of the variables.
   2. Substitute the expression obtained in step one into the equation for the circle.
   3. Solve for the remaining variable.
   4. Check your solutions in both equations.

  EXAMPLE 2
Finding the Intersection of a Circle and a Line by Substitution
Find the intersection of the given circle and the given line by substitution.

     Solution                                     We will substitute        into the equation for the circle.
One of the equations has already been solved for

Now, we factor and solve for

Substitute the two x-values into the original linear equation to solve for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1063

The line intersects the circle at      and  which can be verified by substituting these  values into both of

the original equations. See Figure 5.

                                                                              Figure 5

       TRY IT #2 Solve the system of nonlinear equations.

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination

We have seen that substitution is often the preferred method when a system of equations includes a linear equation and
a nonlinear equation. However, when both equations in the system have like variables of the second degree, solving
them using elimination by addition is often easier than substitution. Generally, elimination is a far simpler method when
the system involves only two equations in two variables (a two-by-two system), rather than a three-by-three system, as
there are fewer steps. As an example, we will investigate the possible types of solutions when solving a system of
equations representing a circle and an ellipse.

  Possible Types of Solutions for the Points of Intersection of a Circle and an Ellipse

  Figure 6 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a circle and an ellipse.
    · No solution. The circle and ellipse do not intersect. One shape is inside the other or the circle and the ellipse are
        a distance away from the other.
    · One solution. The circle and ellipse are tangent to each other, and intersect at exactly one point.
    · Two solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at two points.
    · Three solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at three points.
    · Four solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at four points.
1064 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                                                                              Figure 6

  EXAMPLE 3
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Representing a Circle and an Ellipse
Solve the system of nonlinear equations.

     Solution                                    and adding it to equation (2).
Let's begin by multiplying equation (1) by

After we add the two equations together, we solve for

Substitute  into one of the equations and solve for

There are four solutions:                              See Figure 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1065

                                                                       Figure 7
TRY IT #3 Find the solution set for the given system of nonlinear equations.

Graphing a Nonlinear Inequality

All of the equations in the systems that we have encountered so far have involved equalities, but we may also encounter
systems that involve inequalities. We have already learned to graph linear inequalities by graphing the corresponding
equation, and then shading the region represented by the inequality symbol. Now, we will follow similar steps to graph a
nonlinear inequality so that we can learn to solve systems of nonlinear inequalities. A nonlinear inequality is an
inequality containing a nonlinear expression. Graphing a nonlinear inequality is much like graphing a linear inequality.

Recall that when the inequality is greater than,  or less than,              the graph is drawn with a dashed line. When

the inequality is greater than or equal to,       or less than or equal to,  the graph is drawn with a solid line. The

graphs will create regions in the plane, and we will test each region for a solution. If one point in the region works, the

whole region works. That is the region we shade. See Figure 8.

Figure 8 (a) an example of                   (b) an example of   (c) an example of  (d) an example of
1066 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                       ...

                         HOW TO

          Given an inequality bounded by a parabola, sketch a graph.
           1. Graph the parabola as if it were an equation. This is the boundary for the region that is the solution set.
           2. If the boundary is included in the region (the operator is or ), the parabola is graphed as a solid line.
           3. If the boundary is not included in the region (the operator is < or >), the parabola is graphed as a dashed line.
           4. Test a point in one of the regions to determine whether it satisfies the inequality statement. If the statement is

                 true, the solution set is the region including the point. If the statement is false, the solution set is the region on
                 the other side of the boundary line.
           5. Shade the region representing the solution set.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing an Inequality for a Parabola
Graph the inequality

Solution

First, graph the corresponding equation  Since  has a greater than symbol, we draw the graph

with a dashed line. Then we choose points to test both inside and outside the parabola. Let's test the points

and        One point is clearly inside the parabola and the other point is clearly outside.

The graph is shown in Figure 9. We can see that the solution set consists of all points inside the parabola, but not on the
graph itself.

                                                                              Figure 9

Graphing a System of Nonlinear Inequalities

Now that we have learned to graph nonlinear inequalities, we can learn how to graph systems of nonlinear inequalities.
A system of nonlinear inequalities is a system of two or more inequalities in two or more variables containing at least
one inequality that is not linear. Graphing a system of nonlinear inequalities is similar to graphing a system of linear
inequalities. The difference is that our graph may result in more shaded regions that represent a solution than we find in
a system of linear inequalities. The solution to a nonlinear system of inequalities is the region of the graph where the
shaded regions of the graph of each inequality overlap, or where the regions intersect, called the feasible region.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1067

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a system of nonlinear inequalities, sketch a graph.
   1. Find the intersection points by solving the corresponding system of nonlinear equations.
   2. Graph the nonlinear equations.
   3. Find the shaded regions of each inequality.
   4. Identify the feasible region as the intersection of the shaded regions of each inequality or the set of points

        common to each inequality.

  EXAMPLE 5
Graphing a System of Inequalities
Graph the given system of inequalities.

     Solution
These two equations are clearly parabolas. We can find the points of intersection by the elimination process: Add both
equations and the variable will be eliminated. Then we solve for

Substitute the x-values into one of the equations and solve for

The two points of intersection are  and  Notice that the equations can be rewritten as follows.

Graph each inequality. See Figure 10. The feasible region is the region between the two equations bounded by

on the top and                      on the bottom.
1068 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                                                                          Figure 10
    TRY IT #4 Graph the given system of inequalities.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with nonlinear equations.

    Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution (http://openstax.org/l/nonlinsub)
    Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination (http://openstax.org/l/nonlinelim)

        11.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain whether a system of                   2. When graphing an                 3. When you graph a system of
    two nonlinear equations can                      inequality, explain why we          inequalities, will there
    have exactly two solutions.                      only need to test one point         always be a feasible region?
    What about exactly three? If                     to determine whether an             If so, explain why. If not,
    not, explain why not. If so,                     entire region is the solution?      give an example of a graph
    give an example of such a                                                            of inequalities that does not
    system, in graph form, and                                                           have a feasible region. Why
    explain why your choice                                                              does it not have a feasible
    gives two or three answers.                                                          region?

4. If you graph a revenue and                    5. If you perform your break-
    cost function, explain how to                    even analysis and there is
    determine in what regions                        more than one solution,
    there is profit.                                 explain how you would
                                                     determine which x-values
                                                     are profit and which are not.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations using substitution.

6.                                               7.                                  8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.3 · Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1069

9.         10.

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations using elimination.

11.        12.                                      13.

14.        15.

For the following exercises, use any method to solve the system of nonlinear equations.

16.        17.                                      18.

19.        20.                                      21.

22.        23.

For the following exercises, use any method to solve the nonlinear system.

24.        25.                                      26.

27.        28.                                      29.

30.        31.                                      32.

33.        34.                                      35.

36.        37.                                      38.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the inequality.

39.        40.
1070 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

For the following exercises, graph the system of inequalities. Label all points of intersection.

41.                              42.                                              43.

44.                                              45.

Extensions

For the following exercises, graph the inequality.

46.                                              47.

For the following exercises, find the solutions to the nonlinear equations with two variables.

48.                                              49.                              50.

51.                                              52.

Technology

For the following exercises, solve the system of inequalities. Use a calculator to graph the system to confirm the answer.

53.                                              54.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, construct a system of nonlinear equations to describe the given behavior, then solve for the
requested solutions.

55. Two numbers add up to                        56. The squares of two
      300. One number is twice                         numbers add to 360. The
      the square of the other                          second number is half the
      number. What are the                             value of the first number
      numbers?                                         squared. What are the
                                                       numbers?

57. A laptop company has discovered their cost and                   58. A cell phone company has the following cost and
      revenue functions for each day:
                                        and                          revenue functions:
                                             If they want to make a
      profit, what is the range of laptops per day that              and                 What is the range of
      they should produce? Round to the nearest
      number which would generate profit.                            cell phones they should produce each day so

                                                                     there is profit? Round to the nearest number that

                                                                     generates profit.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  11.4 · Partial Fractions 1071

11.4 Partial Fractions

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:

Decompose                   , where      has only nonrepeated linear factors.
                                          has repeated linear factors.
Decompose                   , where      has a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor.
                                         has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor.
Decompose                   , where

Decompose                   , where

Earlier in this chapter, we studied systems of two equations in two variables, systems of three equations in three
variables, and nonlinear systems. Here we introduce another way that systems of equations can be utilized--the
decomposition of rational expressions.

Fractions can be complicated; adding a variable in the denominator makes them even more so. The methods studied in
this section will help simplify the concept of a rational expression.

Decomposing                     Where Q(x) Has Only Nonrepeated Linear Factors

Recall the algebra regarding adding and subtracting rational expressions. These operations depend on finding a
common denominator so that we can write the sum or difference as a single, simplified rational expression. In this
section, we will look at partial fraction decomposition, which is the undoing of the procedure to add or subtract rational
expressions. In other words, it is a return from the single simplified rational expression to the original expressions, called
the partial fraction.

For example, suppose we add the following fractions:

We would first need to find a common denominator,
Next, we would write each expression with this common denominator and find the sum of the terms.

Partial fraction decomposition is the reverse of this procedure. We would start with the solution and rewrite
(decompose) it as the sum of two fractions.

We will investigate rational expressions with linear factors and quadratic factors in the denominator where the degree of
the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator. Regardless of the type of expression we are decomposing,
the first and most important thing to do is factor the denominator.

When the denominator of the simplified expression contains distinct linear factors, it is likely that each of the original

rational expressions, which were added or subtracted, had one of the linear factors as the denominator. In other words,

using the example above, the factors of        are  the denominators of the decomposed rational

expression. So we will rewrite the simplified form as the sum of individual fractions and use a variable for each

numerator. Then, we will solve for each numerator using one of several methods available for partial fraction

decomposition.

Partial Fraction Decomposition of              Has Nonrepeated Linear Factors

The partial fraction decomposition of    when       has nonrepeated linear factors and the degree of               is less

than the degree of          is
1072 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

...

     HOW TO

Given a rational expression with distinct linear factors in the denominator, decompose it.

1. Use a variable for the original numerators, usually   or depending on the number of factors, placing

each variable over a single factor. For the purpose of this definition, we use for each numerator

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions.
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms.
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system

     of equations to solve for the numerators.

  EXAMPLE 1

Decomposing a Rational Function with Distinct Linear Factors
Decompose the given rational expression with distinct linear factors.

Solution

We will separate the denominator factors and give each numerator a symbolic label, like    or

Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate the fractions:

The resulting equation is
Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms.
Set up a system of equations associating corresponding coefficients.
Add the two equations and solve for

Substitute  into one of the original equations in the system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               11.4 · Partial Fractions 1073

Thus, the partial fraction decomposition is

Another method to use to solve for or is by considering the equation that resulted from eliminating the fractions

and substituting a value for that will make either the A- or B-term equal 0. If we let  the

term becomes 0 and we can simply solve for

Next, either substitute  into the equation and solve for or make the B-term 0 by substituting  into the
equation.

We obtain the same values for and using either method, so the decompositions are the same using either method.

Although this method is not seen very often in textbooks, we present it here as an alternative that may make some
partial fraction decompositions easier. It is known as the Heaviside method, named after Charles Heaviside, a pioneer in
the study of electronics.

       TRY IT #1 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the following expression.

Decomposing              Where Q(x) Has Repeated Linear Factors

Some fractions we may come across are special cases that we can decompose into partial fractions with repeated linear
factors. We must remember that we account for repeated factors by writing each factor in increasing powers.

Partial Fraction Decomposition of                     Has Repeated Linear Factors

The partial fraction decomposition of           when  has a repeated linear factor occurring times and the degree
                                             is
of  is less than the degree of

Write the denominator powers in increasing order.
1074 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

...

     HOW TO

Given a rational expression with repeated linear factors, decompose it.

1. Use a variable like       or for the numerators and account for increasing powers of the denominators.

   2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions.
   3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms.
   4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system

        of equations to solve for the numerators.

  EXAMPLE 2

Decomposing with Repeated Linear Factors
Decompose the given rational expression with repeated linear factors.

Solution

The denominator factors are                       To allow for the repeated factor of  the decomposition will include three
                                                 Thus,
denominators:           and

Next, we multiply both sides by the common denominator.

On the right side of the equation, we expand and collect like terms.

Next, we compare the coefficients of both sides. This will give the system of equations in three variables:

Solving for , we have

Substitute     into equation (1).

Then, to solve for substitute the values for and into equation (2).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.4 · Partial Fractions 1075

Thus,

TRY IT #2 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with repeated linear factors.

Decomposing                    Where Q(x) Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor

So far, we have performed partial fraction decomposition with expressions that have had linear factors in the

denominator, and we applied numerators          or  representing constants. Now we will look at an example where

one of the factors in the denominator is a quadratic expression that does not factor. This is referred to as an irreducible

quadratic factor. In cases like this, we use a linear numerator such as        etc.

Decomposition of               Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor

The partial fraction decomposition of   such that   has a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor and

the degree of       is less than the degree of      is written as

The decomposition may contain more rational expressions if there are linear factors. Each linear factor will have a

different constant numerator:           and so on.

       ...

            HOW TO

Given a rational expression where the factors of the denominator are distinct, irreducible quadratic factors,
decompose it.

1. Use variables such as       or       for the constant numerators over linear factors, and linear expressions
     such as
                                       etc., for the numerators of each quadratic factor in the denominator.

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions.
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms.
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system

     of equations to solve for the numerators.
1076 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 3

Decomposing  When Q(x) Contains a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor

Find a partial fraction decomposition of the given expression.

     Solution
We have one linear factor and one irreducible quadratic factor in the denominator, so one numerator will be a constant
and the other numerator will be a linear expression. Thus,

We follow the same steps as in previous problems. First, clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by
the common denominator.

Notice we could easily solve for                 by choosing a value for  that will make the  term equal 0. Let

and substitute it into the equation.

Now that we know the value of                    substitute it back into the equation. Then expand the right side and collect like
terms.

Setting the coefficients of terms on the right side equal to the coefficients of terms on the left side gives the system of
equations.

Solve for  using equation (1) and solve for      using equation (3).

Thus, the partial fraction decomposition of the expression is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 11.4 · Partial Fractions 1077

Q&A        Could we have just set up a system of equations to solve Example 3?

           Yes, we could have solved it by setting up a system of equations without solving for  first. The
           expansion on the right would be:

           So the system of equations would be:

TRY IT #3         Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with a nonrepeating irreducible
                  quadratic factor.

Decomposing            When Q(x) Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor

Now that we can decompose a simplified rational expression with an irreducible quadratic factor, we will learn how to do
partial fraction decomposition when the simplified rational expression has repeated irreducible quadratic factors. The
decomposition will consist of partial fractions with linear numerators over each irreducible quadratic factor represented
in increasing powers.

Decomposition of       When Q(x) Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor

The partial fraction decomposition of         when          has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor and the
                                                        is
degree of         is less than the degree of

Write the denominators in increasing powers.

...

     HOW TO

Given a rational expression that has a repeated irreducible factor, decompose it.

1. Use variables like  or              for the constant numerators over linear factors, and linear expressions such as

                       etc., for the numerators of each quadratic factor in the denominator written in

increasing powers, such as

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions.
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms.
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system

     of equations to solve for the numerators.
1078 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          EXAMPLE 4
        Decomposing a Rational Function with a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor in the Denominator
        Decompose the given expression that has a repeated irreducible factor in the denominator.

Solution

The factors of the denominator are         and             Recall that, when a factor in the denominator is a

quadratic that includes at least two terms, the numerator must be of the linear form     So, let's begin the

decomposition.

We eliminate the denominators by multiplying each term by  Thus,
Expand the right side.

Now we will collect like terms.
Set up the system of equations matching corresponding coefficients on each side of the equal sign.

We can use substitution from this point. Substitute        into the first equation.

Substitute      and              into the third equation.

Substitute      into the fourth equation.

Now we have solved for all of the unknowns on the right side of the equal sign. We have

and         We can write the decomposition as follows:

     TRY IT #4       Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with a repeated irreducible quadratic
                     factor.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    11.4 · Partial Fractions 1079

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with partial fractions.

     Partial Fraction Decomposition (http://openstax.org/l/partdecomp)
     Partial Fraction Decomposition With Repeated Linear Factors (http://openstax.org/l/partdecomprlf)
     Partial Fraction Decomposition With Linear and Quadratic Factors (http://openstax.org/l/partdecomlqu)

        11.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can any quotient of              2. Can you explain why a        3. Can you explain how to
    polynomials be decomposed           partial fraction                verify a partial fraction
    into at least two partial           decomposition is unique?        decomposition graphically?
    fractions? If so, explain why,      (Hint: Think about it as a
    and if not, give an example         system of equations.)
    of such a fraction

4. You are unsure if you correctly decomposed the      5. Once you have a system of equations generated by
    partial fraction correctly. Explain how you could      the partial fraction decomposition, can you explain
    double-check your answer.                              another method to solve it? For example if you had
                                                                                                 , we eventually simplify

                                                       to                Explain how

                                                       you could intelligently choose an -value that will

                                                       eliminate either or and solve for and

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the nonrepeating linear factors.

6.                                  7.                              8.

9.                                  10.                             11.

12.                                 13.                             14.

15.                                 16.                             17.

18.                                 19.

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the repeating linear factors.

20.                                 21.                             22.
1080 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

23.                                              24.               25.

26.                                              27.               28.

29.                                              30.

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the irreducible nonrepeating quadratic
factor.

31.                                              32.               33.

34.                                              35.               36.

37.                                              38.               39.

40.                                              41.               42.

43.

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the irreducible repeating quadratic factor.

44.                                              45.               46.

47.                                              48.               49.

50.                                              51.               52.

53.                                              54.

Extensions

For the following exercises, find the partial fraction expansion.

55.                                              56.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1081

For the following exercises, perform the operation and then find the partial fraction decomposition.

57.           58.                                        59.

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the sum and difference of two matrices.
           Find scalar multiples of a matrix.
           Find the product of two matrices.

                                                             Figure 1 (credit: "SD Dirk," Flickr)

Two club soccer teams, the Wildcats and the Mud Cats, are hoping to obtain new equipment for an upcoming season.
Table 1 shows the needs of both teams.

                            Wildcats Mud Cats

                   Goals    6                            10

                   Balls    30                           24

                   Jerseys  14                           20

                   Table 1

A goal costs $300; a ball costs $10; and a jersey costs $30. How can we find the total cost for the equipment needed for
each team? In this section, we discover a method in which the data in the soccer equipment table can be displayed and
used for calculating other information. Then, we will be able to calculate the cost of the equipment.

Finding the Sum and Difference of Two Matrices

To solve a problem like the one described for the soccer teams, we can use a matrix, which is a rectangular array of

numbers. A row in a matrix is a set of numbers that are aligned horizontally. A column in a matrix is a set of numbers

that are aligned vertically. Each number is an entry, sometimes called an element, of the matrix. Matrices (plural) are

enclosed in [ ] or ( ), and are usually named with capital letters. For example, three matrices named  and are

shown below.
1082 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Describing Matrices

A matrix is often referred to by its size or dimensions:  indicating rows and columns. Matrix entries are defined

first by row and then by column. For example, to locate the entry in matrix identified as we look for the entry in

row column In matrix  shown below, the entry in row 2, column 3 is

A square matrix is a matrix with dimensions      meaning that it has the same number of rows as columns. The
matrix above is an example of a square matrix.

A row matrix is a matrix consisting of one row with dimensions

A column matrix is a matrix consisting of one column with dimensions

A matrix may be used to represent a system of equations. In these cases, the numbers represent the coefficients of the
variables in the system. Matrices often make solving systems of equations easier because they are not encumbered with
variables. We will investigate this idea further in the next section, but first we will look at basic matrix operations.

Matrices

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers that is usually named by a capital letter:     and so on. Each entry in

a matrix is referred to as such that represents the row and represents the column. Matrices are often referred

to by their dimensions:          indicating rows and columns.

EXAMPLE 1

Finding the Dimensions of the Given Matrix and Locating Entries
Given matrix

 What are the dimensions of matrix                What are the entries at and

Solution

 The dimensions are              because there are three rows and three columns.

 Entry is the number at row 3, column 1, which is 3. The entry is the number at row 2, column 2, which is 4.
Remember, the row comes first, then the column.

Adding and Subtracting Matrices

We use matrices to list data or to represent systems. Because the entries are numbers, we can perform operations on
matrices. We add or subtract matrices by adding or subtracting corresponding entries.

In order to do this, the entries must correspond. Therefore, addition and subtraction of matrices is only possible when

the matrices have the same dimensions. We can add or subtract a       matrix and another  matrix, but we cannot

add or subtract a  matrix and a                  matrix because some entries in one matrix will not have a corresponding

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1083

entry in the other matrix.
  Adding and Subtracting Matrices
  Given matrices and of like dimensions, addition and subtraction of and will produce matrix or
  matrix of the same dimension.

  Matrix addition is commutative.
  It is also associative.

  EXAMPLE 2
Finding the Sum of Matrices
Find the sum of and given

     Solution
Add corresponding entries.

  EXAMPLE 3
Adding Matrix A and Matrix B
Find the sum of and

     Solution
Add corresponding entries. Add the entry in row 1, column 1, of matrix to the entry in row 1, column 1, of
Continue the pattern until all entries have been added.
1084 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          EXAMPLE 4
        Finding the Difference of Two Matrices
        Find the difference of and

             Solution
        We subtract the corresponding entries of each matrix.

  EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Sum and Difference of Two 3 x 3 Matrices
Given and

 Find the sum.  Find the difference.

     Solution                                                   Subtract the corresponding entries.

 Add the corresponding entries.

       TRY IT #1 Add matrix and matrix

Finding Scalar Multiples of a Matrix

Besides adding and subtracting whole matrices, there are many situations in which we need to multiply a matrix by a
constant called a scalar. Recall that a scalar is a real number quantity that has magnitude, but not direction. For example,
time, temperature, and distance are scalar quantities. The process of scalar multiplication involves multiplying each
entry in a matrix by a scalar. A scalar multiple is any entry of a matrix that results from scalar multiplication.
Consider a real-world scenario in which a university needs to add to its inventory of computers, computer tables, and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1085

chairs in two of the campus labs due to increased enrollment. They estimate that 15% more equipment is needed in both
labs. The school's current inventory is displayed in Table 2.

                                                         Lab A Lab B

                                          Computers      15   27

                                          Computer Tables 16  34

                                          Chairs         16   34

                                          Table 2

Converting the data to a matrix, we have

To calculate how much computer equipment will be needed, we multiply all entries in matrix by 0.15.

We must round up to the next integer, so the amount of new equipment needed is

Adding the two matrices as shown below, we see the new inventory amounts.

This means

Thus, Lab A will have 18 computers, 19 computer tables, and 19 chairs; Lab B will have 32 computers, 40 computer tables,
and 40 chairs.

  Scalar Multiplication
  Scalar multiplication involves finding the product of a constant by each entry in the matrix. Given

  the scalar multiple is

Scalar multiplication is distributive. For the matrices  and with scalars and
1086 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

  EXAMPLE 6

Multiplying the Matrix by a Scalar
Multiply matrix by the scalar 3.

     Solution           by the scalar 3.
Multiply each entry in

TRY IT #2 Given matrix find                      where

  EXAMPLE 7
Finding the Sum of Scalar Multiples
Find the sum

     Solution
First, find then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1087

Now, add

Finding the Product of Two Matrices

In addition to multiplying a matrix by a scalar, we can multiply two matrices. Finding the product of two matrices is only

possible when the inner dimensions are the same, meaning that the number of columns of the first matrix is equal to

the number of rows of the second matrix. If is an  matrix and is an          matrix, then the product matrix is

an  matrix. For example, the product is possible because the number of columns in is the same as the

number of rows in If the inner dimensions do not match, the product is not defined.

We multiply entries of with entries of according to a specific pattern as outlined below. The process of matrix
multiplication becomes clearer when working a problem with real numbers.

To obtain the entries in row of we multiply the entries in row of by column in       and add. For example, given
                                                                                      the product of will be a
matrices and where the dimensions of are           and the dimensions of are

    matrix.

Multiply and add as follows to obtain the first entry of the product matrix  by the first column in  and add.
 1. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 1 of multiply the first row in

2. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 2 of multiply the first row of by the second column in and add.
1088 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

         3. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 3 of multiply the first row of by the third column in and add.

We proceed the same way to obtain the second row of In other words, row 2 of times column 1 of            row 2 of
times column 2 of row 2 of times column 3 of When complete, the product matrix will be

Properties of Matrix Multiplication

For the matrices  and the following properties hold.

· Matrix multiplication is associative:

· Matrix multiplication is distributive:

Note that matrix multiplication is not commutative.

  EXAMPLE 8

Multiplying Two Matrices
Multiply matrix and matrix

Solution

First, we check the dimensions of the matrices. Matrix has dimensions  and matrix has dimensions                 The

inner dimensions are the same so we can perform the multiplication. The product will have the dimensions

We perform the operations outlined previously.

EXAMPLE 9

Multiplying Two Matrices
Given and

 Find       Find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1089

Solution

 As the dimensions of are         and the dimensions of are               these matrices can be multiplied together
                                  matches the number of rows in
because the number of columns in                                          The resulting product will be a  matrix,

the number of rows in by the number of columns in

 The dimensions of are            and the dimensions of are               The inner dimensions match so the product is

defined and will be a  matrix.

     Analysis
Notice that the products and are not equal.

This illustrates the fact that matrix multiplication is not commutative.

Q&A       Is it possible for AB to be defined but not BA?

          Yes, consider a matrix A with dimension     and matrix B with dimension  For the product AB the

          inner dimensions are 4 and the product is defined, but for the product BA the inner dimensions are 2 and

          3 so the product is undefined.

  EXAMPLE 10

Using Matrices in Real-World Problems
Let's return to the problem presented at the opening of this section. We have Table 3, representing the equipment
needs of two soccer teams.

                                                   Wildcats Mud Cats

                                          Goals    6                      10

                                  Table 3
1090 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

                                                          Wildcats Mud Cats

                                                 Balls    30          24

                                                 Jerseys  14          20

                                                 Table 3

We are also given the prices of the equipment, as shown in Table 4.

                                                          Goal $300

                                                          Ball $10

                                                          Jersey $30

                                                          Table 4

We will convert the data to matrices. Thus, the equipment need matrix is written as

The cost matrix is written as
We perform matrix multiplication to obtain costs for the equipment.

The total cost for equipment for the Wildcats is $2,520, and the total cost for equipment for the Mud Cats is $3,840.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a matrix operation, evaluate using a calculator.
   1. Save each matrix as a matrix variable
   2. Enter the operation into the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed.
   3. If the operation is defined, the calculator will present the solution matrix; if the operation is undefined, it will

        display an error message.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1091

EXAMPLE 11

Using a Calculator to Perform Matrix Operations

Find      given

Solution

On the matrix page of the calculator, we enter matrix above as the matrix variable  matrix above as the matrix

variable  and matrix above as the matrix variable

On the home screen of the calculator, we type in the problem and call up each matrix variable as needed.

The calculator gives us the following matrix.

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with matrices and matrix operations.

      Dimensions of a Matrix (http://openstax.org/l/matrixdimen)
      Matrix Addition and Subtraction (http://openstax.org/l/matrixaddsub)
      Matrix Operations (http://openstax.org/l/matrixoper)
      Matrix Multiplication (http://openstax.org/l/matrixmult)

        11.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can we add any two             2. Can we multiply any column          3. Can both the products
    matrices together? If so,         matrix by any row matrix?              and be defined? If so,
    explain why; if not, explain      Explain why or why not.                explain how; if not, explain
    why not and give an                                                      why.
    example of two matrices
    that cannot be added
    together.

4. Can any two matrices of the    5. Does matrix multiplication
    same size be multiplied? If       commute? That is, does
    so, explain why, and if not,                       If so, prove why
    explain why not and give an       it does. If not, explain why it
    example of two matrices of        does not.
    the same size that cannot be
    multiplied together.
1092 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

       Algebraic

        For the following exercises, use the matrices below and perform the matrix addition or subtraction. Indicate if the
        operation is undefined.

6.                               7.               8.

9.                               10.              11.

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform scalar multiplication.

12.                              13.              14.

15.                              16.              17.

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform matrix multiplication.

18.                              19.              20.

21.                              22.              23.

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain
why the operation cannot be performed.

24.                              25.              26.

27.                              28.              29.

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain

why the operation cannot be performed. (Hint:  )

30.                              31.              32.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            11.5 · Matrices and Matrix Operations 1093

33.  34.                                               35.

36.  37.                                               38.

39.  40.

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain

why the operation cannot be performed. (Hint:  )

41.  42.                                               43.

44.  45.                                               46.

47.  48.                                               49.

Technology

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain
why the operation cannot be performed. Use a calculator to verify your solution.

50.  51.                                               52.

53.  54.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use the matrix below to perform the indicated operation on the given matrix.

55.  56.                                               57.

58.  59. Using the above questions,

          find a formula for Test

          the formula for                         and

          using a calculator.
1094 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

    11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination

       Learning Objectives

        In this section, you will:
                   Write the augmented matrix of a system of equations.
                   Write the system of equations from an augmented matrix.
                   Perform row operations on a matrix.
                   Solve a system of linear equations using matrices.

                                 Figure 1 German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855).

Carl Friedrich Gauss lived during the late 18th century and early 19th century, but he is still considered one of the most
prolific mathematicians in history. His contributions to the science of mathematics and physics span fields such as
algebra, number theory, analysis, differential geometry, astronomy, and optics, among others. His discoveries regarding
matrix theory changed the way mathematicians have worked for the last two centuries.

We first encountered Gaussian elimination in Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables. In this section, we will revisit
this technique for solving systems, this time using matrices.

Writing the Augmented Matrix of a System of Equations

A matrix can serve as a device for representing and solving a system of equations. To express a system in matrix form,
we extract the coefficients of the variables and the constants, and these become the entries of the matrix. We use a
vertical line to separate the coefficient entries from the constants, essentially replacing the equal signs. When a system is
written in this form, we call it an augmented matrix.

For example, consider the following  system of equations.

We can write this system as an augmented matrix:

We can also write a matrix containing just the coefficients. This is called the coefficient matrix.

A three-by-three system of equations such as

has a coefficient matrix

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1095

and is represented by the augmented matrix

Notice that the matrix is written so that the variables line up in their own columns: x-terms go in the first column,

y-terms in the second column, and z-terms in the third column. It is very important that each equation is written in

standard form      so that the variables line up. When there is a missing variable term in an equation, the

coefficient is 0.

...

     HOW TO

Given a system of equations, write an augmented matrix.

 1. Write the coefficients of the x-terms as the numbers down the first column.
 2. Write the coefficients of the y-terms as the numbers down the second column.
 3. If there are z-terms, write the coefficients as the numbers down the third column.
 4. Draw a vertical line and write the constants to the right of the line.

  EXAMPLE 1

Writing the Augmented Matrix for a System of Equations
Write the augmented matrix for the given system of equations.

     Solution
The augmented matrix displays the coefficients of the variables, and an additional column for the constants.

       TRY IT #1 Write the augmented matrix of the given system of equations.

Writing a System of Equations from an Augmented Matrix

We can use augmented matrices to help us solve systems of equations because they simplify operations when the
systems are not encumbered by the variables. However, it is important to understand how to move back and forth
between formats in order to make finding solutions smoother and more intuitive. Here, we will use the information in an
augmented matrix to write the system of equations in standard form.

  EXAMPLE 2
Writing a System of Equations from an Augmented Matrix Form
Find the system of equations from the augmented matrix.
1096 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Solution

When the columns represent the variables         and

       TRY IT #2 Write the system of equations from the augmented matrix.

Performing Row Operations on a Matrix

Now that we can write systems of equations in augmented matrix form, we will examine the various row operations
that can be performed on a matrix, such as addition, multiplication by a constant, and interchanging rows.
Performing row operations on a matrix is the method we use for solving a system of equations. In order to solve the
system of equations, we want to convert the matrix to row-echelon form, in which there are ones down the main
diagonal from the upper left corner to the lower right corner, and zeros in every position below the main diagonal as
shown.

We use row operations corresponding to equation operations to obtain a new matrix that is row-equivalent in a simpler
form. Here are the guidelines to obtaining row-echelon form.

1. In any nonzero row, the first nonzero number is a 1. It is called a leading 1.
2. Any all-zero rows are placed at the bottom on the matrix.
3. Any leading 1 is below and to the right of a previous leading 1.
4. Any column containing a leading 1 has zeros in all other positions in the column.

To solve a system of equations we can perform the following row operations to convert the coefficient matrix to row-
echelon form and do back-substitution to find the solution.

1. Interchange rows. (Notation:                  )

2. Multiply a row by a constant. (Notation: )

3. Add the product of a row multiplied by a constant to another row. (Notation:

Each of the row operations corresponds to the operations we have already learned to solve systems of equations in
three variables. With these operations, there are some key moves that will quickly achieve the goal of writing a matrix in
row-echelon form. To obtain a matrix in row-echelon form for finding solutions, we use Gaussian elimination, a method
that uses row operations to obtain a 1 as the first entry so that row 1 can be used to convert the remaining rows.

Gaussian Elimination

The Gaussian elimination method refers to a strategy used to obtain the row-echelon form of a matrix. The goal is
to write matrix with the number 1 as the entry down the main diagonal and have all zeros below.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1097

The first step of the Gaussian strategy includes obtaining a 1 as the first entry, so that row 1 may be used to alter the
rows below.

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an augmented matrix, perform row operations to achieve row-echelon form.

 1. The first equation should have a leading coefficient of 1. Interchange rows or multiply by a constant, if necessary.
 2. Use row operations to obtain zeros down the first column below the first entry of 1.
 3. Use row operations to obtain a 1 in row 2, column 2.
 4. Use row operations to obtain zeros down column 2, below the entry of 1.
 5. Use row operations to obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3.
 6. Continue this process for all rows until there is a 1 in every entry down the main diagonal and there are only

      zeros below.
 7. If any rows contain all zeros, place them at the bottom.

EXAMPLE 3

Solving a  System by Gaussian Elimination

Solve the given system by Gaussian elimination.

     Solution
First, we write this as an augmented matrix.

We want a 1 in row 1, column 1. This can be accomplished by interchanging row 1 and row 2.

We now have a 1 as the first entry in row 1, column 1. Now let's obtain a 0 in row 2, column 1. This can be accomplished
by multiplying row 1 by and then adding the result to row 2.

We only have one more step, to multiply row 2 by

Use back-substitution. The second row of the matrix represents  Back-substitute             into the first equation.
1098 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        The solution is the point
               TRY IT #3 Solve the given system by Gaussian elimination.

EXAMPLE 4

Using Gaussian Elimination to Solve a System of Equations

Use Gaussian elimination to solve the given         system of equations.

     Solution
Write the system as an augmented matrix.

Obtain a 1 in row 1, column 1. This can be accomplished by multiplying the first row by

Next, we want a 0 in row 2, column 1. Multiply row 1 by and add row 1 to row 2.

The second row represents the equation       Therefore, the system is inconsistent and has no solution.

  EXAMPLE 5

Solving a Dependent System
Solve the system of equations.

     Solution
Perform row operations on the augmented matrix to try and achieve row-echelon form.

The matrix ends up with all zeros in the last row:  Thus, there are an infinite number of solutions and the system

is classified as dependent. To find the generic solution, return to one of the original equations and solve for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1099

So the solution to this system is

  EXAMPLE 6
Performing Row Operations on a 3×3 Augmented Matrix to Obtain Row-Echelon Form
Perform row operations on the given matrix to obtain row-echelon form.

     Solution                                                                            and add it to row 2. Then replace
The first row already has a 1 in row 1, column 1. The next step is to multiply row 1 by
row 2 with the result.

Next, obtain a zero in row 3, column 1.

Next, obtain a zero in row 3, column 2.

The last step is to obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3.

       TRY IT #4 Write the system of equations in row-echelon form.

Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices

We have seen how to write a system of equations with an augmented matrix, and then how to use row operations and
back-substitution to obtain row-echelon form. Now, we will take row-echelon form a step farther to solve a 3 by 3 system
of linear equations. The general idea is to eliminate all but one variable using row operations and then back-substitute to
solve for the other variables.
1100 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

          EXAMPLE 7
        Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
        Solve the system of linear equations using matrices.

             Solution
        First, we write the augmented matrix.

        Next, we perform row operations to obtain row-echelon form.

        The easiest way to obtain a 1 in row 2 of column 1 is to interchange and

        Then

        The last matrix represents the equivalent system.

        Using back-substitution, we obtain the solution as
          EXAMPLE 8

        Solving a Dependent System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
        Solve the following system of linear equations using matrices.

             Solution
        Write the augmented matrix.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1101

First, multiply row 1 by to get a 1 in row 1, column 1. Then, perform row operations to obtain row-echelon form.

The last matrix represents the following system.

We see by the identity  that this is a dependent system with an infinite number of solutions. We then find the

generic solution. By solving the second equation for and substituting it into the first equation we can solve for in

terms of

Now we substitute the expression for into the second equation to solve for in terms of

The generic solution is
       TRY IT #5 Solve the system using matrices.

Q&A       Can any system of linear equations be solved by Gaussian elimination?
          Yes, a system of linear equations of any size can be solved by Gaussian elimination.
1102 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities
                       ...

                         HOW TO
          Given a system of equations, solve with matrices using a calculator.
           1. Save the augmented matrix as a matrix variable
           2. Use the ref( function in the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed.

          EXAMPLE 9
        Solving Systems of Equations with Matrices Using a Calculator
        Solve the system of equations.

             Solution
        Write the augmented matrix for the system of equations.

        On the matrix page of the calculator, enter the augmented matrix above as the matrix variable

        Use the ref( function in the calculator, calling up the matrix variable
        Evaluate.

Using back-substitution, the solution is

EXAMPLE 10

Applying 2 × 2 Matrices to Finance
Carolyn invests a total of $12,000 in two municipal bonds, one paying 10.5% interest and the other paying 12% interest.
The annual interest earned on the two investments last year was $1,335. How much was invested at each rate?

     Solution                                            the amount invested at 10.5% interest, and    the amount
We have a system of two equations in two variables. Let
invested at 12% interest.

As a matrix, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1103

Multiply row 1 by        and add the result to row 2.

Then,

So
Thus, $5,000 was invested at 12% interest and $7,000 at 10.5% interest.

EXAMPLE 11

Applying 3 × 3 Matrices to Finance
Ava invests a total of $10,000 in three accounts, one paying 5% interest, another paying 8% interest, and the third paying
9% interest. The annual interest earned on the three investments last year was $770. The amount invested at 9% was
twice the amount invested at 5%. How much was invested at each rate?

     Solution                                                                                           be the amount
We have a system of three equations in three variables. Let be the amount invested at 5% interest, let
invested at 8% interest, and let be the amount invested at 9% interest. Thus,

As a matrix, we have

Now, we perform Gaussian elimination to achieve row-echelon form.

The third row tells us   thus                          we get
The second row tells us      Substituting
1104 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

The first row tells us                               Substituting  and                we get

The answer is $3,000 invested at 5% interest, $1,000 invested at 8%, and $6,000 invested at 9% interest.

    TRY IT #6           A small shoe company took out a loan of $1,500,000 to expand their inventory. Part of the money
                        was borrowed at 7%, part was borrowed at 8%, and part was borrowed at 10%. The amount
                        borrowed at 10% was four times the amount borrowed at 7%, and the annual interest on all three
                        loans was $130,500. Use matrices to find the amount borrowed at each rate.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems of linear equations using
    Gaussian elimination.

    Solve a System of Two Equations Using an Augmented Matrix (http://openstax.org/l/system2augmat)
    Solve a System of Three Equations Using an Augmented Matrix (http://openstax.org/l/system3augmat)
    Augmented Matrices on the Calculator (http://openstax.org/l/augmatcalc)

        11.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Can any system of linear                      2. Can any matrix be written as  3. Is there only one correct
    equations be written as an                       a system of linear               method of using row
    augmented matrix? Explain                        equations? Explain why or        operations on a matrix? Try
    why or why not. Explain how                      why not. Explain how to          to explain two different row
    to write that augmented                          write that system of             operations possible to solve
    matrix.                                          equations.                       the augmented matrix

4. Can a matrix whose entry is                   5. Can a matrix that has 0
    0 on the diagonal be solved?                     entries for an entire row
    Explain why or why not.                          have one solution? Explain
    What would you do to                             why or why not.
    remedy the situation?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, write the augmented matrix for the linear system.

6.                                               7.                               8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1105

9.   10.

For the following exercises, write the linear system from the augmented matrix.

11.  12.                                                                13.

14.  15.

For the following exercises, solve the system by Gaussian elimination.

16.  17.                                                                18.

19.  20.                                                                21.

22.  23.                                                                24.

25.  26.                                                                27.

28.  29.                                                                30.

31.  32.                                                                33.

34.  35.                                                                36.

37.  38.                                                                39.

40.  41.                                                                42.
1106 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

43.                                              44.                                 45.

46.

Extensions

For the following exercises, use Gaussian elimination to solve the system.

47.                                              48.                                 49.

50.                                              51.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, set up the augmented matrix that describes the situation, and solve for the desired solution.

52. Every day, Angeni's                          53. At Bakari's competing           54. You invested $10,000 into
      cupcake store sells 5,000                        cupcake store, $4,520               two accounts: one that has
      cupcakes in chocolate and                        worth of cupcakes are sold          simple 3% interest, the
      vanilla flavors. If the                          daily. The chocolate                other with 2.5% interest. If
      chocolate flavor is 3 times                      cupcakes cost $2.25 and             your total interest payment
      as popular as the vanilla                        the red velvet cupcakes             after one year was $283.50,
      flavor, how many of each                         cost $1.75. If the total            how much was in each
      cupcake does the store sell                      number of cupcakes sold             account after the year
      per day?                                         per day is 2,200, how many          passed?
                                                       of each flavor are sold each
                                                       day?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           11.6 · Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1107

55. You invested $2,300 into         56. Bikes'R'Us manufactures           57. A major appliance store
      account 1, and $2,700 into           bikes, which sell for $250. It        has agreed to order
      account 2. If the total              costs the manufacturer                vacuums from a startup
      amount of interest after             $180 per bike, plus a                 founded by college
      one year is $254, and                startup fee of $3,500. After          engineering students. The
      account 2 has 1.5 times the          how many bikes sold will              store would be able to
      interest rate of account 1,          the manufacturer break                purchase the vacuums for
      what are the interest rates?         even?                                 $86 each, with a delivery
      Assume simple interest                                                     fee of $9,200, regardless of
      rates.                                                                     how many vacuums are
                                                                                 sold. If the store needs to
                                                                                 start seeing a profit after
                                                                                 230 units are sold, how
                                                                                 much should they charge
                                                                                 for the vacuums?

58. The three most popular ice       59. At an ice cream shop, three       60. A bag of mixed nuts
      cream flavors are                    flavors are increasing in             contains cashews,
      chocolate, strawberry, and           demand. Last year,                    pistachios, and almonds.
      vanilla, comprising 83% of           banana, pumpkin, and                  There are 1,000 total nuts
      the flavors sold at an ice           rocky road ice cream made             in the bag, and there are
      cream shop. If vanilla sells         up 12% of total ice cream             100 less almonds than
      1% more than twice                   sales. This year, the same            pistachios. The cashews
      strawberry, and chocolate            three ice creams made up              weigh 3 g, pistachios weigh
      sells 11% more than vanilla,         16.9% of ice cream sales.             4 g, and almonds weigh 5
      how much of the total ice            The rocky road sales                  g. If the bag weighs 3.7 kg,
      cream consumption are                doubled, the banana sales             find out how many of each
      the vanilla, chocolate, and          increased by 50%, and the             type of nut is in the bag.
      strawberry flavors?                  pumpkin sales increased
                                           by 20%. If the rocky road
                                           ice cream had one less
                                           percent of sales than the
                                           banana ice cream, find out
                                           the percentage of ice
                                           cream sales each individual
                                           ice cream made last year.

61. A bag of mixed nuts
      contains cashews,
      pistachios, and almonds.
      Originally there were 900
      nuts in the bag. 30% of the
      almonds, 20% of the
      cashews, and 10% of the
      pistachios were eaten, and
      now there are 770 nuts left
      in the bag. Originally, there
      were 100 more cashews
      than almonds. Figure out
      how many of each type of
      nut was in the bag to begin
      with.
1108 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the inverse of a matrix.
           Solve a system of linear equations using an inverse matrix.

Soriya plans to invest $10,500 into two different bonds to spread out her risk. The first bond has an annual return of 10%,
and the second bond has an annual return of 6%. In order to receive an 8.5% return from the two bonds, how much
should Soriya invest in each bond? What is the best method to solve this problem?

There are several ways we can solve this problem. As we have seen in previous sections, systems of equations and
matrices are useful in solving real-world problems involving finance. After studying this section, we will have the tools to
solve the bond problem using the inverse of a matrix.

Finding the Inverse of a Matrix

We know that the multiplicative inverse of a real number is        and                 For example,

and               The multiplicative inverse of a matrix is similar in concept, except that the product of matrix and its

inverse   equals the identity matrix. The identity matrix is a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal

and zeros everywhere else. We identify identity matrices by where represents the dimension of the matrix. Observe

the following equations.

The identity matrix acts as a 1 in matrix algebra. For example,
A matrix that has a multiplicative inverse has the properties

A matrix that has a multiplicative inverse is called an invertible matrix. Only a square matrix may have a multiplicative

inverse, as the reversibility,                   is a requirement. Not all square matrices have an inverse, but if is

invertible, then  is unique. We will look at two methods for finding the inverse of a  matrix and a third method

that can be used on both         and             matrices.

The Identity Matrix and Multiplicative Inverse

The identity matrix, is a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal and zeros everywhere else.

If is an          matrix and     is an           matrix such that       then           the multiplicative

inverse of a matrix

  EXAMPLE 1

Showing That the Identity Matrix Acts as a 1
Given matrix A, show that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1109

     Solution                                          and the identity is equal to the product of the identity and A.
Use matrix multiplication to show that the product of

       ...

            HOW TO

Given two matrices, show that one is the multiplicative inverse of the other.

1. Given matrix of order  and matrix     of order      multiply
                                                then          and
2. If          then find the product If

  EXAMPLE 2

Showing That Matrix A Is the Multiplicative Inverse of Matrix B
Show that the given matrices are multiplicative inverses of each other.

     Solution       If both products equal the identity, then the two matrices are inverses of each other.
Multiply and

   and are inverses of each other.

       TRY IT #1 Show that the following two matrices are inverses of each other.

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse Using Matrix Multiplication

We can now determine whether two matrices are inverses, but how would we find the inverse of a given matrix? Since
we know that the product of a matrix and its inverse is the identity matrix, we can find the inverse of a matrix by setting
1110 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

       up an equation using matrix multiplication.
          EXAMPLE 3

       Finding the Multiplicative Inverse Using Matrix Multiplication
       Use matrix multiplication to find the inverse of the given matrix.

     Solution                    by a matrix containing unknown constants and set it equal to the identity.
For this method, we multiply

Find the product of the two matrices on the left side of the equal sign.

Next, set up a system of equations with the entry in row 1, column 1 of the new matrix equal to the first entry of the
identity, 1. Set the entry in row 2, column 1 of the new matrix equal to the corresponding entry of the identity, which is 0.

Using row operations, multiply and add as follows:                         Add the equations, and solve for

Back-substitute to solve for

Write another system of equations setting the entry in row 1, column 2 of the new matrix equal to the corresponding
entry of the identity, 0. Set the entry in row 2, column 2 equal to the corresponding entry of the identity.

Using row operations, multiply and add as follows:                         Add the two equations and solve for

Once more, back-substitute and solve for

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse by Augmenting with the Identity                              is transformed into

Another way to find the multiplicative inverse is by augmenting with the identity. When matrix
the augmented matrix transforms into

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1111

For example, given

augment with the identity

Perform row operations with the goal of turning  into the identity.
 1. Switch row 1 and row 2.

2. Multiply row 2 by and add to row 1.

3. Multiply row 1 by and add to row 2.

4. Add row 2 to row 1.

5. Multiply row 2 by

The matrix we have found is

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse of 2×2 Matrices Using a Formula

When we need to find the multiplicative inverse of a   matrix, we can use a special formula instead of using matrix

multiplication or augmenting with the identity.

If is a    matrix, such as

the multiplicative inverse of is given by the formula

where               If       then has no inverse.

EXAMPLE 4

Using the Formula to Find the Multiplicative Inverse of Matrix A
Use the formula to find the multiplicative inverse of

     Solution
Using the formula, we have
1112 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

     Analysis                                                                                                        with
We can check that our formula works by using one of the other methods to calculate the inverse. Let's augment
the identity.

     Perform row operations with the goal of turning  into the identity.
1. Multiply row 1 by and add to row 2.

2. Multiply row 1 by 2 and add to row 1.

So, we have verified our original solution.

TRY IT #2  Use the formula to find the inverse of matrix                  Verify your answer by augmenting with the
           identity matrix.

  EXAMPLE 5
Finding the Inverse of the Matrix, If It Exists
Find the inverse, if it exists, of the given matrix.

     Solution
We will use the method of augmenting with the identity.

 1. Switch row 1 and row 2.
 2. Multiply row 1 by -3 and add it to row 2.
 3. There is nothing further we can do. The zeros in row 2 indicate that this matrix has no inverse.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1113

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse of 3×3 Matrices

Unfortunately, we do not have a formula similar to the one for a  matrix to find the inverse of a   matrix.

Instead, we will augment the original matrix with the identity matrix and use row operations to obtain the inverse.

Given a    matrix

augment with the identity matrix

To begin, we write the augmented matrix with the identity on the right and on the left. Performing elementary row
operations so that the identity matrix appears on the left, we will obtain the inverse matrix on the right. We will find the
inverse of this matrix in the next example.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a    matrix, find the inverse

1. Write the original matrix augmented with the identity matrix on the right.

2. Use elementary row operations so that the identity appears on the left.

3. What is obtained on the right is the inverse of the original matrix.

4. Use matrix multiplication to show that  and

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Inverse of a 3 × 3 Matrix

Given the  matrix find the inverse.

     Solution                                                                                       The matrix on
Augment with the identity matrix, and then begin row operations until the identity matrix replaces
the right will be the inverse of
1114 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Thus,

     Analysis  let's multiply the two matrices together to see if the product equals the identity, if

To prove that
and

TRY IT #3 Find the inverse of the                matrix.

Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Inverse of a Matrix                                               is the

Solving a system of linear equations using the inverse of a matrix requires the definition of two new matrices:
matrix representing the variables of the system, and is the matrix representing the constants. Using matrix
multiplication, we may define a system of equations with the same number of equations as variables as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1115

To solve a system of linear equations using an inverse matrix, let be the coefficient matrix, let be the variable

matrix, and let be the constant matrix. Thus, we want to solve a system     For example, look at the following

system of equations.

From this system, the coefficient matrix is

The variable matrix is

And the constant matrix is

Then       looks like

Recall the discussion earlier in this section regarding multiplying a real number by its inverse,                  To

solve a single linear equation  for we would simply multiply both sides of the equation by the multiplicative
inverse (reciprocal) of Thus,

The only difference between a solving a linear equation and a system of equations written in matrix form is that finding
the inverse of a matrix is more complicated, and matrix multiplication is a longer process. However, the goal is the
same--to isolate the variable.

We will investigate this idea in detail, but it is helpful to begin with a  system and then move on to a  system.

Solving a System of Equations Using the Inverse of a Matrix

Given a system of equations, write the coefficient matrix the variable matrix and the constant matrix Then

Multiply both sides by the inverse of to obtain the solution.

      Q&A  If the coefficient matrix does not have an inverse, does that mean the system has no solution?

           No, if the coefficient matrix is not invertible, the system could be inconsistent and have no solution, or be
           dependent and have infinitely many solutions.
1116 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

         EXAMPLE 7
       Solving a 2 × 2 System Using the Inverse of a Matrix
       Solve the given system of equations using the inverse of a matrix.

     Solution
Write the system in terms of a coefficient matrix, a variable matrix, and a constant matrix.

Then

First, we need to calculate      Using the formula to calculate the inverse of a 2 by 2 matrix, we have:

So,
Now we are ready to solve. Multiply both sides of the equation by

The solution is

      Q&A        Can we solve for by finding the product

                 No, recall that matrix multiplication is not commutative, so                 Consider our steps for solving
                 the matrix equation.

                 Notice in the first step we multiplied both sides of the equation by  but the  was to the left of

                 on the left side and to the left of on the right side. Because matrix multiplication is not commutative,

                 order matters.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1117

  EXAMPLE 8
Solving a 3 × 3 System Using the Inverse of a Matrix
Solve the following system using the inverse of a matrix.

     Solution
Write the equation
First, we will find the inverse of by augmenting with the identity.
Multiply row 1 by

Multiply row 1 by 4 and add to row 2.

Add row 1 to row 3.

Multiply row 2 by -3 and add to row 1.

Multiply row 3 by 5.

Multiply row 3 by and add to row 1.
1118 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Multiply row 3 by  and add to row 2.

So,

Multiply both sides of the equation by           We want

Thus,

The solution is
       TRY IT #4 Solve the system using the inverse of the coefficient matrix.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a system of equations, solve with matrix inverses using a calculator.
   1. Save the coefficient matrix and the constant matrix as matrix variables and
   2. Enter the multiplication into the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed.
   3. If the coefficient matrix is invertible, the calculator will present the solution matrix; if the coefficient matrix is not

        invertible, the calculator will present an error message.

  EXAMPLE 9

Using a Calculator to Solve a System of Equations with Matrix Inverses
Solve the system of equations with matrix inverses using a calculator

     Solution                                                                              and enter the constant
On the matrix page of the calculator, enter the coefficient matrix as the matrix variable
matrix as the matrix variable

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1119

                                                                      

On the home screen of the calculator, type in the multiplication to solve for calling up each matrix variable as needed.
Evaluate the expression.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems with inverses.

    The Identity Matrix (http://openstax.org/l/identmatrix)
    Determining Inverse Matrices (http://openstax.org/l/inversematrix)
    Using a Matrix Equation to Solve a System of Equations (http://openstax.org/l/matrixsystem)

        11.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. In a previous section, we       2. Does every  matrix               3. Can you explain whether a
    showed that matrix                                                             matrix with an entire
    multiplication is not          have an inverse? Explain
    commutative, that is,                                                  row of zeros can have an
                   in most cases.  why or why not. Explain                 inverse?
    Can you explain why matrix
    multiplication is              what condition is necessary
    commutative for matrix
    inverses, that is,             for an inverse to exist.

4. Can a matrix with an entire     5. Can a matrix with zeros on
    column of zeros have an            the diagonal have an
    inverse? Explain why or why        inverse? If so, find an
    not.                               example. If not, prove why
                                       not. For simplicity, assume a
                                               matrix.

Algebraic

In the following exercises, show that matrix is the inverse of matrix

6.                                                7.

8.                                                9.
1120 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

10.                                                   11.

12.

For the following exercises, find the multiplicative inverse of each matrix, if it exists.

13.                                              14.                  15.

16.                                              17.                  18.

19.                                              20.                  21.

22.                                              23.                  24.

25.                                              26.

For the following exercises, solve the system using the inverse of a    matrix.
                                                                      29.
27.                                              28.

30.                                              31.                  32.

33.                                              34.

For the following exercises, solve a system using the inverse of a    matrix.
                                                                      37.
35.                                              36.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         11.7 · Solving Systems with Inverses 1121

38.  39.                                                            40.

41.  42.

Technology

For the following exercises, use a calculator to solve the system of equations with matrix inverses.

43.  44.                                                            45.

46.

Extensions

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the given matrix.

47.  48.                                                            49.

50.  51.
1122 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, write a system of equations that represents the situation. Then, solve the system using the
inverse of a matrix.

52. 2,400 tickets were sold for                  53. In the previous exercise, if   54. A food drive collected two
      a basketball game. If the                        you were told there were           different types of canned
      prices for floor 1 and floor                     400 more tickets sold for          goods, green beans and
      2 were different, and the                        floor 2 than floor 1, how          kidney beans. The total
      total amount of money                            much was the price of each         number of collected cans
      brought in is $64,000, how                       ticket?                            was 350 and the total
      much was the price of each                                                          weight of all donated food
      ticket?                                                                             was 348 lb, 12 oz. If the
                                                                                          green bean cans weigh 2
                                                                                          oz less than the kidney
                                                                                          bean cans, how many of
                                                                                          each can was donated?

55. Students were asked to                       56. The nursing club held a        57. A clothing store needs to
      bring their favorite fruit to                    bake sale to raise money           order new inventory. It has
      class. 95% of the fruits                         and sold brownies and              three different types of
      consisted of banana, apple,                      chocolate chip cookies.            hats for sale: straw hats,
      and oranges. If oranges                          They priced the brownies           beanies, and cowboy hats.
      were twice as popular as                         at $1 and the chocolate            The straw hat is priced at
      bananas, and apples were                         chip cookies at $0.75. They        $13.99, the beanie at $7.99,
      5% less popular than                             raised $700 and sold 850           and the cowboy hat at
      bananas, what are the                            items. How many brownies           $14.49. If 100 hats were
      percentages of each                              and how many cookies               sold this past quarter,
      individual fruit?                                were sold?                         $1,119 was taken in by
                                                                                          sales, and the amount of
                                                                                          beanies sold was 10 more
                                                                                          than cowboy hats, how
                                                                                          many of each should the
                                                                                          clothing store order to
                                                                                          replace those already sold?

58. Anna, Percy, and Morgan                      59. Three roommates shared a       60. A farmer constructed a
      weigh a combined 370 lb. If                      package of 12 ice cream
      Morgan weighs 20 lb more                         bars, but no one             chicken coop out of
      than Percy, and Anna                             remembers who ate how
      weighs 1.5 times as much                         many. If Micah ate twice as  chicken wire, wood, and
      as Percy, how much does                          many ice cream bars as
      each person weigh?                               Joe, and Albert ate three    plywood. The chicken wire
                                                       less than Micah, how many
                                                       ice cream bars did each      cost $2 per square foot, the
                                                       roommate eat?
                                                                                    wood $10 per square foot,

                                                                                    and the plywood $5 per

                                                                                    square foot. The farmer

                                                                                    spent a total of $51, and

                                                                                    the total amount of

                                                                                    materials used was

                                                                                    He used  more chicken

                                                                                    wire than plywood. How

                                                                                    much of each material in

                                                                                    did the farmer use?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1123

61. Jay has lemon, orange, and
      pomegranate trees in his
      backyard. An orange
      weighs 8 oz, a lemon 5 oz,
      and a pomegranate 11 oz.
      Jay picked 142 pieces of
      fruit weighing a total of 70
      lb, 10 oz. He picked 15.5
      times more oranges than
      pomegranates. How many
      of each fruit did Jay pick?

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Evaluate 2 × 2 determinants.
           Use Cramer's Rule to solve a system of equations in two variables.
           Evaluate 3 × 3 determinants.
           Use Cramer's Rule to solve a system of three equations in three variables.
           Know the properties of determinants.

We have learned how to solve systems of equations in two variables and three variables, and by multiple methods:
substitution, addition, Gaussian elimination, using the inverse of a matrix, and graphing. Some of these methods are
easier to apply than others and are more appropriate in certain situations. In this section, we will study two more
strategies for solving systems of equations.

Evaluating the Determinant of a 2×2 Matrix

A determinant is a real number that can be very useful in mathematics because it has multiple applications, such as
calculating area, volume, and other quantities. Here, we will use determinants to reveal whether a matrix is invertible by
using the entries of a square matrix to determine whether there is a solution to the system of equations. Perhaps one of
the more interesting applications, however, is their use in cryptography. Secure signals or messages are sometimes sent
encoded in a matrix. The data can only be decrypted with an invertible matrix and the determinant. For our purposes,
we focus on the determinant as an indication of the invertibility of the matrix. Calculating the determinant of a matrix
involves following the specific patterns that are outlined in this section.

Find the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix

The determinant of a  matrix, given

is defined as

Notice the change in notation. There are several ways to indicate the determinant, including  and replacing the
brackets in a matrix with straight lines,

  EXAMPLE 1

Finding the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix
Find the determinant of the given matrix.
1124 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

             Solution

     Using Cramer's Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations in Two Variables

        We will now introduce a final method for solving systems of equations that uses determinants. Known as Cramer's Rule,
        this technique dates back to the middle of the 18th century and is named for its innovator, the Swiss mathematician
        Gabriel Cramer (1704-1752), who introduced it in 1750 in Introduction à l'Analyse des lignes Courbes algébriques.
        Cramer's Rule is a viable and efficient method for finding solutions to systems with an arbitrary number of unknowns,
        provided that we have the same number of equations as unknowns.
        Cramer's Rule will give us the unique solution to a system of equations, if it exists. However, if the system has no
        solution or an infinite number of solutions, this will be indicated by a determinant of zero. To find out if the system is
        inconsistent or dependent, another method, such as elimination, will have to be used.
        To understand Cramer's Rule, let's look closely at how we solve systems of linear equations using basic row operations.
        Consider a system of two equations in two variables.

        We eliminate one variable using row operations and solve for the other. Say that we wish to solve for If equation (2) is
        multiplied by the opposite of the coefficient of in equation (1), equation (1) is multiplied by the coefficient of in
        equation (2), and we add the two equations, the variable will be eliminated.

        Now, solve for

        Similarly, to solve for we will eliminate

        Solving for gives

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1125

Notice that the denominator for both and is the determinant of the coefficient matrix.

We can use these formulas to solve for and but Cramer's Rule also introduces new notation:

·  determinant of the coefficient matrix

·          determinant of the numerator in the solution of

·          determinant of the numerator in the solution of

The key to Cramer's Rule is replacing the variable column of interest with the constant column and calculating the
determinants. We can then express and as a quotient of two determinants.

  Cramer's Rule for 2×2 Systems

  Cramer's Rule is a method that uses determinants to solve systems of equations that have the same number of
  equations as variables.
  Consider a system of two linear equations in two variables.

The solution using Cramer's Rule is given as

If we are solving for the column is replaced with the constant column. If we are solving for  the column is
replaced with the constant column.

EXAMPLE 2

Using Cramer's Rule to Solve a 2 × 2 System

Solve the following  system using Cramer's Rule.

     Solution
Solve for

Solve for
1126 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        The solution is
               TRY IT #1 Use Cramer's Rule to solve the 2 × 2 system of equations.

     Evaluating the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix

        Finding the determinant of a 2×2 matrix is straightforward, but finding the determinant of a 3×3 matrix is more
        complicated. One method is to augment the 3×3 matrix with a repetition of the first two columns, giving a 3×5 matrix.
       Then we calculate the sum of the products of entries down each of the three diagonals (upper left to lower right), and
       subtract the products of entries up each of the three diagonals (lower left to upper right). This is more easily understood
        with a visual and an example.
        Find the determinant of the 3×3 matrix.

         1. Augment with the first two columns.

         2. From upper left to lower right: Multiply the entries down the first diagonal. Add the result to the product of entries
              down the second diagonal. Add this result to the product of the entries down the third diagonal.

         3. From lower left to upper right: Subtract the product of entries up the first diagonal. From this result subtract the
              product of entries up the second diagonal. From this result, subtract the product of entries up the third diagonal.

        The algebra is as follows:
          EXAMPLE 3

        Finding the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
        Find the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix given

             Solution
        Augment the matrix with the first two columns and then follow the formula. Thus,

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1127

TRY IT #2 Find the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix.

Q&A  Can we use the same method to find the determinant of a larger matrix?

     No, this method only works for  and  matrices. For larger matrices it is best to use a graphing

     utility or computer software.

Using Cramer's Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations in Three Variables

Now that we can find the determinant of a 3 × 3 matrix, we can apply Cramer's Rule to solve a system of three equations
in three variables. Cramer's Rule is straightforward, following a pattern consistent with Cramer's Rule for 2 × 2 matrices.
As the order of the matrix increases to 3 × 3, however, there are many more calculations required.

When we calculate the determinant to be zero, Cramer's Rule gives no indication as to whether the system has no
solution or an infinite number of solutions. To find out, we have to perform elimination on the system.

Consider a 3 × 3 system of equations.

where

If we are writing the determinant we replace the column with the constant column. If we are writing the
determinant we replace the column with the constant column. If we are writing the determinant we replace
the column with the constant column. Always check the answer.

  EXAMPLE 4
Solving a 3 × 3 System Using Cramer's Rule
Find the solution to the given 3 × 3 system using Cramer's Rule.
1128 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

             Solution
        Use Cramer's Rule.

        Then,

The solution is
       TRY IT #3 Use Cramer's Rule to solve the 3 × 3 matrix.

  EXAMPLE 5

Using Cramer's Rule to Solve an Inconsistent System
Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule.

                                                                        
                                                                        

     Solution
We begin by finding the determinants

We know that a determinant of zero means that either the system has no solution or it has an infinite number of
solutions. To see which one, we use the process of elimination. Our goal is to eliminate one of the variables.
 1. Multiply equation (1) by
 2. Add the result to equation

We obtain the equation           which is false. Therefore, the system has no solution. Graphing the system reveals two
parallel lines. See Figure 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1129

                                                                              Figure 1

  EXAMPLE 6
Use Cramer's Rule to Solve a Dependent System
Solve the system with an infinite number of solutions.

     Solution
Let's find the determinant first. Set up a matrix augmented by the first two columns.

Then,

As the determinant equals zero, there is either no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform
elimination to find out.
 1. Multiply equation (1) by and add the result to equation (3):

2. Obtaining an answer of       a statement that is always true, means that the system has an infinite number of

solutions. Graphing the system, we can see that two of the planes are the same and they both intersect the third

plane on a line. See Figure 2.

                                                                              Figure 2

Understanding Properties of Determinants

There are many properties of determinants. Listed here are some properties that may be helpful in calculating the
1130 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

determinant of a matrix.

Properties of Determinants

1. If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.

2. When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.

3. If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero.

4. If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the determinant equals zero.

5. The determinant of an inverse matrix          is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix

6. If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same factor.

  EXAMPLE 7

Illustrating Properties of Determinants
Illustrate each of the properties of determinants.

     Solution
Property 1 states that if the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant is the product of the entries down the
main diagonal.

Augment with the first two columns.

Then
Property 2 states that interchanging rows changes the sign. Given

Property 3 states that if two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero.

Property 4 states that if a row or column equals zero, the determinant equals zero. Thus,

Property 5 states that the determinant of an inverse matrix  is the reciprocal of the determinant Thus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1131

Property 6 states that if any row or column of a matrix is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the
same factor. Thus,

  EXAMPLE 8
Using Cramer's Rule and Determinant Properties to Solve a System
Find the solution to the given 3 × 3 system.

     Solution
Using Cramer's Rule, we have

Notice that the second and third columns are identical. According to Property 3, the determinant will be zero, so there is
either no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to find out.
 1. Multiply equation (3) by -2 and add the result to equation (1).

Obtaining a statement that is a contradiction means that the system has no solution.
       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with Cramer's Rule.
      Solve a System of Two Equations Using Cramer's Rule (http://openstax.org/l/system2cramer)
      Solve a Systems of Three Equations using Cramer's Rule (http://openstax.org/l/system3cramer)
1132 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

        11.8 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain why we can always                     2. Examining Cramer's Rule,      3. Explain what it means in
    evaluate the determinant of                      explain why there is no          terms of an inverse for a
    a square matrix.                                 unique solution to the           matrix to have a 0
                                                     system when the                  determinant.
                                                     determinant of your matrix
                                                     is 0. For simplicity, use a
                                                             matrix.

4. The determinant of
    matrix is 3. If you switch
    the rows and multiply the
    first row by 6 and the
    second row by 2, explain
    how to find the determinant
    and provide the answer.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the determinant.

5.                                               6.                               7.

8.                                               9.                               10.

11.                                              12.                              13.

14.                                              15.                              16.

17.                                              18.                              19.

20.                                              21.                              22.

23.                                              24.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1133

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Cramer's Rule.

25.  26.  27.

28.  29.  30.

31.  32.  33.

34.

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Cramer's Rule.

35.  36.  37.

38.  39.  40.

41.  42.  43.

44.

Technology

For the following exercises, use the determinant function on a graphing utility.

45.  46.  47.

48.
1134 11 · Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to describe the behavior. Then, calculate the
determinant. Will there be a unique solution? If so, find the unique solution.

49. Two numbers add up to 56.                    50. Two numbers add up to            51. Three numbers add up to
      One number is 20 less than                       104. If you add two times            106. The first number is 3
      the other.                                       the first number plus two            less than the second
                                                       times the second number,             number. The third number
                                                       your total is 208                    is 4 more than the first
                                                                                            number.

52. Three numbers add to 216.
      The sum of the first two
      numbers is 112. The third
      number is 8 less than the
      first two numbers
      combined.

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to describe the behavior. Then, solve the system for all
solutions using Cramer's Rule.

53. You invest $10,000 into two                  54. You invest $80,000 into two      55. A theater needs to know
      accounts, which receive 8%                       accounts, $22,000 in one             how many adult tickets and
      interest and 5% interest. At                     account, and $58,000 in the          children tickets were sold
      the end of a year, you had                       other account. At the end            out of the 1,200 total
      $10,710 in your combined                         of one year, assuming                tickets. If children's tickets
      accounts. How much was                           simple interest, you have            are $5.95, adult tickets are
      invested in each account?                        earned $2,470 in interest.           $11.15, and the total
                                                       The second account                   amount of revenue was
                                                       receives half a percent less         $12,756, how many
                                                       than twice the interest on           children's tickets and adult
                                                       the first account. What are          tickets were sold?
                                                       the interest rates for your
                                                       accounts?

56. A concert venue sells single                 57. You decide to paint your         58. You sold two types of
      tickets for $40 each and                         kitchen green. You create            scarves at a farmers'
      couple's tickets for $65. If                     the color of paint by mixing         market and would like to
      the total revenue was                            yellow and blue paints. You          know which one was more
      $18,090 and the 321 tickets                      cannot remember how                  popular. The total number
      were sold, how many                              many gallons of each color           of scarves sold was 56, the
      single tickets and how                           went into your mix, but you          yellow scarf cost $10, and
      many couple's tickets were                       know there were 10 gal               the purple scarf cost $11. If
      sold?                                            total. Additionally, you kept        you had total revenue of
                                                       your receipt, and know the           $583, how many yellow
                                                       total amount spent was               scarves and how many
                                                       $29.50. If each gallon of            purple scarves were sold?
                                                       yellow costs $2.59, and
                                                       each gallon of blue costs
                                                       $3.19, how many gallons of
                                                       each color go into your
                                                       green mix?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                11.8 · Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1135

59. Your garden produced two          60. At a market, the three most      61. At the same market, the
      types of tomatoes, one                popular vegetables make              three most popular fruits
      green and one red. The red            up 53% of vegetable sales.           make up 37% of the total
      weigh 10 oz, and the green            Corn has 4% higher sales             fruit sold. Strawberries sell
      weigh 4 oz. You have 30               than broccoli, which has 5%          twice as much as oranges,
      tomatoes, and a total                 more sales than onions.              and kiwis sell one more
      weight of 13 lb, 14 oz. How           What percentage does                 percentage point than
      many of each type of                  each vegetable have in the           oranges. For each fruit,
      tomato do you have?                   market share?                        find the percentage of total
                                                                                 fruit sold.

62. Three artists performed at        63. A movie theatre sold
      a concert venue. The first            tickets to three movies. The
      one charged $15 per ticket,           tickets to the first movie
      the second artist charged             were $5, the tickets to the
      $45 per ticket, and the final         second movie were $11,
      one charged $22 per ticket.           and the third movie was
      There were 510 tickets sold,          $12. 100 tickets were sold
      for a total of $12,700. If the        to the first movie. The total
      first band had 40 more                number of tickets sold was
      audience members than                 642, for a total revenue of
      the second band, how                  $6,774. How many tickets
      many tickets were sold for            for each movie were sold?
      each band?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A health-conscious company decides to make a trail mix out of almonds,
dried cranberries, and chocolate-covered cashews. The nutritional information for these items is shown in Table 1.

                                      Fat (g) Protein (g) Carbohydrates (g)

Almonds (10)                          6  2                                 3

Cranberries (10) 0.02                    0                                 8

Cashews (10)                          7  3.5                               5.5

Table 1

64. For the special "low-             65. For the "hiking" mix, there      66. For the "energy-booster"
      carb"trail mix, there are             are 1,000 pieces in the mix,         mix, there are 1,000 pieces
      1,000 pieces of mix. The              containing 390.8 g of fat,           in the mix, containing 145 g
      total number of                       and 165 g of protein. If             of protein and 625 g of
      carbohydrates is 425 g, and           there is the same amount             carbohydrates. If the
      the total amount of fat is            of almonds as cashews,               number of almonds and
      570.2 g. If there are 200             how many of each item is             cashews summed together
      more pieces of cashews                in the trail mix?                    is equivalent to the amount
      than cranberries, how                                                      of cranberries, how many
      many of each item is in the                                                of each item is in the trail
      trail mix?                                                                 mix?
1136 11 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

addition method an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in which the equations are added in

a way that eliminates one variable, allowing the resulting equation to be solved for the remaining variable;

substitution is then used to solve for the first variable

augmented matrix a coefficient matrix adjoined with the constant column separated by a vertical line within the

matrix brackets

break-even point the point at which a cost function intersects a revenue function; where profit is zero

coefficient matrix a matrix that contains only the coefficients from a system of equations

column a set of numbers aligned vertically in a matrix

consistent system a system for which there is a single solution to all equations in the system and it is an independent

system, or if there are an infinite number of solutions and it is a dependent system

cost function the function used to calculate the costs of doing business; it usually has two parts, fixed costs and

variable costs

Cramer's Rule a method for solving systems of equations that have the same number of equations as variables using

determinants

dependent system a system of linear equations in which the two equations represent the same line; there are an

infinite number of solutions to a dependent system

determinant a number calculated using the entries of a square matrix that determines such information as whether

there is a solution to a system of equations

entry an element, coefficient, or constant in a matrix

feasible region the solution to a system of nonlinear inequalities that is the region of the graph where the shaded

regions of each inequality intersect

Gaussian elimination using elementary row operations to obtain a matrix in row-echelon form

identity matrix a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal and zeros everywhere else; it acts as a 1 in

matrix algebra

inconsistent system a system of linear equations with no common solution because they represent parallel lines,

which have no point or line in common

independent system a system of linear equations with exactly one solution pair

main diagonal entries from the upper left corner diagonally to the lower right corner of a square matrix

matrix a rectangular array of numbers

multiplicative inverse of a matrix a matrix that, when multiplied by the original, equals the identity matrix

nonlinear inequality an inequality containing a nonlinear expression

partial fraction decomposition the process of returning a simplified rational expression to its original form, a sum or

difference of simpler rational expressions

partial fractions the individual fractions that make up the sum or difference of a rational expression before combining

them into a simplified rational expression

profit function the profit function is written as          revenue minus cost

revenue function the function that is used to calculate revenue, simply written as          where quantity and

price

row a set of numbers aligned horizontally in a matrix

row operations adding one row to another row, multiplying a row by a constant, interchanging rows, and so on, with

the goal of achieving row-echelon form

row-echelon form after performing row operations, the matrix form that contains ones down the main diagonal and

zeros at every space below the diagonal

row-equivalent two matrices and are row-equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by performing basic

row operations

scalar multiple an entry of a matrix that has been multiplied by a scalar

solution set the set of all ordered pairs or triples that satisfy all equations in a system of equations

substitution method an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in which one of the two

equations is solved for one variable and then substituted into the second equation to solve for the second variable

system of linear equations a set of two or more equations in two or more variables that must be considered

simultaneously.

system of nonlinear equations a system of equations containing at least one equation that is of degree larger than

one

system of nonlinear inequalities a system of two or more inequalities in two or more variables containing at least

one inequality that is not linear

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11 · Chapter Review 1137

Key Equations                matrix

  Identity matrix for a

Identity matrix for a        matrix

Multiplicative inverse of a  matrix

Key Concepts

11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables

· A system of linear equations consists of two or more equations made up of two or more variables such that all
    equations in the system are considered simultaneously.

· The solution to a system of linear equations in two variables is any ordered pair that satisfies each equation
    independently. See Example 1.

· Systems of equations are classified as independent with one solution, dependent with an infinite number of
    solutions, or inconsistent with no solution.

· One method of solving a system of linear equations in two variables is by graphing. In this method, we graph the
    equations on the same set of axes. See Example 2.

· Another method of solving a system of linear equations is by substitution. In this method, we solve for one variable
    in one equation and substitute the result into the second equation. See Example 3.

· A third method of solving a system of linear equations is by addition, in which we can eliminate a variable by adding
    opposite coefficients of corresponding variables. See Example 4.

· It is often necessary to multiply one or both equations by a constant to facilitate elimination of a variable when
    adding the two equations together. See Example 5, Example 6, and Example 7.

· Either method of solving a system of equations results in a false statement for inconsistent systems because they
    are made up of parallel lines that never intersect. See Example 8.

· The solution to a system of dependent equations will always be true because both equations describe the same line.
    See Example 9.

· Systems of equations can be used to solve real-world problems that involve more than one variable, such as those
    relating to revenue, cost, and profit. See Example 10 and Example 11.

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables

· A solution set is an ordered triple  that represents the intersection of three planes in space. See

Example 1.

· A system of three equations in three variables can be solved by using a series of steps that forces a variable to be

eliminated. The steps include interchanging the order of equations, multiplying both sides of an equation by a

nonzero constant, and adding a nonzero multiple of one equation to another equation. See Example 2.

· Systems of three equations in three variables are useful for solving many different types of real-world problems. See

Example 3.

· A system of equations in three variables is inconsistent if no solution exists. After performing elimination

operations, the result is a contradiction. See Example 4.

· Systems of equations in three variables that are inconsistent could result from three parallel planes, two parallel

planes and one intersecting plane, or three planes that intersect the other two but not at the same location.

· A system of equations in three variables is dependent if it has an infinite number of solutions. After performing

elimination operations, the result is an identity. See Example 5.

· Systems of equations in three variables that are dependent could result from three identical planes, three planes

intersecting at a line, or two identical planes that intersect the third on a line.

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables

· There are three possible types of solutions to a system of equations representing a line and a parabola: (1) no
    solution, the line does not intersect the parabola; (2) one solution, the line is tangent to the parabola; and (3) two
1138 11 · Chapter Review

    solutions, the line intersects the parabola in two points. See Example 1.
· There are three possible types of solutions to a system of equations representing a circle and a line: (1) no solution,

    the line does not intersect the circle; (2) one solution, the line is tangent to the circle; (3) two solutions, the line
    intersects the circle in two points. See Example 2.
· There are five possible types of solutions to the system of nonlinear equations representing an ellipse and a circle:
    (1) no solution, the circle and the ellipse do not intersect; (2) one solution, the circle and the ellipse are tangent to
    each other; (3) two solutions, the circle and the ellipse intersect in two points; (4) three solutions, the circle and
    ellipse intersect in three places; (5) four solutions, the circle and the ellipse intersect in four points. See Example 3.
· An inequality is graphed in much the same way as an equation, except for > or <, we draw a dashed line and shade
    the region containing the solution set. See Example 4.
· Inequalities are solved the same way as equalities, but solutions to systems of inequalities must satisfy both
    inequalities. See Example 5.

11.4 Partial Fractions

· Decompose               by writing the partial fractions as  Solve by clearing the fractions, expanding the

right side, collecting like terms, and setting corresponding coefficients equal to each other, then setting up and
solving a system of equations. See Example 1.

· The decomposition of           with repeated linear factors must account for the factors of the denominator in

increasing powers. See Example 2.

· The decomposition of           with a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor needs a linear numerator over the

quadratic factor, as in                 See Example 3.

· In the decomposition of        where  has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor, when the irreducible

quadratic factors are repeated, powers of the denominator factors must be represented in increasing powers as

See Example 4.

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations

· A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. Entries are arranged in rows and columns.

· The dimensions of a matrix refer to the number of rows and the number of columns. A    matrix has three rows

and two columns. See Example 1.

· We add and subtract matrices of equal dimensions by adding and subtracting corresponding entries of each matrix.

See Example 2, Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5.

· Scalar multiplication involves multiplying each entry in a matrix by a constant. See Example 6.

· Scalar multiplication is often required before addition or subtraction can occur. See Example 7.

· Multiplying matrices is possible when inner dimensions are the same--the number of columns in the first matrix

must match the number of rows in the second.

· The product of two matrices, and is obtained by multiplying each entry in row 1 of by each entry in column 1

of then multiply each entry of row 1 of by each entry in columns 2 of and so on. See Example 8 and Example

9.

· Many real-world problems can often be solved using matrices. See Example 10.

· We can use a calculator to perform matrix operations after saving each matrix as a matrix variable. See Example 11.

11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination

· An augmented matrix is one that contains the coefficients and constants of a system of equations. See Example 1.
· A matrix augmented with the constant column can be represented as the original system of equations. See Example

    2.
· Row operations include multiplying a row by a constant, adding one row to another row, and interchanging rows.
· We can use Gaussian elimination to solve a system of equations. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5.
· Row operations are performed on matrices to obtain row-echelon form. See Example 6.
· To solve a system of equations, write it in augmented matrix form. Perform row operations to obtain row-echelon

    form. Back-substitute to find the solutions. See Example 7 and Example 8.
· A calculator can be used to solve systems of equations using matrices. See Example 9.
· Many real-world problems can be solved using augmented matrices. See Example 10 and Example 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        11 · Exercises 1139

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses

    · An identity matrix has the property       See Example 1.

    · An invertible matrix has the property                  See Example 2.

    · Use matrix multiplication and the identity to find the inverse of a      matrix. See Example 3.

    · The multiplicative inverse can be found using a formula. See Example 4.

    · Another method of finding the inverse is by augmenting with the identity. See Example 5.

    · We can augment a     matrix with the identity on the right and use row operations to turn the original matrix into

    the identity, and the matrix on the right becomes the inverse. See Example 6.

    · Write the system of equations as          and multiply both sides by the inverse of                  See

    Example 7 and Example 8.

    · We can also use a calculator to solve a system of equations with matrix inverses. See Example 9.

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule

    · The determinant for     is             See Example 1.

    · Cramer's Rule replaces a variable column with the constant column. Solutions are                     See Example 2.

    · To find the determinant of a 3×3 matrix, augment with the first two columns. Add the three diagonal entries (upper
        left to lower right) and subtract the three diagonal entries (lower left to upper right). See Example 3.

    · To solve a system of three equations in three variables using Cramer's Rule, replace a variable column with the

    constant column for each desired solution:                                 See Example 4.

    · Cramer's Rule is also useful for finding the solution of a system of equations with no solution or infinite solutions.

    See Example 5 and Example 6.

    · Certain properties of determinants are useful for solving problems. For example:

     If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.

     When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.

     If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero.

     If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the determinant equals zero.

     The determinant of an inverse matrix       is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix

     If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same factor. See Example 7

    and Example 8.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables

For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system of equations.

1.  and                           2.            and

For the following exercises, use substitution to solve the system of equations.

3.                                4.                                       5.

For the following exercises, use addition to solve the system of equations.

6.                                7.                                       8.
1140 11 · Exercises

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations.

9. A factory has a cost of                  10. A performer charges
    production
                                     and a        where is the total
    revenue function                              number of attendees at a
                        What is the               show. The venue charges
    break-even point?                             $75 per ticket. After how
                                                  many people buy tickets
                                                  does the venue break even,
                                                  and what is the value of
                                                  the total tickets sold at that
                                                  point?

Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables
For the following exercises, solve the system of three equations using substitution or addition.

11.                                         12.                                   13.

14.                                         15.                                   16.

17.                                         18.

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations.

19. Three odd numbers sum                   20. A local theatre sells out for
      up to 61. The smaller is                    their show. They sell all 500
      one-third the larger and                    tickets for a total purse of
      the middle number is 16                     $8,070.00. The tickets were
      less than the larger. What                  priced at $15 for students,
      are the three numbers?                      $12 for children, and $18
                                                  for adults. If the band sold
                                                  three times as many adult
                                                  tickets as children's tickets,
                                                  how many of each type
                                                  was sold?

Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables
For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations.

21.                                         22.                                   23.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      11 · Exercises 1141

24.                25.

For the following exercises, graph the inequality.

26.                27.

For the following exercises, graph the system of inequalities.

28.                29.                                          30.

Partial Fractions

For the following exercises, decompose into partial fractions.

31.                32.                                          33.

34.                35.                                          36.

37.                38.

Matrices and Matrix Operations
For the following exercises, perform the requested operations on the given matrices.

39.                40.                                          41.

42.                43.                                          44.

45.                46.                                          47.

48.                49.                                          50.

Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination

For the following exercises, write the system of linear equations from the augmented matrix. Indicate whether there will
be a unique solution.

51.                52.
1142 11 · Exercises

For the following exercises, write the augmented matrix from the system of linear equations.

53.                              54.                          55.

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Gaussian elimination.

56.                              57.                          58.

59.                              60.

Solving Systems with Inverses
For the following exercises, find the inverse of the matrix.

61.                              62.                          63.

64.

For the following exercises, find the solutions by computing the inverse of the matrix.

65.                              66.                          67.

68.

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations.

69. Students were asked to bring their favorite fruit to      70. A school club held a bake sale to raise money and
      class. 90% of the fruits consisted of banana, apple,          sold brownies and chocolate chip cookies. They
      and oranges. If oranges were half as popular as               priced the brownies at $2 and the chocolate chip
      bananas and apples were 5% more popular than                  cookies at $1. They raised $250 and sold 175
      bananas, what are the percentages of each                     items. How many brownies and how many cookies
      individual fruit?                                             were sold?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11 · Exercises 1143

Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule
For the following exercises, find the determinant.

71.        72.                                                        73.

74.

For the following exercises, use Cramer's Rule to solve the linear systems of equations.

75.        76.                                                        77.

78.        79.                                                        80.

Practice Test

Is the following ordered pair a solution to the system of equations?

1.   with

For the following exercises, solve the systems of linear and nonlinear equations using substitution or elimination.
Indicate if no solution exists.

2.         3.                                                         4.

5.         6.                                                         7.

8.         9.

For the following exercises, graph the following inequalities.

10.        11.
1144 11 · Exercises

For the following exercises, write the partial fraction decomposition.

12.                              13.                                    14.

For the following exercises, perform the given matrix operations.

15.                              16.                                    17.

18.                              19.                                    20. If               what would

21. Rewrite the system of                                                    be the determinant if you
      linear equations as an
      augmented matrix.                                                      switched rows 1 and 3,

                                                                             multiplied the second row

                                                                             by 12, and took the

                                                                             inverse?

                                 22. Rewrite the augmented
                                       matrix as a system of linear
                                       equations.

For the following exercises, use Gaussian elimination to solve the systems of equations.

23.                              24.

For the following exercises, use the inverse of a matrix to solve the systems of equations.

25.                              26.

For the following exercises, use Cramer's Rule to solve the systems of equations.

27.                              28.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        11 · Exercises 1145

For the following exercises, solve using a system of linear equations.

29. A factory producing cell phones has the following    30. A small fair charges $1.50 for students, $1 for
      cost and revenue functions:                              children, and $2 for adults. In one day, three times
                                           and                 as many children as adults attended. A total of 800
      What is the range of cell phones they should             tickets were sold for a total revenue of $1,050.
      produce each day so there is profit? Round to the        How many of each type of ticket was sold?
      nearest number that generates profit.
1146 11 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                       12 · Introduction 1147

12  ANALYTIC GEOMETRY

The rings of Saturn have produced wonder, as well as misunderstanding, since Galileo first discovered them (he initially
thought they were moons). Though they appear to be a series of solid discs even in this 2004 closeup from the Cassini
probe, 19th century mathematicians proved that they are made up of billions of small objects clustered together. (credit:
modificaion of "Saturn" by NASA/JPL-Caltech/SSI/Kevin M. Gill/flickr)

Chapter Outline

  12.1 The Ellipse
  12.2 The Hyperbola
  12.3 The Parabola
  12.4 Rotation of Axes
  12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates

      Introduction to Analytic Geometry

The Greek mathematician Menaechmus (c. 380-c. 320 BCE) is generally credited with discovering the shapes formed by
the intersection of a plane and a right circular cone. Depending on how he tilted the plane when it intersected the cone,
he formed different shapes at the intersection-beautiful shapes with near-perfect symmetry.

It was also said that Aristotle may have had an intuitive understanding of these shapes, as he observed the orbit of the
planet to be circular. He presumed that the planets moved in circular orbits around Earth, and for nearly 2000 years this
was the commonly held belief.

It was not until the Renaissance movement that Johannes Kepler noticed that the orbits of the planet were not circular in
nature. His published law of planetary motion in the 1600s changed our view of the solar system forever. He claimed that
the sun was at one end of the orbits, and the planets revolved around the sun in an oval-shaped path.

Other objects in the solar system (and perhaps other systems) follow a similar elliptical path, including the spectacular
rings of Saturn. Using this understanding as a basis, 19th century mathematicians like James Clerk Maxwell and Sofya
Kovalevskaya showed that despite their appearance through the telescopes of the day (and even in current telescopes),
the rings are not solid and continuous, but are rather composed of small particles. Even after the Voyager and Cassini
missions have provided close-up and detailed data regarding the ring structures, full understanding of their construction
relies heavily on mathematical analysis. Of particular interest are the influences of Saturn's moons and moonlets, and
the ways they both disrupt and preserve the ring structure.

In this chapter, we will investigate the two-dimensional figures that are formed when a right circular cone is intersected
by a plane. We will begin by studying each of three figures created in this manner. We will develop defining equations for
each figure and then learn how to use these equations to solve a variety of problems.
1148 12 · Analytic Geometry

    12.1 The Ellipse

      Learning Objectives

        In this section, you will:
                   Write equations of ellipses in standard form.
                   Graph ellipses centered at the origin.
                   Graph ellipses not centered at the origin.
                   Solve applied problems involving ellipses.

                                 Figure 1 The National Statuary Hall in Washington, D.C. (credit: Greg Palmer, Flickr)
        Can you imagine standing at one end of a large room and still being able to hear a whisper from a person standing at
        the other end? The National Statuary Hall in Washington, D.C., shown in Figure 1, is such a room.1 It is an semi-circular
       room called a whispering chamber because the shape makes it possible for sound to travel along the walls and dome. In
        this section, we will investigate the shape of this room and its real-world applications, including how far apart two people
        in Statuary Hall can stand and still hear each other whisper.

     Writing Equations of Ellipses in Standard Form

        A conic section, or conic, is a shape resulting from intersecting a right circular cone with a plane. The angle at which the
        plane intersects the cone determines the shape, as shown in Figure 2.

                                                  Figure 2

Conic sections can also be described by a set of points in the coordinate plane. Later in this chapter, we will see that the

graph of any quadratic equation in two variables is a conic section. The signs of the equations and the coefficients of the

variable terms determine the shape. This section focuses on the four variations of the standard form of the equation for

the ellipse. An ellipse is the set of all points  in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is

a constant. Each fixed point is called a focus (plural: foci).

1 Architect of the Capitol. http://www.aoc.gov. Accessed April 15, 2014.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                      12.1 · The Ellipse 1149

We can draw an ellipse using a piece of cardboard, two thumbtacks, a pencil, and string. Place the thumbtacks in the
cardboard to form the foci of the ellipse. Cut a piece of string longer than the distance between the two thumbtacks (the
length of the string represents the constant in the definition). Tack each end of the string to the cardboard, and trace a
curve with a pencil held taut against the string. The result is an ellipse. See Figure 3.

                                                                              Figure 3

Every ellipse has two axes of symmetry. The longer axis is called the major axis, and the shorter axis is called the minor
axis. Each endpoint of the major axis is the vertex of the ellipse (plural: vertices), and each endpoint of the minor axis is
a co-vertex of the ellipse. The center of an ellipse is the midpoint of both the major and minor axes. The axes are
perpendicular at the center. The foci always lie on the major axis, and the sum of the distances from the foci to any point
on the ellipse (the constant sum) is greater than the distance between the foci. See Figure 4.

               Figure 4

In this section, we restrict ellipses to those that are positioned vertically or horizontally in the coordinate plane. That is,
the axes will either lie on or be parallel to the x- and y-axes. Later in the chapter, we will see ellipses that are rotated in
the coordinate plane.

To work with horizontal and vertical ellipses in the coordinate plane, we consider two cases: those that are centered at
the origin and those that are centered at a point other than the origin. First we will learn to derive the equations of
ellipses, and then we will learn how to write the equations of ellipses in standard form. Later we will use what we learn to
draw the graphs.

Deriving the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at the Origin

To derive the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin, we begin with the foci  and  The ellipse is the set

of all points  such that the sum of the distances from  to the foci is constant, as shown in Figure 5.
1150 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                   Figure 5

If  is a vertex of the ellipse, the distance from  to          is              The distance from  to                    is

    . The sum of the distances from the foci to the vertex is

If  is a point on the ellipse, then we can define the following variables:

By the definition of an ellipse,  is constant for any point        on the ellipse. We know that the sum of these

distances is for the vertex       It follows that              for any point on the ellipse. We will begin the derivation

by applying the distance formula. The rest of the derivation is algebraic.

Thus, the standard equation of an ellipse is       This equation defines an ellipse centered at the origin. If

         the ellipse is stretched further in the horizontal direction, and if  the ellipse is stretched further in the
vertical direction.

Writing Equations of Ellipses Centered at the Origin in Standard Form

Standard forms of equations tell us about key features of graphs. Take a moment to recall some of the standard forms of
equations we've worked with in the past: linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential, logarithmic, and so on. By learning to
interpret standard forms of equations, we are bridging the relationship between algebraic and geometric
representations of mathematical phenomena.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  12.1 · The Ellipse 1151

The key features of the ellipse are its center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and lengths and positions of the major and minor
axes. Just as with other equations, we can identify all of these features just by looking at the standard form of the
equation. There are four variations of the standard form of the ellipse. These variations are categorized first by the
location of the center (the origin or not the origin), and then by the position (horizontal or vertical). Each is presented
along with a description of how the parts of the equation relate to the graph. Interpreting these parts allows us to form
a mental picture of the ellipse.

Standard Forms of the Equation of an Ellipse with Center (0,0)

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center     and major axis on the x-axis is

where

·

· the length of the major axis is

· the coordinates of the vertices are

· the length of the minor axis is

· the coordinates of the co-vertices are

· the coordinates of the foci are         , where               See Figure 6 a
                                                                 and major axis on the y-axis is
The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center

where

·

· the length of the major axis is

· the coordinates of the vertices are

· the length of the minor axis is

· the coordinates of the co-vertices are

· the coordinates of the foci are         , where               See Figure 6 b

Note that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the equation       When we are given the

coordinates of the foci and vertices of an ellipse, we can use this relationship to find the equation of the ellipse in

standard form.

                Figure 6 (a) Horizontal ellipse with center     (b) Vertical ellipse with center
1152 12 · Analytic Geometry

...

     HOW TO

Given the vertices and foci of an ellipse centered at the origin, write its equation in standard form.

1. Determine whether the major axis lies on the x- or y-axis.

a. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form          and  respectively, then the

     major axis is the x-axis. Use the standard form

b. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form          and  respectively, then the

     major axis is the y-axis. Use the standard form

2. Use the equation                            along with the given coordinates of the vertices and foci, to solve for
3. Substitute the values for              and into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.

EXAMPLE 1

Writing the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at the Origin in Standard Form

What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices   and foci

     Solution
The foci are on the x-axis, so the major axis is the x-axis. Thus, the equation will have the form

The vertices are                 so       and

The foci are                 so      and

We know that the vertices and foci are related by the equation             Solving for we have:

Now we need only substitute                    and      into the standard form of the equation. The equation of the ellipse is

TRY IT #1 What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices                       and foci

Q&A           Can we write the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin given coordinates of just one focus
              and vertex?

              Yes. Ellipses are symmetrical, so the coordinates of the vertices of an ellipse centered around the origin

              will always have the form             or  Similarly, the coordinates of the foci will always have the

              form                   or        Knowing this, we can use and from the given points, along with the equation

                                     to find

Writing Equations of Ellipses Not Centered at the Origin

Like the graphs of other equations, the graph of an ellipse can be translated. If an ellipse is translated units

horizontally and units vertically, the center of the ellipse will be  This translation results in the standard form of

the equation we saw previously, with replaced by        and y replaced by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           12.1 · The Ellipse 1153

Standard Forms of the Equation of an Ellipse with Center (h, k)

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center      and major axis parallel to the x-axis is

where

·                                         where                    See Figure 7a
· the length of the major axis is                                and major axis parallel to the y-axis is
· the coordinates of the vertices are
· the length of the minor axis is
· the coordinates of the co-vertices are
· the coordinates of the foci are

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center

where

·                                         where                  See Figure 7b
· the length of the major axis is
· the coordinates of the vertices are
· the length of the minor axis is
· the coordinates of the co-vertices are
· the coordinates of the foci are

Just as with ellipses centered at the origin, ellipses that are centered at a point  have vertices, co-vertices, and

foci that are related by the equation     We can use this relationship along with the midpoint and distance

formulas to find the equation of the ellipse in standard form when the vertices and foci are given.

       Figure 7 (a) Horizontal ellipse with center               (b) Vertical ellipse with center

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the vertices and foci of an ellipse not centered at the origin, write its equation in standard form.
 1. Determine whether the major axis is parallel to the x- or y-axis.

       a. If the y-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the major axis is parallel to the x-axis.
1154 12 · Analytic Geometry

         Use the standard form
    b. If the x-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the major axis is parallel to the y-axis.

         Use the standard form

2. Identify the center of the ellipse            using the midpoint formula and the given coordinates for the vertices.

3. Find by solving for the length of the major axis, which is the distance between the given vertices.

4. Find using and found in Step 2, along with the given coordinates for the foci.

5. Solve for using the equation

6. Substitute the values for               and into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.

EXAMPLE 2

Writing the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at a Point Other Than the Origin

What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices  and

and foci   and

     Solution
The x-coordinates of the vertices and foci are the same, so the major axis is parallel to the y-axis. Thus, the equation of
the ellipse will have the form

First, we identify the center,   The center is halfway between the vertices,  and  Applying the
midpoint formula, we have:

Next, we find The length of the major axis,      is bounded by the vertices. We solve for by finding the distance
between the y-coordinates of the vertices.

So

Now we find The foci are given by                So,                 and           We substitute

using either of these points to solve for

So                           using the equation
Next, we solve for

Finally, we substitute the values found for      and into the standard form equation for an ellipse:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                12.1 · The Ellipse 1155

TRY IT #2    What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices   and          and foci
                                 and

Graphing Ellipses Centered at the Origin

Just as we can write the equation for an ellipse given its graph, we can graph an ellipse given its equation. To graph

ellipses centered at the origin, we use the standard form          for horizontal ellipses and

             for vertical ellipses.

...

     HOW TO

Given the standard form of an equation for an ellipse centered at  sketch the graph.

1. Use the standard forms of the equations of an ellipse to determine the major axis, vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

a. If the equation is in the form                  where     then

      the major axis is the x-axis
      the coordinates of the vertices are
      the coordinates of the co-vertices are
      the coordinates of the foci are

b. If the equation is in the form                  where     then

      the major axis is the y-axis
       the coordinates of the vertices are
       the coordinates of the co-vertices are
       the coordinates of the foci are

2. Solve for using the equation
3. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the

     ellipse.

EXAMPLE 3

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at the Origin         Identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci.
Graph the ellipse given by the equation,

     Solution                                                  the major axis is on the y-axis. Therefore, the
First, we determine the position of the major axis. Because  It follows that:

equation is in the form            where           and

· the center of the ellipse is
· the coordinates of the vertices are

· the coordinates of the co-vertices are

· the coordinates of the foci are           where            Solving for we have:

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are
1156 12 · Analytic Geometry

        Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse. See Figure
        8.

                                                    Figure 8

TRY IT #3  Graph the ellipse given by the equation            Identify and label the center, vertices, co-
           vertices, and foci.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at the Origin from an Equation Not in Standard Form

Graph the ellipse given by the equation                       Rewrite the equation in standard form. Then identify and

label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

     Solution
First, use algebra to rewrite the equation in standard form.

Next, we determine the position of the major axis. Because        the major axis is on the x-axis. Therefore, the
                                                               It follows that:
equation is in the form            where            and
                                                              Solving for we have:
· the center of the ellipse is
· the coordinates of the vertices are

· the coordinates of the co-vertices are

· the coordinates of the foci are         where

Therefore the coordinates of the foci are
Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           12.1 · The Ellipse 1157

                                                Figure 9

TRY IT #4     Graph the ellipse given by the equation                                Rewrite the equation in standard

              form. Then identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

Graphing Ellipses Not Centered at the Origin

When an ellipse is not centered at the origin, we can still use the standard forms to find the key features of the graph.

When the ellipse is centered at some point,  we use the standard forms                     for horizontal

ellipses and                              for vertical ellipses. From these standard equations, we can easily determine

the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and positions of the major and minor axes.

...

     HOW TO

Given the standard form of an equation for an ellipse centered at       sketch the graph.

1. Use the standard forms of the equations of an ellipse to determine the center, position of the major axis,
     vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

a. If the equation is in the form                      where       then

      the center is
      the major axis is parallel to the x-axis
      the coordinates of the vertices are
      the coordinates of the co-vertices are
      the coordinates of the foci are

b. If the equation is in the form                      where       then

       the center is
      the major axis is parallel to the y-axis
       the coordinates of the vertices are
       the coordinates of the co-vertices are
       the coordinates of the foci are

2. Solve for using the equation
3. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the

     ellipse.

  EXAMPLE 5                                            Identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at (h, k)
Graph the ellipse given by the equation,
1158 12 · Analytic Geometry

     Solution                                                         the major axis is parallel to the y-axis. Therefore, the
First, we determine the position of the major axis. Because                   It follows that:

equation is in the form                     where            and

· the center of the ellipse is                                                     or        and
· the coordinates of the vertices are
· the coordinates of the co-vertices are                                               or    and
· the coordinates of the foci are
                                            where                     Solving for  we have:

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are         and

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse.

                                                   Figure 10

TRY IT #5                    Graph the ellipse given by the equation                   Identify and label the center,
                             vertices, co-vertices, and foci.

...

     HOW TO

Given the general form of an equation for an ellipse centered at (h, k), express the equation in standard form.

1. Recognize that an ellipse described by an equation in the form                                 is in general form.

2. Rearrange the equation by grouping terms that contain the same variable. Move the constant term to the

opposite side of the equation.

3. Factor out the coefficients of the and terms in preparation for completing the square.

4. Complete the square for each variable to rewrite the equation in the form of the sum of multiples of two

binomials squared set equal to a constant,                                         where          and are constants.

5. Divide both sides of the equation by the constant term to express the equation in standard form.

EXAMPLE 6

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at (h, k) by First Writing It in Standard Form

Graph the ellipse given by the equation                               Identify and label the center, vertices, co-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                      12.1 · The Ellipse 1159

vertices, and foci.
     Solution

We must begin by rewriting the equation in standard form.
Group terms that contain the same variable, and move the constant to the opposite side of the equation.
Factor out the coefficients of the squared terms.
Complete the square twice. Remember to balance the equation by adding the same constants to each side.
Rewrite as perfect squares.
Divide both sides by the constant term to place the equation in standard form.

Now that the equation is in standard form, we can determine the position of the major axis. Because       the major

axis is parallel to the x-axis. Therefore, the equation is in the form          where                and       It

follows that:

· the center of the ellipse is                                          or                    and
· the coordinates of the vertices are

· the coordinates of the co-vertices are                                    or                and
· the coordinates of the foci are
                                            where                       Solving for we have:

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are         and

Next we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse as shown in
Figure 11.

                                                   Figure 11

TRY IT #6      Express the equation of the ellipse given in standard form. Identify the center, vertices, co-
               vertices, and foci of the ellipse.
1160 12 · Analytic Geometry

     Solving Applied Problems Involving Ellipses

        Many real-world situations can be represented by ellipses, including orbits of planets, satellites, moons and comets, and
        shapes of boat keels, rudders, and some airplane wings. A medical device called a lithotripter uses elliptical reflectors to
        break up kidney stones by generating sound waves. Some buildings, called whispering chambers, are designed with
        elliptical domes so that a person whispering at one focus can easily be heard by someone standing at the other focus.
        This occurs because of the acoustic properties of an ellipse. When a sound wave originates at one focus of a whispering
        chamber, the sound wave will be reflected off the elliptical dome and back to the other focus. See Figure 12. In the
        whisper chamber at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, two people standing at the foci--about 43 feet
        apart--can hear each other whisper. When these chambers are placed in unexpected places, such as the ones inside
        Bush International Airport in Houston and Grand Central Terminal in New York City, they can induce surprised reactions
        among travelers.

             Figure 12 Sound waves are reflected between foci in an elliptical room, called a whispering chamber.

  EXAMPLE 7

Locating the Foci of a Whispering Chamber
A large room in an art gallery is a whispering chamber. Its dimensions are 46 feet wide by 96 feet long as shown in
Figure 13.

 a. What is the standard form of the equation of the ellipse representing the outline of the room? Hint: assume a
      horizontal ellipse, and let the center of the room be the point

b. If two visitors standing at the foci of this room can hear each other whisper, how far apart are the two visitors?
      Round to the nearest foot.

                                                     Figure 13

Solution

a. We are assuming a horizontal ellipse with center  so we need to find an equation of the form

where     We know that the length of the major axis, is longer than the length of the minor axis, So the

length of the room, 96, is represented by the major axis, and the width of the room, 46, is represented by the minor

axis.

 Solving for we have             so  and

 Solving for we have             so  and

     Therefore, the equation of the ellipse is                                             where
b. To find the distance between the senators, we must find the distance between the foci,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.1 · The Ellipse 1161

    Solving for we have:

    The points  represent the foci. Thus, the distance between the senators is            feet.

    TRY IT #7   Suppose a whispering chamber is 480 feet long and 320 feet wide.

                 What is the standard form of the equation of the ellipse representing the room? Hint: assume

                a horizontal ellipse, and let the center of the room be the point

                 If two people are standing at the foci of this room and can hear each other whisper, how far

                apart are the people? Round to the nearest foot.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with ellipses.

    Conic Sections: The Ellipse (http://openstax.org/l/conicellipse)
    Graph an Ellipse with Center at the Origin (http://openstax.org/l/grphellorigin)
    Graph an Ellipse with Center Not at the Origin (http://openstax.org/l/grphellnot)

        12.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Define an ellipse in terms of  2. Where must the foci of an     3. What special case of the
    its foci.                         ellipse lie?                     ellipse do we have when the
                                                                       major and minor axis are of
                                                                       the same length?

4. For the special case           5. What can be said about the
    mentioned in the previous         symmetry of the graph of an
    question, what would be           ellipse with center at the
    true about the foci of that       origin and foci along the
    ellipse?                          y-axis?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the given equations represent ellipses. If yes, write in standard form.

6.                                7.                               8.

9.                                10.
1162 12 · Analytic Geometry

For the following exercises, write the equation of an ellipse in standard form, and identify the end points of the major
and minor axes as well as the foci.

11.                              12.                                13.

14.                              15.                                16.

17.                              18.                                19.

20.                                        21.

22.                                        23.

24.                                        25.

26.

For the following exercises, find the foci for the given ellipses.

27.                              28.                                29.

30.                              31.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the given ellipses, noting center, vertices, and foci.

32.                              33.                                34.

35.                              36.                                37.

38.                              39.                                     40.

41.                                   42.

43.                                        44.

45.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            12.1 · The Ellipse 1163

For the following exercises, use the given information about the graph of each ellipse to determine its equation.

46. Center at the origin,          47. Center at the origin,            48. Center at the origin,
      symmetric with respect to          symmetric with respect to            symmetric with respect to
      the x- and y-axes, focus at        the x- and y-axes, focus at          the x- and y-axes, focus at
               and point on graph                   and point on graph                 and major axis is
                                                                              twice as long as minor axis.

49. Center        ; vertex         ; 50. Center       ; vertex          51. Center    ; vertex
      one focus:
                            .           ; one focus:                                  ; one focus:

For the following exercises, given the graph of the ellipse, determine its equation.

52.                                     53.                                  54.

55.                                56.

Extensions

For the following exercises, find the area of the ellipse. The area of an ellipse is given by the formula

57.                                58.                                  59.

60.                                     61.
1164 12 · Analytic Geometry

Real-World Applications             63. Find the equation of the         64. An arch has the shape of a
                                          ellipse that will just fit           semi-ellipse (the top half of
62. Find the equation of the              inside a box that is four            an ellipse). The arch has a
      ellipse that will just fit          times as wide as it is high.         height of 8 feet and a span
      inside a box that is 8 units        Express in terms of the              of 20 feet. Find an equation
      wide and 4 units high.              height.                              for the ellipse, and use that
                                                                               to find the height to the
                                                                               nearest 0.01 foot of the
                                                                               arch at a distance of 4 feet
                                                                               from the center.

65. An arch has the shape of a      66. A bridge is to be built in the   67. A person in a whispering
      semi-ellipse. The arch has a        shape of a semi-elliptical           gallery standing at one
      height of 12 feet and a             arch and is to have a span           focus of the ellipse can
      span of 40 feet. Find an            of 120 feet. The height of           whisper and be heard by a
      equation for the ellipse,           the arch at a distance of 40         person standing at the
      and use that to find the            feet from the center is to           other focus because all the
      distance from the center to         be 8 feet. Find the height of        sound waves that reach the
      a point at which the height         the arch at its center.              ceiling are reflected to the
      is 6 feet. Round to the                                                  other person. If a
      nearest hundredth.                                                       whispering gallery has a
                                                                               length of 120 feet, and the
                                                                               foci are located 30 feet
                                                                               from the center, find the
                                                                               height of the ceiling at the
                                                                               center.

68. A person is standing 8 feet
      from the nearest wall in a
      whispering gallery. If that
      person is at one focus, and
      the other focus is 80 feet
      away, what is the length
      and height at the center of
      the gallery?

12.2 The Hyperbola

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Locate a hyperbola's vertices and foci.
           Write equations of hyperbolas in standard form.
           Graph hyperbolas centered at the origin.
           Graph hyperbolas not centered at the origin.
           Solve applied problems involving hyperbolas.

What do paths of comets, supersonic booms, ancient Grecian pillars, and natural draft cooling towers have in common?
They can all be modeled by the same type of conic. For instance, when something moves faster than the speed of sound,
a shock wave in the form of a cone is created. A portion of a conic is formed when the wave intersects the ground,
resulting in a sonic boom. See Figure 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                12.2 · The Hyperbola 1165

            Figure 1 A shock wave intersecting the ground forms a portion of a conic and results in a sonic boom.
Most people are familiar with the sonic boom created by supersonic aircraft, but humans were breaking the sound
barrier long before the first supersonic flight. The crack of a whip occurs because the tip is exceeding the speed of
sound. The bullets shot from many firearms also break the sound barrier, although the bang of the gun usually
supersedes the sound of the sonic boom.

Locating the Vertices and Foci of a Hyperbola

In analytic geometry, a hyperbola is a conic section formed by intersecting a right circular cone with a plane at an angle
such that both halves of the cone are intersected. This intersection produces two separate unbounded curves that are
mirror images of each other. See Figure 2.

        Figure 2 A hyperbola

Like the ellipse, the hyperbola can also be defined as a set of points in the coordinate plane. A hyperbola is the set of all

points  in a plane such that the difference of the distances between  and the foci is a positive constant.

Notice that the definition of a hyperbola is very similar to that of an ellipse. The distinction is that the hyperbola is
defined in terms of the difference of two distances, whereas the ellipse is defined in terms of the sum of two distances.

As with the ellipse, every hyperbola has two axes of symmetry. The transverse axis is a line segment that passes
through the center of the hyperbola and has vertices as its endpoints. The foci lie on the line that contains the transverse
axis. The conjugate axis is perpendicular to the transverse axis and has the co-vertices as its endpoints. The center of a
hyperbola is the midpoint of both the transverse and conjugate axes, where they intersect. Every hyperbola also has
two asymptotes that pass through its center. As a hyperbola recedes from the center, its branches approach these
asymptotes. The central rectangle of the hyperbola is centered at the origin with sides that pass through each vertex
and co-vertex; it is a useful tool for graphing the hyperbola and its asymptotes. To sketch the asymptotes of the
hyperbola, simply sketch and extend the diagonals of the central rectangle. See Figure 3.
1166 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                   Figure 3 Key features of the hyperbola

In this section, we will limit our discussion to hyperbolas that are positioned vertically or horizontally in the coordinate
plane; the axes will either lie on or be parallel to the x- and y-axes. We will consider two cases: those that are centered at
the origin, and those that are centered at a point other than the origin.

Deriving the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at the Origin

Let      and                 be the foci of a hyperbola centered at the origin. The hyperbola is the set of all points  such

that the difference of the distances from  to the foci is constant. See Figure 4.

                                                          Figure 4

If       is a vertex of the hyperbola, the distance from      to    is                   The distance from              to

     is  The difference of the distances from the foci to the vertex is

If       is a point on the hyperbola, we can define the following variables:

By definition of a hyperbola,      is constant for any point        on the hyperbola. We know that the difference of

these distances is for the vertex          It follows that          for any point on the hyperbola. As with the

derivation of the equation of an ellipse, we will begin by applying the distance formula. The rest of the derivation is

algebraic. Compare this derivation with the one from the previous section for ellipses.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         12.2 · The Hyperbola 1167

This equation defines a hyperbola centered at the origin with vertices  and co-vertices

Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (0,0)

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center     and transverse axis on the x-axis is

where                                                            and transverse axis on the y-axis is

  · the length of the transverse axis is
  · the coordinates of the vertices are
  · the length of the conjugate axis is
  · the coordinates of the co-vertices are
  · the distance between the foci is where
  · the coordinates of the foci are
  · the equations of the asymptotes are

See Figure 5a.

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center

where

  · the length of the transverse axis is
  · the coordinates of the vertices are
  · the length of the conjugate axis is
  · the coordinates of the co-vertices are
1168 12 · Analytic Geometry                                                                When we are given the equation

            · the distance between the foci is where
            · the coordinates of the foci are
            · the equations of the asymptotes are
          See Figure 5b.
          Note that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the equation
          of a hyperbola, we can use this relationship to identify its vertices and foci.

         Figure 5 (a) Horizontal hyperbola with center         (b) Vertical hyperbola with center

...

     HOW TO

Given the equation of a hyperbola in standard form, locate its vertices and foci.

1. Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the x- or y-axis. Notice that is always under the variable with
     the positive coefficient. So, if you set the other variable equal to zero, you can easily find the intercepts. In the
     case where the hyperbola is centered at the origin, the intercepts coincide with the vertices.

a. If the equation has the form  then the transverse axis lies on the x-axis. The vertices are

located at                       and the foci are located at

b. If the equation has the form  then the transverse axis lies on the y-axis. The vertices are

located at                       and the foci are located at

2. Solve for using the equation
3. Solve for using the equation

EXAMPLE 1

Locating a Hyperbola's Vertices and Foci
Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation

     Solution                    so the transverse axis lies on the y-axis. The hyperbola is centered at the
The equation has the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      12.2 · The Hyperbola 1169

origin, so the vertices serve as the y-intercepts of the graph. To find the vertices, set  and solve for

The foci are located at      Solving for

Therefore, the vertices are located at    and the foci are located at

TRY IT #1 Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation

Writing Equations of Hyperbolas in Standard Form

Just as with ellipses, writing the equation for a hyperbola in standard form allows us to calculate the key features: its
center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and the lengths and positions of the transverse and conjugate axes.
Conversely, an equation for a hyperbola can be found given its key features. We begin by finding standard equations for
hyperbolas centered at the origin. Then we will turn our attention to finding standard equations for hyperbolas centered
at some point other than the origin.

Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin

Reviewing the standard forms given for hyperbolas centered at          we see that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are

related by the equation                 Note that this equation can also be rewritten as          This relationship is

used to write the equation for a hyperbola when given the coordinates of its foci and vertices.

...

     HOW TO

Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at         write its equation in standard form.

1. Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the x- or y-axis.

a. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form     and                 respectively, then the

transverse axis is the x-axis. Use the standard form

b. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form     and                        respectively, then the

transverse axis is the y-axis. Use the standard form

2. Find using the equation              into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.
3. Substitute the values for and

EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at (0,0) Given its Foci and Vertices

What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices  and foci

     Solution
The vertices and foci are on the x-axis. Thus, the equation for the hyperbola will have the form

The vertices are         so  and
1170 12 · Analytic Geometry

The foci are                     so       and

Solving for we have

Finally, we substitute               and  into the standard form of the equation,       The equation of the
hyperbola is
                                 as shown in Figure 6.

                                                                           Figure 6     and foci
    TRY IT #2 What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices

Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin

Like the graphs for other equations, the graph of a hyperbola can be translated. If a hyperbola is translated units

horizontally and units vertically, the center of the hyperbola will be  This translation results in the standard form

of the equation we saw previously, with replaced by     and replaced by

Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (h, k)

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center            and transverse axis parallel to the x-axis is

where

· the length of the transverse axis is
· the coordinates of the vertices are
· the length of the conjugate axis is
· the coordinates of the co-vertices are
· the distance between the foci is where
· the coordinates of the foci are

The asymptotes of the hyperbola coincide with the diagonals of the central rectangle. The length of the rectangle is

    and its width is The slopes of the diagonals are and each diagonal passes through the center                       Using

the point-slope formula, it is simple to show that the equations of the asymptotes are            See Figure

7a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.2 · The Hyperbola 1171

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center    and transverse axis parallel to the y-axis is

where                                                                       See Figure 7b.

  · the length of the transverse axis is
  · the coordinates of the vertices are
  · the length of the conjugate axis is
  · the coordinates of the co-vertices are
  · the distance between the foci is where
  · the coordinates of the foci are

Using the reasoning above, the equations of the asymptotes are

Figure 7 (a) Horizontal hyperbola with center                   (b) Vertical hyperbola with center

Like hyperbolas centered at the origin, hyperbolas centered at a point      have vertices, co-vertices, and foci that are

related by the equation  We can use this relationship along with the midpoint and distance formulas to find

the standard equation of a hyperbola when the vertices and foci are given.

...

     HOW TO

Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at          write its equation in standard form.

1. Determine whether the transverse axis is parallel to the x- or y-axis.
      a. If the y-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the transverse axis is parallel to the
           x-axis. Use the standard form
      b. If the x-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the transverse axis is parallel to the
           y-axis. Use the standard form

2. Identify the center of the hyperbola,  using the midpoint formula and the given coordinates for the

vertices.

3. Find by solving for the length of the transverse axis, , which is the distance between the given vertices.
1172 12 · Analytic Geometry

4. Find using and found in Step 2 along with the given coordinates for the foci.

5. Solve for using the equation

6. Substitute the values for              and into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.

EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at (h, k) Given its Foci and Vertices

What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices at     and        and foci at         and

     Solution
The y-coordinates of the vertices and foci are the same, so the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis. Thus, the equation
of the hyperbola will have the form

First, we identify the center,   The center is halfway between the vertices        and              Applying the midpoint

formula, we have

Next, we find The length of the transverse axis,     is bounded by the vertices. So, we can find    by finding the
distance between the x-coordinates of the vertices.

Now we need to find The coordinates of the foci are  So                                 and                         We

can use the x-coordinate from either of these points to solve for Using the point       and substituting

Next, solve for using the equation

Finally, substitute the values found for  and into the standard form of the equation.

TRY IT #3                    What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices  and     and foci
                                         and

Graphing Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin

When we have an equation in standard form for a hyperbola centered at the origin, we can interpret its parts to identify
the key features of its graph: the center, vertices, co-vertices, asymptotes, foci, and lengths and positions of the

transverse and conjugate axes. To graph hyperbolas centered at the origin, we use the standard form                 for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   12.2 · The Hyperbola 1173

horizontal hyperbolas and the standard form              for vertical hyperbolas.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a standard form equation for a hyperbola centered at  sketch the graph.

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation.
2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of the transverse axis; coordinates for the

     vertices, co-vertices, and foci; and the equations for the asymptotes.

a. If the equation is in the form              then

      the transverse axis is on the x-axis
      the coordinates of the vertices are
      the coordinates of the co-vertices are
      the coordinates of the foci are
      the equations of the asymptotes are

b. If the equation is in the form              then

      the transverse axis is on the y-axis
       the coordinates of the vertices are
       the coordinates of the co-vertices are
       the coordinates of the foci are
       the equations of the asymptotes are

3. Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation
4. Plot the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the

     hyperbola.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at (0, 0) Given an Equation in Standard Form

Graph the hyperbola given by the equation                Identify and label the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and
asymptotes.

Solution

The standard form that applies to the given equation is     Thus, the transverse axis is on the y-axis

The coordinates of the vertices are

The coordinates of the co-vertices are

The coordinates of the foci are         where            Solving for we have

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are

The equations of the asymptotes are

Plot and label the vertices and co-vertices, and then sketch the central rectangle. Sides of the rectangle are parallel to the
axes and pass through the vertices and co-vertices. Sketch and extend the diagonals of the central rectangle to show the
asymptotes. The central rectangle and asymptotes provide the framework needed to sketch an accurate graph of the
hyperbola. Label the foci and asymptotes, and draw a smooth curve to form the hyperbola, as shown in Figure 8.
1174 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                  Figure 8

TRY IT #4                    Graph the hyperbola given by the equation  Identify and label the vertices, co-
                             vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

Graphing Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin

Graphing hyperbolas centered at a point  other than the origin is similar to graphing ellipses centered at a point

other than the origin. We use the standard forms                        for horizontal hyperbolas, and

                              for vertical hyperbolas. From these standard form equations we can easily calculate and plot key

features of the graph: the coordinates of its center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci; the equations of its asymptotes; and
the positions of the transverse and conjugate axes.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a general form for a hyperbola centered at     sketch the graph.

1. Convert the general form to that standard form. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given
     equation.

2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of the transverse axis; coordinates for the
     center, vertices, co-vertices, foci; and equations for the asymptotes.

a. If the equation is in the form                    then

      the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis
      the center is
      the coordinates of the vertices are
      the coordinates of the co-vertices are
      the coordinates of the foci are
      the equations of the asymptotes are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                12.2 · The Hyperbola 1175

b. If the equation is in the form                        then

      the transverse axis is parallel to the y-axis
       the center is
       the coordinates of the vertices are
       the coordinates of the co-vertices are
       the coordinates of the foci are
       the equations of the asymptotes are

3. Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation
4. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the coordinate plane and draw a smooth curve to

     form the hyperbola.

EXAMPLE 5

Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at (h, k) Given an Equation in General Form

Graph the hyperbola given by the equation                                       Identify and label the center, vertices, co-

vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

     Solution
Start by expressing the equation in standard form. Group terms that contain the same variable, and move the constant
to the opposite side of the equation.

Factor the leading coefficient of each expression.

Complete the square twice. Remember to balance the equation by adding the same constants to each side.

Rewrite as perfect squares.
Divide both sides by the constant term to place the equation in standard form.

The standard form that applies to the given equation is                where               and  or                  and

Thus, the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis. It follows that:

· the center of the ellipse is                                or       and
· the coordinates of the vertices are                             or      and
· the coordinates of the co-vertices are
                                            where                     Solving for we have
· the coordinates of the foci are

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are               and

The equations of the asymptotes are

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes and draw smooth curves to form the
hyperbola, as shown in Figure 9.
1176 12 · Analytic Geometry

                             Figure 9

TRY IT #5                    Graph the hyperbola given by the standard form of an equation   Identify and
                             label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

Solving Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas

As we discussed at the beginning of this section, hyperbolas have real-world applications in many fields, such as
astronomy, physics, engineering, and architecture. The design efficiency of hyperbolic cooling towers is particularly
interesting. Cooling towers are used to transfer waste heat to the atmosphere and are often touted for their ability to
generate power efficiently. Because of their hyperbolic form, these structures are able to withstand extreme winds while
requiring less material than any other forms of their size and strength. See Figure 10. For example, a 500-foot tower can
be made of a reinforced concrete shell only 6 or 8 inches wide!

    Figure 10 Cooling towers at the Drax power station in North Yorkshire, United Kingdom (credit: Les Haines, Flickr)
The first hyperbolic towers were designed in 1914 and were 35 meters high. Today, the tallest cooling towers are in
France, standing a remarkable 170 meters tall. In Example 6 we will use the design layout of a cooling tower to find a
hyperbolic equation that models its sides.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                12.2 · The Hyperbola 1177

  EXAMPLE 6
Solving Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas
The design layout of a cooling tower is shown in Figure 11. The tower stands 179.6 meters tall. The diameter of the top is
72 meters. At their closest, the sides of the tower are 60 meters apart.

                         Figure 11 Project design for a natural draft cooling tower

Find the equation of the hyperbola that models the sides of the cooling tower. Assume that the center of the
hyperbola--indicated by the intersection of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure--is the origin of the coordinate
plane. Round final values to four decimal places.

     Solution
We are assuming the center of the tower is at the origin, so we can use the standard form of a horizontal hyperbola

centered at the origin:  where the branches of the hyperbola form the sides of the cooling tower. We must

find the values of and to complete the model.

First, we find Recall that the length of the transverse axis of a hyperbola is This length is represented by the

distance where the sides are closest, which is given as meters. So,  Therefore,      and

To solve for we need to substitute for and in our equation using a known point. To do this, we can use the

dimensions of the tower to find some point  that lies on the hyperbola. We will use the top right corner of the tower

to represent that point. Since the y-axis bisects the tower, our x-value can be represented by the radius of the top, or 36

meters. The y-value is represented by the distance from the origin to the top, which is given as 79.6 meters. Therefore,

The sides of the tower can be modeled by the hyperbolic equation

TRY IT #6                A design for a cooling tower project is shown in Figure 12. Find the equation of the hyperbola that
                         models the sides of the cooling tower. Assume that the center of the hyperbola--indicated by the
1178 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                        intersection of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure--is the origin of the coordinate plane.
                                        Round final values to four decimal places.

                                                                                           Figure 12

    MEDIA
    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with hyperbolas.
    Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 1 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/hyperbola1)
    Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 2 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/hyperbola2)
    Graph a Hyperbola with Center at Origin (http://openstax.org/l/hyperbolaorigin)
    Graph a Hyperbola with Center not at Origin (http://openstax.org/l/hbnotorigin)

        12.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Define a hyperbola in terms   2. What can we conclude           3. What must be true of the
    of its foci.                     about a hyperbola if its          foci of a hyperbola?
                                     asymptotes intersect at the
                                     origin?

4. If the transverse axis of a   5. Where must the center of
    hyperbola is vertical, what      hyperbola be relative to its
    do we know about the             foci?
    graph?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the following equations represent hyperbolas. If so, write in standard
form.

6.                               7.                                8.

9.                               10.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     12.2 · The Hyperbola 1179

For the following exercises, write the equation for the hyperbola in standard form if it is not already, and identify the
vertices and foci, and write equations of asymptotes.

11.                    12.                         13.

14.                    15.                         16.

17.                    18.                              19.

20.                                     21.

22.                                     23.

24.                                     25.

For the following exercises, find the equations of the asymptotes for each hyperbola.

26.                    27.                         28.

29.                                     30.

Graphical

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the hyperbola, labeling vertices and foci.

31.                    32.                         33.

34.                    35.                         36.

37.                    38.                              39.

40.                         41.

42.                                     43.

44.

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of the hyperbola, find its equation.

45. Vertices at  and   46. Vertices at  and        47. Vertices at                         and

     and one focus at            and one focus at       and one focus at
1180 12 · Analytic Geometry

48. Center:  vertex:                       49. Center:  vertex:                      50. Center:      vertex:

             one focus:                              one focus:                                   one focus:

For the following exercises, given the graph of the hyperbola, find its equation.

51.                                             52.                                       53.

54.                                             55.

Extensions

For the following exercises, express the equation for the hyperbola as two functions, with as a function of         Express as
simply as possible. Use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of the two functions on the same axes.

56.                                        57.                                       58.

59.                                             60.

Real-World Applications

For the following exercises, a hedge is to be constructed in the shape of a hyperbola near a fountain at the center of the
yard. Find the equation of the hyperbola and sketch the graph.

61. The hedge will follow the              62. The hedge will follow the             63. The hedge will follow the
      asymptotes                                 asymptotes
                                  and its                                       and       asymptotes          and
      closest distance to the                    its closest distance to the
      center fountain is 5 yards.                center fountain is 6 yards.                      and its closest

                                                                                          distance to the center
                                                                                          fountain is 10 yards.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        12.3 · The Parabola 1181

64. The hedge will follow the  65. The hedge will follow the

asymptotes  and                asymptotes                    and

      and its closest                and its closest

distance to the center         distance to the center
fountain is 12 yards.          fountain is 20 yards.

For the following exercises, assume an object enters our solar system and we want to graph its path on a coordinate
system with the sun at the origin and the x-axis as the axis of symmetry for the object's path. Give the equation of the
flight path of each object using the given information.

66. The object enters along a  67. The object enters along a             68. The object enters along a

path approximated by the       path approximated by the                  path approximated by the

line        and passes         line                          and passes  line         and

within 1 au (astronomical      within 0.5 au of the sun at               passes within 1 au of the

unit) of the sun at its        its closest approach, so the              sun at its closest approach,

closest approach, so that      sun is one focus of the                   so the sun is one focus of

the sun is one focus of the    hyperbola. It then departs                the hyperbola. It then

hyperbola. It then departs     the solar system along a                  departs the solar system

the solar system along a       path approximated by the                  along a path approximated

path approximated by the       line                                      by the line

line

69. The object enters along a  70. The object enters along a

path approximated by the       path approximated by the

line        and passes         line                          and passes

within 1 au of the sun at its  within 1 au of the sun at its
closest approach, so the
sun is one focus of the        closest approach, so the
hyperbola. It then departs
the solar system along a       sun is one focus of the
path approximated by the
line                           hyperbola. It then departs

                               the solar system along a

                               path approximated by the

                               line

12.3 The Parabola

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Graph parabolas with vertices at the origin.
           Write equations of parabolas in standard form.
           Graph parabolas with vertices not at the origin.
           Solve applied problems involving parabolas.
1182 12 · Analytic Geometry

        Figure 1 Katherine Johnson's pioneering mathematical work in the area of parabolic and other orbital calculations
        played a significant role in the development of U.S space flight. (credit: NASA)
        Katherine Johnson is the pioneering NASA mathematician who was integral to the successful and safe flight and return
       of many human missions as well as satellites. Prior to the work featured in the movie Hidden Figures, she had already
        made major contributions to the space program. She provided trajectory analysis for the Mercury mission, in which Alan
        Shepard became the first American to reach space, and she and engineer Ted Sopinski authored a monumental paper
        regarding placing an object in a precise orbital position and having it return safely to Earth. Many of the orbits she
        determined were made up of parabolas, and her ability to combine different types of math enabled an unprecedented
        level of precision. Johnson said, "You tell me when you want it and where you want it to land, and I'll do it backwards and
        tell you when to take off."
        Johnson's work on parabolic orbits and other complex mathematics resulted in successful orbits, Moon landings, and
        the development of the Space Shuttle program. Applications of parabolas are also critical to other areas of science.
        Parabolic mirrors (or reflectors) are able to capture energy and focus it to a single point. The advantages of this property
        are evidenced by the vast list of parabolic objects we use every day: satellite dishes, suspension bridges, telescopes,
        microphones, spotlights, and car headlights, to name a few. Parabolic reflectors are also used in alternative energy
        devices, such as solar cookers and water heaters, because they are inexpensive to manufacture and need little
        maintenance. In this section we will explore the parabola and its uses, including low-cost, energy-efficient solar designs.

     Graphing Parabolas with Vertices at the Origin

        In The Ellipse, we saw that an ellipse is formed when a plane cuts through a right circular cone. If the plane is parallel to
        the edge of the cone, an unbounded curve is formed. This curve is a parabola. See Figure 2.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      12.3 · The Parabola 1183

                                   Figure 2 Parabola

Like the ellipse and hyperbola, the parabola can also be defined by a set of points in the coordinate plane. A parabola is

the set of all points  in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix, and a fixed point

(the focus) not on the directrix.

In Quadratic Functions (http://openstax.org/books/precalculus-2e/pages/3-3-power-functions-and-polynomial-
functions), we learned about a parabola's vertex and axis of symmetry. Now we extend the discussion to include other
key features of the parabola. See Figure 3. Notice that the axis of symmetry passes through the focus and vertex and is
perpendicular to the directrix. The vertex is the midpoint between the directrix and the focus.

The line segment that passes through the focus and is parallel to the directrix is called the latus rectum. The endpoints
of the latus rectum lie on the curve. By definition, the distance from the focus to any point on the parabola is equal
to the distance from to the directrix.

                                                          Figure 3 Key features of the parabola

To work with parabolas in the coordinate plane, we consider two cases: those with a vertex at the origin and those with a
vertex at a point other than the origin. We begin with the former.
1184 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                   Figure 4

Let        be a point on the parabola with vertex  focus             and directrix  as shown in Figure 4. The

distance from point              to point  on the directrix is the difference of the y-values:          The distance from

the focus  to the point              is also equal to and can be expressed using the distance formula.

Set the two expressions for equal to each other and solve for to derive the equation of the parabola. We do this

because the distance from            to    equals the distance from  to

We then square both sides of the equation, expand the squared terms, and simplify by combining like terms.

The equations of parabolas with vertex     are     when the x-axis is the axis of symmetry and              when

the y-axis is the axis of symmetry. These standard forms are given below, along with their general graphs and key

features.

Standard Forms of Parabolas with Vertex (0, 0)

Table 1 and Figure 5 summarize the standard features of parabolas with a vertex at the origin.

           Axis of Symmetry Equation Focus Directrix Endpoints of Latus Rectum

                             x-axis

                             y-axis

           Table 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               12.3 · The Parabola 1185

Figure 5 (a) When  and the axis of symmetry is the x-axis, the parabola opens right. (b) When  and the

axis of symmetry is the x-axis, the parabola opens left. (c) When  and the axis of symmetry is the y-axis, the

parabola opens up. (d) When  and the axis of symmetry is the y-axis, the parabola opens down.

The key features of a parabola are its vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum. See Figure 5. When
given a standard equation for a parabola centered at the origin, we can easily identify the key features to graph the
parabola.

A line is said to be tangent to a curve if it intersects the curve at exactly one point. If we sketch lines tangent to the
parabola at the endpoints of the latus rectum, these lines intersect on the axis of symmetry, as shown in Figure 6.
1186 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                             Figure 6

       ...

            HOW TO

Given a standard form equation for a parabola centered at (0, 0), sketch the graph.

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation:          or

2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the axis of symmetry, focus, equation of the directrix,

and endpoints of the latus rectum.

       a. If the equation is in the form               then

        the axis of symmetry is the x-axis,

        set equal to the coefficient of x in the given equation to solve for If             the parabola opens right.

           If                the parabola opens left.

        use to find the coordinates of the focus,

        use to find the equation of the directrix,

        use to find the endpoints of the latus rectum,                 Alternately, substitute  into the original

           equation.

       b. If the equation is in the form               then

        the axis of symmetry is the y-axis,

        set equal to the coefficient of y in the given equation to solve for If             the parabola opens up. If

                             the parabola opens down.

        use to find the coordinates of the focus,

        use to find equation of the directrix,

        use to find the endpoints of the latus rectum,

3. Plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola.

EXAMPLE 1

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (0, 0) and the x-axis as the Axis of Symmetry

Graph          Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.3 · The Parabola 1187

     Solution                                                      Thus, the axis of symmetry is the x-axis. It follows that:
The standard form that applies to the given equation is

·          so  Since                the parabola opens right

· the coordinates of the focus are

· the equation of the directrix is

· the endpoints of the latus rectum have the same x-coordinate at the focus. To find the endpoints, substitute

   into the original equation:

Next we plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola. Figure 7

                                                         Figure 7

   TRY IT #1 Graph                  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum.

EXAMPLE 2

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (0, 0) and the y-axis as the Axis of Symmetry

Graph          Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum.

     Solution                                                      Thus, the axis of symmetry is the y-axis. It follows that:
The standard form that applies to the given equation is

·          so  Since                the parabola opens down.

· the coordinates of the focus are

· the equation of the directrix is

· the endpoints of the latus rectum can be found by substituting   into the original equation,

Next we plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola.
1188 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                       Figure 8

TRY IT #2 Graph                  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum.

Writing Equations of Parabolas in Standard Form

In the previous examples, we used the standard form equation of a parabola to calculate the locations of its key features.
We can also use the calculations in reverse to write an equation for a parabola when given its key features.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given its focus and directrix, write the equation for a parabola in standard form.

1. Determine whether the axis of symmetry is the x- or y-axis.       then the axis of symmetry is the x-axis. Use the
      a. If the given coordinates of the focus have the form         then the axis of symmetry is the y-axis. Use the
            standard form
      b. If the given coordinates of the focus have the form
            standard form

2. Multiply
3. Substitute the value from Step 2 into the equation determined in Step 1.

EXAMPLE 3

Writing the Equation of a Parabola in Standard Form Given its Focus and Directrix

What is the equation for the parabola with focus       and directrix

     Solution                    so the equation will have the form
The focus has the form

· Multiplying we have
· Substituting for we have

Therefore, the equation for the parabola is

TRY IT #3 What is the equation for the parabola with focus                   and directrix

Graphing Parabolas with Vertices Not at the Origin

Like other graphs we've worked with, the graph of a parabola can be translated. If a parabola is translated units

horizontally and units vertically, the vertex will be  This translation results in the standard form of the equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            12.3 · The Parabola 1189

we saw previously with replaced by  and replaced by

To graph parabolas with a vertex    other than the origin, we use the standard form         for

parabolas that have an axis of symmetry parallel to the x-axis, and                  for parabolas that have an axis

of symmetry parallel to the y-axis. These standard forms are given below, along with their general graphs and key

features.

Standard Forms of Parabolas with Vertex (h, k)

Table 2 and Figure 9 summarize the standard features of parabolas with a vertex at a point

           Axis of Symmetry         Equation    Focus                Directrix Endpoints of Latus Rectum

Table 2
1190 12 · Analytic Geometry

Figure 9 (a) When                the parabola opens right. (b) When  the parabola opens left. (c) When  the

parabola opens up. (d) When      the parabola opens down.

...

     HOW TO

Given a standard form equation for a parabola centered at (h, k), sketch the graph.

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation:                           or

2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, equation of the

directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum.

a. If the equation is in the form                          then:

 use the given equation to identify and for the vertex,

 use the value of to determine the axis of symmetry,

 set equal to the coefficient of                           in the given equation to solve for If  the parabola opens

right. If                        the parabola opens left.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         12.3 · The Parabola 1191

          use      and to find the coordinates of the focus,

          use and to find the equation of the directrix,

          use      and to find the endpoints of the latus rectum,

       b. If the equation is in the form                  then:

          use the given equation to identify and for the vertex,

          use the value of to determine the axis of symmetry,

          set equal to the coefficient of    in the given equation to solve for If  the parabola opens

           up. If  the parabola opens down.

          use      and to find the coordinates of the focus,

          use and to find the equation of the directrix,

          use      and to find the endpoints of the latus rectum,

3. Plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the
     parabola.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (h, k) and Axis of Symmetry Parallel to the x-axis

Graph                      Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus

rectum.

     Solution                                                      Thus, the axis of symmetry is parallel to
The standard form that applies to the given equation is
the x-axis. It follows that:

· the vertex is

· the axis of symmetry is

·          so      Since            the parabola opens left.

· the coordinates of the focus are

· the equation of the directrix is

· the endpoints of the latus rectum are                            or               and

Next we plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the
parabola. See Figure 10.

                                             Figure 10
1192 12 · Analytic Geometry

TRY IT #4                    Graph       Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and

                             endpoints of the latus rectum.

EXAMPLE 5

Graphing a Parabola from an Equation Given in General Form

Graph                               Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and endpoints of the

latus rectum.

     Solution
Start by writing the equation of the parabola in standard form. The standard form that applies to the given equation is

                               Thus, the axis of symmetry is parallel to the y-axis. To express the equation of the parabola in this
form, we begin by isolating the terms that contain the variable in order to complete the square.

It follows that:

· the vertex is

· the axis of symmetry is

· since                      and so the parabola opens up

· the coordinates of the focus are

· the equation of the directrix is

· the endpoints of the latus rectum are                                 or  and

Next we plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the
parabola. See Figure 11.

                                                             Figure 11

TRY IT #5                    Graph                           Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and

                             endpoints of the latus rectum.

Solving Applied Problems Involving Parabolas

As we mentioned at the beginning of the section, parabolas are used to design many objects we use every day, such as
telescopes, suspension bridges, microphones, and radar equipment. Parabolic mirrors, such as the one used to light the
Olympic torch, have a very unique reflecting property. When rays of light parallel to the parabola's axis of symmetry are
directed toward any surface of the mirror, the light is reflected directly to the focus. See Figure 12. This is why the
Olympic torch is ignited when it is held at the focus of the parabolic mirror.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     12.3 · The Parabola 1193

                                                      Figure 12 Reflecting property of parabolas

Parabolic mirrors have the ability to focus the sun's energy to a single point, raising the temperature hundreds of
degrees in a matter of seconds. Thus, parabolic mirrors are featured in many low-cost, energy efficient solar products,
such as solar cookers, solar heaters, and even travel-sized fire starters.

  EXAMPLE 6

Solving Applied Problems Involving Parabolas
A cross-section of a design for a travel-sized solar fire starter is shown in Figure 13. The sun's rays reflect off the
parabolic mirror toward an object attached to the igniter. Because the igniter is located at the focus of the parabola, the
reflected rays cause the object to burn in just seconds.

 Find the equation of the parabola that models the fire starter. Assume that the vertex of the parabolic mirror is the

origin of the coordinate plane.

 Use the equation found in part  to find the depth of the fire starter.

                   Figure 13 Cross-section of a travel-sized solar fire starter

Solution

 The vertex of the dish is the origin of the coordinate plane, so the parabola will take the standard form
where     The igniter, which is the focus, is 1.7 inches above the vertex of the dish. Thus we have

 The dish extends  inches on either side of the origin. We can substitute 2.25 for  in the equation from

part (a) to find the depth of the dish.

The dish is about 0.74 inches deep.
1194 12 · Analytic Geometry

     TRY IT #6               Balcony-sized solar cookers have been designed for families living in India. The top of a dish has a
                             diameter of 1600 mm. The sun's rays reflect off the parabolic mirror toward the "cooker," which is
                             placed 320 mm from the base.

                              Find an equation that models a cross-section of the solar cooker. Assume that the vertex of

                             the parabolic mirror is the origin of the coordinate plane, and that the parabola opens to the right
                             (i.e., has the x-axis as its axis of symmetry).

                              Use the equation found in part  to find the depth of the cooker.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with parabolas.

     Conic Sections: The Parabola Part 1 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/parabola1)
     Conic Sections: The Parabola Part 2 of 2 (http://openstax.org/l/parabola2)
     Parabola with Vertical Axis (http://openstax.org/l/parabolavertcal)
     Parabola with Horizontal Axis (http://openstax.org/l/parabolahoriz)

        12.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Define a parabola in terms    2. If the equation of a parabola   3. If the equation of a parabola
    of its focus and directrix.      is written in standard form        is written in standard form
                                     and is positive and the            and is negative and the
                                     directrix is a vertical line,      directrix is a horizontal line,
                                     then what can we conclude          then what can we conclude
                                     about its graph?                   about its graph?

4. What is the effect on the     5. As the graph of a parabola
    graph of a parabola if its       becomes wider, what will
    equation in standard form        happen to the distance
    has increasing values of         between the focus and
                                     directrix?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine whether the given equation is a parabola. If so, rewrite the equation in standard
form.

6.                               7.                                 8.

9.                               10.

For the following exercises, rewrite the given equation in standard form, and then determine the vertex  focus
and directrix of the parabola.

11.                              12.                                13.

14.                              15.                                16.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                12.3 · The Parabola 1195

17.                               18.                               19.

20.                               21.                               22.

23.                               24.                               25.

26.                               27.                               28.

29.                               30.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling the focus and the directrix.

31.                               32.                               33.

34.                               35.                               36.

37.                               38.                               39.

40.                               41.                               42.

43.                               44.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the parabola given information about its graph.

45. Vertex is  directrix is       46. Vertex is       directrix is  47. Vertex is          directrix is
                                                                                        focus is
     focus is                          focus is

48. Vertex is          directrix  49. Vertex is                     50. Vertex is                 directrix is
      is       focus is                 directrix is
                                        is            focus                             focus is
1196 12 · Analytic Geometry

For the following exercises, determine the equation for the parabola from its graph.

51.                                        52.                             53.

54.                                        55.

Extensions

For the following exercises, the vertex and endpoints of the latus rectum of a parabola are given. Find the equation.

56.     , Endpoints              ,    57.       , Endpoints   , 58.             , Endpoints  ,

59.            , Endpoints            60.        , Endpoints
                                                ,
     ,

Real-World Applications

61. The mirror in an                  62. If we want to construct the      63. A satellite dish is shaped
                                            mirror from the previous             like a paraboloid of
     automobile headlight has a             exercise such that the               revolution. This means that
                                            focus is located at                  it can be formed by
     parabolic cross-section                              what should the        rotating a parabola around
                                            equation of the parabola             its axis of symmetry. The
     with the light bulb at the             be?                                  receiver is to be located at
                                                                                 the focus. If the dish is 12
     focus. On a schematic, the                                                  feet across at its opening
                                                                                 and 4 feet deep at its
     equation of the parabola is                                                 center, where should the
                                                                                 receiver be placed?
     given as                At what

     coordinates should you

     place the light bulb?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1197

64. Consider the satellite dish     65. The reflector in a              66. If the reflector in the
      from the previous exercise.         searchlight is shaped like a        searchlight from the
      If the dish is 8 feet across        paraboloid of revolution. A         previous exercise has the
      at the opening and 2 feet           light source is located 1           light source located 6
      deep, where should we               foot from the base along            inches from the base along
      place the receiver?                 the axis of symmetry. If the        the axis of symmetry and
                                          opening of the searchlight          the opening is 4 feet, find
                                          is 3 feet across, find the          the depth.
                                          depth.

67. An arch is in the shape of a    68. If the arch from the            69. An object is projected so as
      parabola. It has a span of          previous exercise has a             to follow a parabolic path
      100 feet and a maximum              span of 160 feet and a              given by
      height of 20 feet. Find the         maximum height of 40                where is the horizontal
      equation of the parabola,           feet, find the equation of          distance traveled in feet
      and determine the height            the parabola, and                   and is the height.
      of the arch 40 feet from the        determine the distance              Determine the maximum
      center.                             from the center at which            height the object reaches.
                                          the height is 20 feet.

70. For the object from the
      previous exercise, assume
      the path followed is given
      by
      Determine how far along
      the horizontal the object
      traveled to reach
      maximum height.

12.4 Rotation of Axes

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Identify nondegenerate conic sections given their general form equations.
           Use rotation of axes formulas.
           Write equations of rotated conics in standard form.
           Identify conics without rotating axes.

As we have seen, conic sections are formed when a plane intersects two right circular cones aligned tip to tip and
extending infinitely far in opposite directions, which we also call a cone. The way in which we slice the cone will
determine the type of conic section formed at the intersection. A circle is formed by slicing a cone with a plane
perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of the cone. An ellipse is formed by slicing a single cone with a slanted plane not
perpendicular to the axis of symmetry. A parabola is formed by slicing the plane through the top or bottom of the
double-cone, whereas a hyperbola is formed when the plane slices both the top and bottom of the cone. See Figure 1.
1198 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                              Figure 1 The nondegenerate conic sections
        Ellipses, circles, hyperbolas, and parabolas are sometimes called the nondegenerate conic sections, in contrast to the
        degenerate conic sections, which are shown in Figure 2. A degenerate conic results when a plane intersects the double
        cone and passes through the apex. Depending on the angle of the plane, three types of degenerate conic sections are
        possible: a point, a line, or two intersecting lines.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1199

                                                           Figure 2 Degenerate conic sections

Identifying Nondegenerate Conics in General Form

In previous sections of this chapter, we have focused on the standard form equations for nondegenerate conic sections.
In this section, we will shift our focus to the general form equation, which can be used for any conic. The general form is
set equal to zero, and the terms and coefficients are given in a particular order, as shown below.

where  and are not all zero. We can use the values of the coefficients to identify which type conic is represented

by a given equation.

You may notice that the general form equation has an term that we have not seen in any of the standard form
equations. As we will discuss later, the term rotates the conic whenever is not equal to zero.

                      Conic Sections   Example

                      ellipse

                               circle

                      hyperbola

                      parabola

                      one line

                      Table 1
1200 12 · Analytic Geometry

                                                      Conic Sections        Example
                                                     intersecting lines
                                                                         and and are nonzero real numbers. This indicates
                                                        parallel lines                                        where and are positive
                                                            a point

                                                          no graph
                                                  Table 1
General Form of Conic Sections
A conic section has the general form

where     and are not all zero.

Table 2 summarizes the different conic sections where
that the conic has not been rotated.

ellipse

circle

hyperbola

parabola

Table 2

       ...

            HOW TO

Given the equation of a conic, identify the type of conic.

1. Rewrite the equation in the general form,
2. Identify the values of and from the general form.

      a. If and are nonzero, have the same sign, and are not equal to each other, then the graph may be an
            ellipse.

      b. If and are equal and nonzero and have the same sign, then the graph may be a circle.
      c. If and are nonzero and have opposite signs, then the graph may be a hyperbola.
      d. If either or is zero, then the graph may be a parabola.

If B = 0, the conic section will have a vertical and/or horizontal axes. If B does not equal 0, as shown below, the

conic section is rotated. Notice the phrase "may be" in the definitions. That is because the equation may not

represent a conic section at all, depending on the values of A, B, C, D, E, and F. For example, the degenerate case

of a circle or an ellipse is a point:

                             when A and B have the same sign.

The degenerate case of a hyperbola is two intersecting straight lines:   when A and B have

opposite signs.

On the other hand, the equation,                                         when A and B are positive does not represent a graph at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1201

  all, since there are no real ordered pairs which satisfy it.

EXAMPLE 1

Identifying a Conic from Its General Form
Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic sections.

                                                                             

  Solution

 Rewriting the general form, we have
  and       so we observe that and              have opposite signs. The graph of this equation is a hyperbola.

 Rewriting the general form, we have                                         is zero.
  and       We can determine that the equation is a parabola, since

 Rewriting the general form, we have
  and       Because                 the graph of this equation is a circle.

 Rewriting the general form, we have
  and       Because                 and         the graph of this equation is an ellipse.

  TRY IT #1 Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic sections.

                                                

Finding a New Representation of the Given Equation after Rotating through a Given Angle

Until now, we have looked at equations of conic sections without an term, which aligns the graphs with the x- and

y-axes. When we add an term, we are rotating the conic about the origin. If the x- and y-axes are rotated through an

angle, say then every point on the plane may be thought of as having two representations:  on the Cartesian

plane with the original x-axis and y-axis, and  on the new plane defined by the new, rotated axes, called the

x'-axis and y'-axis. See Figure 3.

                     Figure 3 The graph of the rotated ellipse
1202 12 · Analytic Geometry

        We will find the relationships between and on the Cartesian plane with and on the new rotated plane. See
        Figure 4.

          Figure 4 The Cartesian plane with x- and y-axes and the resulting x- and y-axes formed by a rotation by an angle
        The original coordinate x- and y-axes have unit vectors and The rotated coordinate axes have unit vectors and
        The angle is known as the angle of rotation. See Figure 5. We may write the new unit vectors in terms of the original
        ones.

Consider a vector           Figure 5 Relationship between the old and new coordinate planes.
                   in the new coordinate plane. It may be represented in terms of its coordinate axes.

Because            we have representations of and in terms of the new coordinate system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1203

Equations of Rotation

If a point  on the Cartesian plane is represented on a new coordinate plane where the axes of rotation are

formed by rotating an angle from the positive x-axis, then the coordinates of the point with respect to the new axes

are         We can use the following equations of rotation to define the relationship between  and

and

     ...

          HOW TO

Given the equation of a conic, find a new representation after rotating through an angle.

1. Find and where                               and

2. Substitute the expression for and into in the given equation, then simplify.

3. Write the equations with and in standard form.

EXAMPLE 2

Finding a New Representation of an Equation after Rotating through a Given Angle

Find a new representation of the equation                  after rotating through an angle of

Solution

Find and where                             and

Because

and

Substitute             and                           into

Simplify.
1204 12 · Analytic Geometry

        Write the equations with and in the standard form.
        This equation is an ellipse. Figure 6 shows the graph.

                                                     Figure 6

Writing Equations of Rotated Conics in Standard Form

Now that we can find the standard form of a conic when we are given an angle of rotation, we will learn how to

transform the equation of a conic given in the form                                      into standard form by

rotating the axes. To do so, we will rewrite the general form as an equation in the and coordinate system without

the    term, by rotating the axes by a measure of that satisfies

We have learned already that any conic may be represented by the second degree equation

where  and are not all zero. However, if             then we have an term that prevents us from rewriting the

equation in standard form. To eliminate it, we can rotate the axes by an acute angle where

· If         then                is in the first quadrant, and is between
· If         then                is in the second quadrant, and is between
· If   then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1205

...

     HOW TO

Given an equation for a conic in the  system, rewrite the equation without the       term in terms of and

where the and axes are rotations of the standard axes by degrees.

1. Find

2. Find         and

3. Substitute         and  into                         and

4. Substitute the expression for and into in the given equation, and then simplify.

5. Write the equations with and in the standard form with respect to the rotated axes.

EXAMPLE 3

Rewriting an Equation with respect to the x and y axes without the xy Term

Rewrite the equation                  in the  system without an  term.

     Solution         See Figure 7.
First, we find

                                              Figure 7

So the hypotenuse is

Next, we find   and
1206 12 · Analytic Geometry

Substitute the values of         and  into            and

and

Substitute the expressions for and into in the given equation, and then simplify.

Write the equations with and in the standard form with respect to the new coordinate system.
Figure 8 shows the graph of the ellipse.

                                            Figure 8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1207

TRY IT #2 Rewrite the                                  in the     system without the  term.

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing an Equation That Has No xy Terms

Graph the following equation relative to the  system:

     Solution
First, we find

Because         we can draw a reference triangle as in Figure 9.

                                              Figure 9

Thus, the hypotenuse is

Next, we find   and      We will use half-angle identities.
1208 12 · Analytic Geometry

      Now we find and 

and

Now we substitute                and        into

Figure 10 shows the graph of the hyperbola

                                                  Figure 10

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1209

Identifying Conics without Rotating Axes

Now we have come full circle. How do we identify the type of conic described by an equation? What happens when the
axes are rotated? Recall, the general form of a conic is

If we apply the rotation formulas to this equation we get the form

It may be shown that                        The expression does not vary after rotation, so we call the expression

invariant. The discriminant,        is invariant and remains unchanged after rotation. Because the discriminant

remains unchanged, observing the discriminant enables us to identify the conic section.

Using the Discriminant to Identify a Conic

If the equation                                  is transformed by rotating axes into the equation
                                            then
The equation
one of these.                                 is an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola, or a degenerate case of

If the discriminant,            is

·  the conic section is an ellipse

·  the conic section is a parabola

·  the conic section is a hyperbola

EXAMPLE 5

Identifying the Conic without Rotating Axes
Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes.

                                    

     Solution                        and

 Let's begin by determining

Now, we find the discriminant.

Therefore,                          represents an ellipse.
                                         and
 Again, let's begin by determining

Now, we find the discriminant.
1210 12 · Analytic Geometry

Therefore,                            represents an ellipse.

     TRY IT #3 Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes.

                                                              

     MEDIA

     Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with conic sections and rotation of axes.

     Introduction to Conic Sections (http://openstax.org/l/introconic)

        12.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What effect does the          term have on the graph of      2. If the equation of a conic section is written in the
    a conic section?
                                                                form                    and

                                                                what can we conclude?

3. If the equation of a conic section is written in the         4. Given the equation                   what
                                                                    can we conclude if
     form                                                and

                             what can we conclude?

5. For the equation                       the value
                                 gives us what
    of that satisfies
    information?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is represented based on the given equation.

6.                                    7.                                     8.

9.                               10.                                    11.

12.                                   13.

14.                              15.

16.                                                 17.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        12.4 · Rotation of Axes 1211

For the following exercises, find a new representation of the given equation after rotating through the given angle.

18.             19.                                                            20.

21.        22.

For the following exercises, determine the angle that will eliminate the  term and write the corresponding equation
without the term.

23.             24.

25.             26.

27.                  28.

29.                  30.

Graphical

For the following exercises, rotate through the given angle based on the given equation. Give the new equation and
graph the original and rotated equation.

31.        32.                                                   33.

34.        35.                                                   36.

37.        38.

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the  system in which the equation has no  term.
                                                                      41.
39.        40.

42.        43.                                                            44.

45.             46.

47.                  48.

49.

For the following exercises, determine the angle of rotation in order to eliminate the  term. Then graph the new set of
axes.

50.                  51.
1212 12 · Analytic Geometry

52.                                          53.

54.                                          55.

For the following exercises, determine the value of based on the given equation.

56. Given                                    57. Given
      find for the graph to be a parabola.         find for the graph to be an ellipse.

58. Given                                    59. Given
      find for the graph to be a hyperbola.        find for the graph to be a parabola.

60. Given
      find for the graph to be an ellipse.

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Identify a conic in polar form.
           Graph the polar equations of conics.
           Define conics in terms of a focus and a directrix.

                        Figure 1 Planets orbiting the sun follow elliptical paths. (credit: NASA Blueshift, Flickr)

Most of us are familiar with orbital motion, such as the motion of a planet around the sun or an electron around an
atomic nucleus. Within the planetary system, orbits of planets, asteroids, and comets around a larger celestial body are
often elliptical. Comets, however, may take on a parabolic or hyperbolic orbit instead. And, in reality, the characteristics
of the planets' orbits may vary over time. Each orbit is tied to the location of the celestial body being orbited and the
distance and direction of the planet or other object from that body. As a result, we tend to use polar coordinates to
represent these orbits.

In an elliptical orbit, the periapsis is the point at which the two objects are closest, and the apoapsis is the point at which
they are farthest apart. Generally, the velocity of the orbiting body tends to increase as it approaches the periapsis and
decrease as it approaches the apoapsis. Some objects reach an escape velocity, which results in an infinite orbit. These
bodies exhibit either a parabolic or a hyperbolic orbit about a body; the orbiting body breaks free of the celestial body's
gravitational pull and fires off into space. Each of these orbits can be modeled by a conic section in the polar coordinate
system.

Identifying a Conic in Polar Form

Any conic may be determined by three characteristics: a single focus, a fixed line called the directrix, and the ratio of the

Access for free at openstax.org
distances of each to a point on the graph. Consider the parabola                                12.5 · Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1213

                                                                                shown in Figure 2.

                                  Figure 2

In The Parabola, we learned how a parabola is defined by the focus (a fixed point) and the directrix (a fixed line). In this

section, we will learn how to define any conic in the polar coordinate system in terms of a fixed point, the focus       at

the pole, and a line, the directrix, which is perpendicular to the polar axis.

If is a fixed point, the focus, and is a fixed line, the directrix, then we can let be a fixed positive number, called the
eccentricity, which we can define as the ratio of the distances from a point on the graph to the focus and the point on

the graph to the directrix. Then the set of all points such that            is a conic. In other words, we can define a conic

as the set of all points with the property that the ratio of the distance from to to the distance from to is equal
to the constant

For a conic with eccentricity

· if  the conic is an ellipse

· if  the conic is a parabola

· if  the conic is an hyperbola

With this definition, we may now define a conic in terms of the directrix,      the eccentricity  and the angle     Thus,

each conic may be written as a polar equation, an equation written in terms of and

The Polar Equation for a Conic

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is       where is a positive real number, and the eccentricity
is a positive real number the conic has a polar equation

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is       where is a positive real number, and the eccentricity
is a positive real number the conic has a polar equation

      ...

           HOW TO

Given the polar equation for a conic, identify the type of conic, the directrix, and the eccentricity.

1. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the constant in the denominator to rewrite the

      equation in standard form.

2. Identify the eccentricity as the coefficient of the trigonometric function in the denominator.

3. Compare with 1 to determine the shape of the conic.

4. Determine the directrix as     if cosine is in the denominator and           if sine is in the denominator. Set
1214 12 · Analytic Geometry

                equal to the numerator in standard form to solve for or

          EXAMPLE 1
        Identifying a Conic Given the Polar Form
        For each of the following equations, identify the conic with focus at the origin, the directrix, and the eccentricity.
         a.
         b.
         c.

             Solution
        For each of the three conics, we will rewrite the equation in standard form. Standard form has a 1 as the constant in the
        denominator. Therefore, in all three parts, the first step will be to multiply the numerator and denominator by the
        reciprocal of the constant of the original equation, where is that constant.
         a. Multiply the numerator and denominator by

Because  is in the denominator, the directrix is         Comparing to standard form, note that  Therefore,

from the numerator,

Since    the conic is an ellipse. The eccentricity is    and the directrix is

b. Multiply the numerator and denominator by

Because         is in the denominator, the directrix is  Comparing to standard form,  Therefore, from

the numerator,

Since    the conic is a hyperbola. The eccentricity is   and the directrix is

c. Multiply the numerator and denominator by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  12.5 · Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1215

Because sine is in the denominator, the directrix is   Comparing to standard form,  Therefore, from the
numerator,

Because  the conic is a parabola. The eccentricity is  and the directrix is

TRY IT #1 Identify the conic with focus at the origin, the directrix, and the eccentricity for

Graphing the Polar Equations of Conics

When graphing in Cartesian coordinates, each conic section has a unique equation. This is not the case when graphing in

polar coordinates. We must use the eccentricity of a conic section to determine which type of curve to graph, and then

determine its specific characteristics. The first step is to rewrite the conic in standard form as we have done in the

previous example. In other words, we need to rewrite the equation so that the denominator begins with 1. This enables

us to determine and, therefore, the shape of the curve. The next step is to substitute values for and solve for to plot

a few key points. Setting equal to            and provides the vertices so we can create a rough sketch of the graph.

  EXAMPLE 2

Graphing a Parabola in Polar Form
Graph

     Solution
First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 3, which
is

Because  we will graph a parabola with a focus at the origin. The function has a    and there is an addition

sign in the denominator, so the directrix is
1216 12 · Analytic Geometry

The directrix is
Plotting a few key points as in Table 1 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 3.

                                      A  B                                              C          D

                                                                                        undefined

                             Table 1

                                                                              Figure 3

     Analysis
We can check our result with a graphing utility. See Figure 4.

                                         Figure 4

  EXAMPLE 3
Graphing a Hyperbola in Polar Form
Graph

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   12.5 · Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1217

     Solution
First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 2, which
is

Because  so we will graph a hyperbola with a focus at the origin. The function has a       term and there is

a subtraction sign in the denominator, so the directrix is

The directrix is
Plotting a few key points as in Table 2 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 5.

                                                            ABC  D

         Table 2

                  Figure 5
1218 12 · Analytic Geometry

          EXAMPLE 4
        Graphing an Ellipse in Polar Form
        Graph

             Solution
        First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 5, which
        is

Because  so we will graph an ellipse with a focus at the origin. The function has a        and there is a

subtraction sign in the denominator, so the directrix is

The directrix is
Plotting a few key points as in Table 3 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 6.

                                                          AB        C  D

                                 Table 3

                                                          Figure 6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   12.5 · Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1219

     Analysis
We can check our result using a graphing utility. See Figure 7.

     Figure 7         graphed on a viewing window of               by                          and

     TRY IT #2 Graph

Defining Conics in Terms of a Focus and a Directrix

So far we have been using polar equations of conics to describe and graph the curve. Now we will work in reverse; we
will use information about the origin, eccentricity, and directrix to determine the polar equation.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the focus, eccentricity, and directrix of a conic, determine the polar equation.

1. Determine whether the directrix is horizontal or vertical. If the directrix is given in terms of we use the general

     polar form in terms of sine. If the directrix is given in terms of we use the general polar form in terms of

     cosine.

2. Determine the sign in the denominator. If  use subtraction. If               use addition.

3. Write the coefficient of the trigonometric function as the given eccentricity.

4. Write the absolute value of in the numerator, and simplify the equation.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Polar Form of a Vertical Conic Given a Focus at the Origin and the Eccentricity and Directrix

Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin,    and directrix

     Solution     so we know the trigonometric function in the denominator is sine.
The directrix is

Because           so we know there is a subtraction sign in the denominator. We use the standard form of

and      and
1220 12 · Analytic Geometry

        Therefore,

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Polar Form of a Horizontal Conic Given a Focus at the Origin and the Eccentricity and Directrix

Find the polar form of a conic given a focus at the origin,  and directrix

Solution

Because the directrix is         we know the function in the denominator is cosine. Because  so we know

there is an addition sign in the denominator. We use the standard form of

and         and

Therefore,

     TRY IT #3 Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin,  and directrix

EXAMPLE 7

Converting a Conic in Polar Form to Rectangular Form

Convert the conic                to rectangular form.

     Solution
We will rearrange the formula to use the identities

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         12.5 · Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1221

     TRY IT #4 Convert the conic      to rectangular form.

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with conics in polar coordinates.

     Polar Equations of Conic Sections (http://openstax.org/l/determineconic)
     Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 1 (http://openstax.org/l/graphconic1)
     Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 2 (http://openstax.org/l/graphconic2)

        12.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Explain how eccentricity      2. If a conic section is written   3. If a conic section is written
    determines which conic           as a polar equation, what          as a polar equation, and the
    section is given.                must be true of the                denominator involves
                                     denominator?                       what conclusion can be
                                                                        drawn about the directrix?

4. If the directrix of a conic   5. What do we know about the
    section is perpendicular to      focus/foci of a conic section
    the polar axis, what do we       if it is written as a polar
    know about the equation of       equation?
    the graph?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, identify the conic with a focus at the origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity.

6.                               7.                                 8.

9.                               10.                                11.

12.                              13.                                14.

15.                              16.                                17.
1222 12 · Analytic Geometry

For the following exercises, convert the polar equation of a conic section to a rectangular equation.

18.                              19.                           20.

21.                              22.                           23.

24.                              25.                           26.

27.                              28.                           29.

30.

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is
an ellipse, label the vertices and foci. If it is a hyperbola, label the vertices and foci.

31.                              32.                           33.

34.                              35.                           36.

37.                              38.                           39.

40.                              41.                           42.

For the following exercises, find the polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin and the given eccentricity and
directrix.

43. Directrix:                   44. Directrix:                45. Directrix:

46. Directrix:                   47. Directrix:                48. Directrix:

49. Directrix:                   50. Directrix:                51. Directrix:

52. Directrix:                   53. Directrix:                54. Directrix:

55. Directrix:

Extensions

Recall from Rotation of Axes that equations of conics with an  term have rotated graphs. For the following exercises,
express each equation in polar form with as a function of               58.

56.                              57.

59.                              60.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     12 · Chapter Review 1223

Chapter Review

Key Terms

angle of rotation an acute angle formed by a set of axes rotated from the Cartesian plane where, if                 then

is between                if          then is between              and if           then

center of a hyperbola the midpoint of both the transverse and conjugate axes of a hyperbola

center of an ellipse the midpoint of both the major and minor axes

conic section any shape resulting from the intersection of a right circular cone with a plane

conjugate axis the axis of a hyperbola that is perpendicular to the transverse axis and has the co-vertices as its

endpoints

degenerate conic sections any of the possible shapes formed when a plane intersects a double cone through the

apex. Types of degenerate conic sections include a point, a line, and intersecting lines.

directrix a line perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of a parabola; a line such that the ratio of the distance between

the points on the conic and the focus to the distance to the directrix is constant

eccentricity the ratio of the distances from a point on the graph to the focus and to the directrix represented

by         where is a positive real number

ellipse the set of all points       in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is a constant

foci plural of focus

focus (of a parabola) a fixed point in the interior of a parabola that lies on the axis of symmetry

focus (of an ellipse) one of the two fixed points on the major axis of an ellipse such that the sum of the distances from

these points to any point           on the ellipse is a constant

hyperbola the set of all points       in a plane such that the difference of the distances between    and the foci is a

positive constant

latus rectum the line segment that passes through the focus of a parabola parallel to the directrix, with endpoints on

the parabola

major axis the longer of the two axes of an ellipse

minor axis the shorter of the two axes of an ellipse

nondegenerate conic section a shape formed by the intersection of a plane with a double right cone such that the

plane does not pass through the apex; nondegenerate conics include circles, ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas

parabola the set of all points        in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix, and a

fixed point (the focus) not on the directrix

polar equation an equation of a curve in polar coordinates and

transverse axis the axis of a hyperbola that includes the foci and has the vertices as its endpoints

Key Equations

Horizontal ellipse, center at origin

Vertical ellipse, center at origin

Horizontal ellipse, center

Vertical ellipse, center

Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on x-axis

Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on y-axis

Hyperbola, center at           transverse axis parallel to x-axis
1224 12 · Chapter Review

Hyperbola, center at             transverse axis parallel to y-axis

Parabola, vertex at origin, axis of symmetry on x-axis

Parabola, vertex at origin, axis of symmetry on y-axis

Parabola, vertex at              axis of symmetry on x-axis

Parabola, vertex at              axis of symmetry on y-axis

General Form equation of a conic section

Rotation of a conic section

Angle of rotation

Key Concepts

12.1 The Ellipse

· An ellipse is the set of all points   in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is a

constant. Each fixed point is called a focus (plural: foci).

· When given the coordinates of the foci and vertices of an ellipse, we can write the equation of the ellipse in standard

form. See Example 1 and Example 2.

· When given an equation for an ellipse centered at the origin in standard form, we can identify its vertices, co-

vertices, foci, and the lengths and positions of the major and minor axes in order to graph the ellipse. See Example 3

and Example 4.

· When given the equation for an ellipse centered at some point other than the origin, we can identify its key features

and graph the ellipse. See Example 5 and Example 6.

· Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of ellipses and then evaluated to find key

features, such as lengths of axes and distance between foci. See Example 7.

12.2 The Hyperbola

· A hyperbola is the set of all points    in a plane such that the difference of the distances between      and the

foci is a positive constant.

· The standard form of a hyperbola can be used to locate its vertices and foci. See Example 1.

· When given the coordinates of the foci and vertices of a hyperbola, we can write the equation of the hyperbola in

standard form. See Example 2 and Example 3.

· When given an equation for a hyperbola, we can identify its vertices, co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and lengths and

positions of the transverse and conjugate axes in order to graph the hyperbola. See Example 4 and Example 5.

· Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of hyperbolas. For instance, given the

dimensions of a natural draft cooling tower, we can find a hyperbolic equation that models its sides. See Example 6.

12.3 The Parabola

· A parabola is the set of all points     in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix,

and a fixed point (the focus) not on the directrix.

· The standard form of a parabola with vertex                and the x-axis as its axis of symmetry can be used to graph the

parabola. If              the parabola opens right. If       the parabola opens left. See Example 1.

· The standard form of a parabola with vertex                and the y-axis as its axis of symmetry can be used to graph the

parabola. If              the parabola opens up. If          the parabola opens down. See Example 2.

· When given the focus and directrix of a parabola, we can write its equation in standard form. See Example 3.

· The standard form of a parabola with vertex                and axis of symmetry parallel to the x-axis can be used to graph

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   12 · Exercises 1225

    the parabola. If   the parabola opens right. If       the parabola opens left. See Example 4.

    · The standard form of a parabola with vertex    and axis of symmetry parallel to the y-axis can be used to graph

    the parabola. If   the parabola opens up. If          the parabola opens down. See Example 5.

    · Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of parabolas. For instance, given the diameter

    and focus of a cross-section of a parabolic reflector, we can find an equation that models its sides. See Example 6.

12.4 Rotation of Axes

    · Four basic shapes can result from the intersection of a plane with a pair of right circular cones connected tail to tail.

    They include an ellipse, a circle, a hyperbola, and a parabola.

    · A nondegenerate conic section has the general form                                 where                and are

    not all zero. The values of         and determine the type of conic. See Example 1.

    · Equations of conic sections with an term have been rotated about the origin. See Example 2.

    · The general form can be transformed into an equation in the and coordinate system without the           term.

    See Example 3 and Example 4.

    · An expression is described as invariant if it remains unchanged after rotating. Because the discriminant is invariant,

    observing it enables us to identify the conic section. See Example 5.

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates

    · Any conic may be determined by a single focus, the corresponding eccentricity, and the directrix. We can also define

    a conic in terms of a fixed point, the focus   at the pole, and a line, the directrix, which is perpendicular to the

    polar axis.

    · A conic is the set of all points      where eccentricity is a positive real number. Each conic may be written in

        terms of its polar equation. See Example 1.
    · The polar equations of conics can be graphed. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4.
    · Conics can be defined in terms of a focus, a directrix, and eccentricity. See Example 5 and Example 6.

    · We can use the identities                           and              to convert the equation for a conic from

    polar to rectangular form. See Example 7.

Exercises

Review Exercises

The Ellipse

For the following exercises, write the equation of the ellipse in standard form. Then identify the center, vertices, and foci.

1.                                      2.                           3.

4.

For the following exercises, graph the ellipse, noting center, vertices, and foci.

5.                                      6.                           7.

8.
1226 12 · Exercises

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the equation for the ellipse.

9. Center at         focus at    10. Center at          vertex at  11. A whispering gallery is to
                                                                         be constructed such that
     vertex at                                focus at                   the foci are located 35 feet
                                                                         from the center. If the
                                                                         length of the gallery is to
                                                                         be 100 feet, what should
                                                                         the height of the ceiling
                                                                         be?

The Hyperbola
For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in standard form. Then give the center, vertices, and foci.

12.                              13.                               14.

15.

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, labeling vertices and foci.

16.                              17.                               18.

19.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the hyperbola.

20. Center at        vertex at   21. Foci at     and

     focus at                         vertex at

The Parabola

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in standard form. Then give the vertex, focus, and
directrix.

22.                              23.                               24.

25.

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling vertex, focus, and directrix.

26.                              27.                               28.

29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      12 · Exercises 1227

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola using the given information.

30. Focus at      directrix  31. Focus at  directrix is          32. A cable TV receiving dish is
      is                                                               the shape of a paraboloid
                                                                       of revolution. Find the
                                                                       location of the receiver,
                                                                       which is placed at the
                                                                       focus, if the dish is 5 feet
                                                                       across at its opening and
                                                                       1.5 feet deep.

Rotation of Axes

For the following exercises, determine which of the conic sections is represented.

33.                                        34.

35.

For the following exercises, determine the angle that will eliminate the  term, and write the corresponding equation
without the term.

36.                                        37.

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the  system in which the equation has no  term.

38.                                        39.

40.

Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates

For the following exercises, given the polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin, identify the eccentricity and
directrix.

41.                          42.                                 43.

44.

For the following exercises, graph the conic given in polar form. If it is a parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If
it is an ellipse or a hyperbola, label the vertices and foci.

45.                          46.                                 47.

48.
1228 12 · Exercises

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of a conic with focus at the origin, find the equation in
polar form.

49. Directrix is     and             50. Directrix is   and

     eccentricity                         eccentricity

Practice Test

For the following exercises, write the equation in standard form and state the center, vertices, and foci.

1.                                   2.

For the following exercises, sketch the graph, identifying the center, vertices, and foci.

3.                                   4.                      5. Write the standard form

                                                             equation of an ellipse with a

                                                             center at                       vertex at

                                                             and focus at

6. A whispering gallery is to be
    constructed with a length of
    150 feet. If the foci are to be
    located 20 feet away from
    the wall, how high should
    the ceiling be?

For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in standard form, and give the center, vertices, foci, and
asymptotes.

7.                                   8.

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, noting its center, vertices, and foci. State the equations of the
asymptotes.

9.                                   10.                     11. Write the standard form

                                                             equation of a hyperbola

                                                             with foci at                    and

                                                                        and a vertex at

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in standard form, and give the vertex, focus, and equation
of the directrix.

12.                                  13.

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling the vertex, focus, and directrix.

14.                                  15.                     16. Write the equation of a

                                                             parabola with a focus at

                                                             and directrix

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               12 · Exercises 1229

17. A searchlight is shaped like
      a paraboloid of revolution.
      If the light source is
      located 1.5 feet from the
      base along the axis of
      symmetry, and the depth
      of the searchlight is 3 feet,
      what should the width of
      the opening be?

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is represented by the given equation, and then determine the
angle that will eliminate the term.

18.                                  19.

For the following exercises, rewrite in the  system without the  term, and graph the rotated graph.

20.                                  21.

For the following exercises, identify the conic with focus at the origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity.

22.                                  23.

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a parabola, label vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is an
ellipse or a hyperbola, label vertices and foci.

24.                                  25.                         26. Find a polar equation of

                                                                 the conic with focus at the

                                                                 origin, eccentricity of

                                                                 and directrix:
1230 12 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 13 · Introduction 1231

13  SEQUENCES, PROBABILITY, AND COUNTING THEORY

(credit: Robert Couse-Baker, Flickr.)

Chapter Outline

  13.1 Sequences and Their Notations
  13.2 Arithmetic Sequences
  13.3 Geometric Sequences
  13.4 Series and Their Notations
  13.5 Counting Principles
  13.6 Binomial Theorem
  13.7 Probability

      Introduction to Sequences, Probability and Counting Theory

A lottery winner has some big decisions to make regarding what to do with the winnings. Buy a new home? A luxury
convertible? A cruise around the world?

The likelihood of winning the lottery is slim, but we all love to fantasize about what we could buy with the winnings. One
of the first things a lottery winner has to decide is whether to take the winnings in the form of a lump sum or as a series
of regular payments, called an annuity, over an extended period of time.

This decision is often based on many factors, such as tax implications, interest rates, and investment strategies. There
are also personal reasons to consider when making the choice, and one can make many arguments for either decision.
However, most lottery winners opt for the lump sum.

In this chapter, we will explore the mathematics behind situations such as these. We will take an in-depth look at
annuities. We will also look at the branch of mathematics that would allow us to calculate the number of ways to choose
lottery numbers and the probability of winning.

13.1 Sequences and Their Notations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Write the terms of a sequence defined by an explicit formula.
           Write the terms of a sequence defined by a recursive formula.
           Use factorial notation.

A video game company launches an exciting new advertising campaign. They predict the number of online visits to their
website, or hits, will double each day. The model they are using shows 2 hits the first day, 4 hits the second day, 8 hits the
1232 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

        third day, and so on. See Table 1.

                                                                      Day 1 2 3 4 5 ...

                                                                     Hits 2 4 8 16 32 ...

                                                                   Table 1

        If their model continues, how many hits will there be at the end of the month? To answer this question, we'll first need to
        know how to determine a list of numbers written in a specific order. In this section, we will explore these kinds of
        ordered lists.

     Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula

        One way to describe an ordered list of numbers is as a sequence. A sequence is a function whose domain is a subset of
        the counting numbers. The sequence established by the number of hits on the website is

        The ellipsis (...) indicates that the sequence continues indefinitely. Each number in the sequence is called a term. The
        first five terms of this sequence are 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32.
        Listing all of the terms for a sequence can be cumbersome. For example, finding the number of hits on the website at
        the end of the month would require listing out as many as 31 terms. A more efficient way to determine a specific term is
        by writing a formula to define the sequence.
        One type of formula is an explicit formula, which defines the terms of a sequence using their position in the sequence.
        Explicit formulas are helpful if we want to find a specific term of a sequence without finding all of the previous terms. We
        can use the formula to find the nth term of the sequence, where is any positive number. In our example, each number
        in the sequence is double the previous number, so we can use powers of 2 to write a formula for the term.

The first term of the sequence is         the second term is  the third term is  and so on. The term of

the sequence can be found by raising 2 to the power. An explicit formula for a sequence is named by a lower case

letter  with the subscript The explicit formula for this sequence is

Now that we have a formula for the term of the sequence, we can answer the question posed at the beginning of this
section. We were asked to find the number of hits at the end of the month, which we will take to be 31 days. To find the
number of hits on the last day of the month, we need to find the 31st term of the sequence. We will substitute 31 for in
the formula.

If the doubling trend continues, the company will get         hits on the last day of the month. That is over 2.1

billion hits! The huge number is probably a little unrealistic because it does not take consumer interest and competition

into account. It does, however, give the company a starting point from which to consider business decisions.

Another way to represent the sequence is by using a table. The first five terms of the sequence and the  term of the
sequence are shown in Table 2.

                                                              123 4 5

                                   term of the sequence,      2 4 8 16 32

                                 Table 2

Graphing provides a visual representation of the sequence as a set of distinct points. We can see from the graph in
Figure 1 that the number of hits is rising at an exponential rate. This particular sequence forms an exponential function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1233

                                                  Figure 1

Lastly, we can write this particular sequence as

A sequence that continues indefinitely is called an infinite sequence. The domain of an infinite sequence is the set of
counting numbers. If we consider only the first 10 terms of the sequence, we could write

This sequence is called a finite sequence because it does not continue indefinitely.

  Sequence

  A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers. A finite sequence is a sequence whose domain
  consists of only the first positive integers. The numbers in a sequence are called terms. The variable with a
  number subscript is used to represent the terms in a sequence and to indicate the position of the term in the
  sequence.

  We call the first term of the sequence, the second term of the sequence, the third term of the sequence, and
  so on. The term is called the nth term of the sequence, or the general term of the sequence. An explicit formula
  defines the term of a sequence using the position of the term. A sequence that continues indefinitely is an
  infinite sequence.

Q&A  Does a sequence always have to begin with

     No. In certain problems, it may be useful to define the initial term as  instead of  In these problems,
     the domain of the function includes 0.

...

     HOW TO

Given an explicit formula, write the first terms of a sequence.

1. Substitute each value of into the formula. Begin with    to find the first term,

2. To find the second term, use

3. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all terms.
1234 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 1

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula

     Solution  into the formula. Repeat with values 2 through 5 for
Substitute

The first five terms are
     Analysis

The sequence values can be listed in a table. A table, such as Table 3, is a convenient way to input the function into a
graphing utility.

                                                                          12 3 4 5

                                                                          5 2 -1 -4 -7

                                                               Table 3

A graph can be made from this table of values. From the graph in Figure 2, we can see that this sequence represents a
linear function, but notice the graph is not continuous because the domain is over the positive integers only.

                                                                              Figure 2

       TRY IT #1 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula

Investigating Alternating Sequences

Sometimes sequences have terms that are alternate. In fact, the terms may actually alternate in sign. The steps to
finding terms of the sequence are the same as if the signs did not alternate. However, the resulting terms will not show
increase or decrease as increases. Let's take a look at the following sequence.

Notice the first term is greater than the second term, the second term is less than the third term, and the third term is
greater than the fourth term. This trend continues forever. Do not rearrange the terms in numerical order to interpret
the sequence.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1235

...

     HOW TO

Given an explicit formula with alternating terms, write the first terms of a sequence.

1. Substitute each value of into the formula. Begin with  to find the first term,  The sign of the term is

given by the   in the explicit formula.

2. To find the second term, use

3. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all terms.

  EXAMPLE 2

Writing the Terms of an Alternating Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula
Write the first five terms of the sequence.

     Solution  and so on in the formula.
Substitute

The first five terms are

     Analysis
The graph of this function, shown in Figure 3, looks different from the ones we have seen previously in this section
because the terms of the sequence alternate between positive and negative values.

                                                                       Figure 3
Q&A In Example 2, does the (-1) to the power of account for the oscillations of signs?
1236 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

                Yes, the power might be                          and so on, but any odd powers will result in a negative term, and

                any even power will result in a positive term.

TRY IT #2 Write the first five terms of the sequence.

Investigating Piecewise Explicit Formulas

We've learned that sequences are functions whose domain is over the positive integers. This is true for other types of
functions, including some piecewise functions. Recall that a piecewise function is a function defined by multiple
subsections. A different formula might represent each individual subsection.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given an explicit formula for a piecewise function, write the first terms of a sequence

1. Identify the formula to which                       applies.

2. To find the first term, use                         in the appropriate formula.

3. Identify the formula to which                       applies.

4. To find the second term, use                        in the appropriate formula.

5. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all terms.

  EXAMPLE 3

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Piecewise Explicit Formula
Write the first six terms of the sequence.

     Solution   and so on in the appropriate formula. Use when is not a multiple of 3. Use when is a
Substitute
multiple of 3.

The first six terms are

     Analysis
Every third point on the graph shown in Figure 4 stands out from the two nearby points. This occurs because the
sequence was defined by a piecewise function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1237

                                                                         Figure 4
  TRY IT #3 Write the first six terms of the sequence.

Finding an Explicit Formula

Thus far, we have been given the explicit formula and asked to find a number of terms of the sequence. Sometimes, the
explicit formula for the term of a sequence is not given. Instead, we are given several terms from the sequence.
When this happens, we can work in reverse to find an explicit formula from the first few terms of a sequence. The key to
finding an explicit formula is to look for a pattern in the terms. Keep in mind that the pattern may involve alternating
terms, formulas for numerators, formulas for denominators, exponents, or bases.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the first few terms of a sequence, find an explicit formula for the sequence.

1. Look for a pattern among the terms.

2. If the terms are fractions, look for a separate pattern among the numerators and denominators.

3. Look for a pattern among the signs of the terms.

4. Write a formula for in terms of Test your formula for                           and

EXAMPLE 4

Writing an Explicit Formula for the nth Term of a Sequence
Write an explicit formula for the term of each sequence.

                                                                                        

  Solution

Look for the pattern in each sequence.

 The terms alternate between positive and negative. We can use                     to make the terms alternate. The

numerator can be represented by         The denominator can be represented by
1238 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

    

        The terms are all negative.

So we know that the fraction is negative, the numerator is 2, and the denominator can be represented by

                                 the first term is so the exponent must be

The terms are powers of For

TRY IT #4 Write an explicit formula for the term of the sequence.
TRY IT #5 Write an explicit formula for the term of the sequence.

TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the term of the sequence.

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula

Sequences occur naturally in the growth patterns of nautilus shells, pinecones, tree branches, and many other natural
structures. We may see the sequence in the leaf or branch arrangement, the number of petals of a flower, or the pattern
of the chambers in a nautilus shell. Their growth follows the Fibonacci sequence, a famous sequence in which each term
can be found by adding the preceding two terms. The numbers in the sequence are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34,.... Other
examples from the natural world that exhibit the Fibonacci sequence are the Calla Lily, which has just one petal, the
Black-Eyed Susan with 13 petals, and different varieties of daisies that may have 21 or 34 petals.

Each term of the Fibonacci sequence depends on the terms that come before it. The Fibonacci sequence cannot easily be
written using an explicit formula. Instead, we describe the sequence using a recursive formula, a formula that defines
the terms of a sequence using previous terms.

A recursive formula always has two parts: the value of an initial term (or terms), and an equation defining  in terms of
preceding terms. For example, suppose we know the following:

We can find the subsequent terms of the sequence using the first term.

So the first four terms of the sequence are            .

The recursive formula for the Fibonacci sequence states the first two terms and defines each successive term as the sum

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1239

of the preceding two terms.

To find the tenth term of the sequence, for example, we would need to add the eighth and ninth terms. We were told
previously that the eighth and ninth terms are 21 and 34, so

Recursive Formula

A recursive formula is a formula that defines each term of a sequence using preceding term(s). Recursive formulas
must always state the initial term, or terms, of the sequence.

Q&A  Must the first two terms always be given in a recursive formula?

     No. The Fibonacci sequence defines each term using the two preceding terms, but many recursive
     formulas define each term using only one preceding term. These sequences need only the first term to be
     defined.

...

     HOW TO

Given a recursive formula with only the first term provided, write the first terms of a sequence.

1. Identify the initial term, which is given as part of the formula. This is the first term.

2. To find the second term, substitute the initial term into the formula for    Solve.

3. To find the third term, substitute the second term into the formula. Solve.

4. Repeat until you have solved for the term.

  EXAMPLE 5

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula.

     Solution                                                                 with the value of the preceding term.
The first term is given in the formula. For each subsequent term, we replace

The first five terms are     See Figure 5.
1240 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

                                                                              Figure 5

       TRY IT #7 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a recursive formula with two initial terms, write the first terms of a sequence.
   1. Identify the initial term, which is given as part of the formula.
   2. Identify the second term, which is given as part of the formula.
   3. To find the third term, substitute the initial term and the second term into the formula. Evaluate.
   4. Repeat until you have evaluated the term.

  EXAMPLE 6
Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula
Write the first six terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula.

Solution

The first two terms are given. For each subsequent term, we replace   and  with the values of the two preceding

terms.

The first six terms are                                See Figure 6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1241

                                                                       Figure 6
TRY IT #8 Write the first 8 terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula.

Using Factorial Notation                                                            factorial, written as  is the

The formulas for some sequences include products of consecutive positive integers.
product of the positive integers from 1 to For example,

An example of formula containing a factorial is  The sixth term of the sequence can be found by
substituting 6 for

The factorial of any whole number is             We can therefore also think of as

n Factorial

n factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined using a recursive formula. The factorial of  denoted
is defined for a positive integer as:

The special case is defined as

Q&A          Can factorials always be found using a calculator?

             No. Factorials get large very quickly--faster than even exponential functions! When the output gets too
             large for the calculator, it will not be able to calculate the factorial.
1242 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 7

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Using Factorials
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula

     Solution  and so on in the formula.
Substitute

The first five terms are

     Analysis
Figure 7 shows the graph of the sequence. Notice that, since factorials grow very quickly, the presence of the factorial
term in the denominator results in the denominator becoming much larger than the numerator as increases. This
means the quotient gets smaller and, as the plot of the terms shows, the terms are decreasing and nearing zero.

                                                                       Figure 7

TRY IT #9 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with sequences.
Finding Terms in a Sequence (http://openstax.org/l/findingterms)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1243

        13.1 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. Discuss the meaning of a        2. Describe three ways that a          3. Is the ordered set of even
    sequence. If a finite              sequence can be defined.               numbers an infinite
    sequence is defined by a                                                  sequence? What about the
    formula, what is its domain?                                              ordered set of odd
    What about an infinite                                                    numbers? Explain why or
    sequence?                                                                 why not.

4. What happens to the terms       5. What is a factorial, and how
        of a sequence when             is it denoted? Use an
                                       example to illustrate how
    there is a negative factor in      factorial notation can be
    the formula that is raised to      beneficial.
    a power that includes
    What is the term used to
    describe this phenomenon?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence.

6.                                 7.                                     8.

9.                                 10.                                    11.

12.                                13.                                    14.

15.

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the piecewise sequence.

16.                                     17.

18.                                     19.

20.

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each sequence.

21.                                22.                                    23.
1244 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

24.                                   25.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence.

26.                              27.                                       28.

29.                              30.

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the sequence.

31.                                                    32.

33.

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each sequence.

34.                              35.                                       36.

37.                              38.

For the following exercises, evaluate the factorial.

39.                              40.                                       41.

42.

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence.

43.                              44.                                       45.

46.

Graphical

For the following exercises, graph the first five terms of the indicated sequence

47.                              48.                                       49.

50.                              51.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            13.1 · Sequences and Their Notations 1245

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for the sequence using the first five points shown on the graph.

52.                                    53.                            54.

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the sequence using the first five points shown on the graph.

55.                               56.

Technology

Follow these steps to evaluate a sequence defined recursively using a graphing calculator:

· On the home screen, key in the value for the initial term and press [ENTER].

· Enter the recursive formula by keying in all numerical values given in the formula, along with the key strokes [2ND]

     ANS for the previous term    Press [ENTER].

· Continue pressing [ENTER] to calculate the values for each successive term.

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated term or terms for the sequence.

57. Find the first five terms of  58. Find the 15th term of the       59. Find the first five terms of

     the sequence           ,          sequence      ,                the sequence          ,

                   Use the

     >Frac feature to give
     fractional results.

60. Find the first ten terms of   61. Find the tenth term of the

     the sequence  ,                   sequence   ,

Follow these steps to evaluate a finite sequence defined by an explicit formula. Using a TI-84, do the following.

· In the home screen, press [2ND] LIST.

· Scroll over to OPS and choose "seq(" from the dropdown list. Press [ENTER].

· In the line headed "Expr:" type in the explicit formula, using the  button for
1246 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

· In the line headed "Variable:" type in the variable used on the previous step.

· In the line headed "start:" key in the value of that begins the sequence.

· In the line headed "end:" key in the value of that ends the sequence.

· Press [ENTER] 3 times to return to the home screen. You will see the sequence syntax on the screen. Press [ENTER]
   to see the list of terms for the finite sequence defined. Use the right arrow key to scroll through the list of terms.

Using a TI-83, do the following.

· In the home screen, press [2ND] LIST.

· Scroll over to OPS and choose "seq(" from the dropdown list. Press [ENTER].

· Enter the items in the order "Expr", "Variable", "start", "end" separated by commas. See the instructions above
   for the description of each item.

· Press [ENTER] to see the list of terms for the finite sequence defined. Use the right arrow key to scroll through the
   list of terms.

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated terms for the sequence. Round to the nearest
thousandth when necessary.

62. List the first five terms of  63. List the first six terms of     64. List the first five terms of
      the sequence                      the sequence                        the sequence

65. List the first four terms of  66. List the first six terms of
      the sequence                      the sequence

Extensions

67. Consider the sequence         68. What term in the sequence       69. Find a recursive formula
                                                             has the        for the sequence 1, 0, -1,
defined by                                                                  -1, 0, 1, 1, 0, -1, -1, 0, 1, 1,
                                        value Verify the result.            .... (Hint: find a pattern for
Is          a term in the                                                       based on the first two
                                                                            terms.)
sequence? Verify the

result.

70. Calculate the first eight terms of the sequences             71. Prove the conjecture made in the preceding
                                                                       exercise.
            and                                        and then

make a conjecture about the relationship between
these two sequences.

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the common difference for an arithmetic sequence.
           Write terms of an arithmetic sequence.
           Use a recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence.
           Use an explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence.

Companies often make large purchases, such as computers and vehicles, for business use. The book-value of these
supplies decreases each year for tax purposes. This decrease in value is called depreciation. One method of calculating
depreciation is straight-line depreciation, in which the value of the asset decreases by the same amount each year.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1247

As an example, consider a woman who starts a small contracting business. She purchases a new truck for $25,000. After
five years, she estimates that she will be able to sell the truck for $8,000. The loss in value of the truck will therefore be
$17,000, which is $3,400 per year for five years. The truck will be worth $21,600 after the first year; $18,200 after two
years; $14,800 after three years; $11,400 after four years; and $8,000 at the end of five years. In this section, we will
consider specific kinds of sequences that will allow us to calculate depreciation, such as the truck's value.

Finding Common Differences

The values of the truck in the example are said to form an arithmetic sequence because they change by a constant
amount each year. Each term increases or decreases by the same constant value called the common difference of the
sequence. For this sequence, the common difference is -3,400.

The sequence below is another example of an arithmetic sequence. In this case, the constant difference is 3. You can
choose any term of the sequence, and add 3 to find the subsequent term.

Arithmetic Sequence

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence that has the property that the difference between any two consecutive terms
is a constant. This constant is called the common difference. If is the first term of an arithmetic sequence and is
the common difference, the sequence will be:

EXAMPLE 1

Finding Common Differences
Is each sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

  Solution  

Subtract each term from the subsequent term to determine whether a common difference exists.

 The sequence is not arithmetic because there is no common difference.

 The sequence is arithmetic because there is a common difference. The common difference is 4.

     Analysis
The graph of each of these sequences is shown in Figure 1. We can see from the graphs that, although both sequences
show growth, is not linear whereas is linear. Arithmetic sequences have a constant rate of change so their graphs will
always be points on a line.
1248 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

                                                       Figure 1

Q&A        If we are told that a sequence is arithmetic, do we have to subtract every term from the following
           term to find the common difference?

           No. If we know that the sequence is arithmetic, we can choose any one term in the sequence, and subtract
           it from the subsequent term to find the common difference.

TRY IT #1 Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

TRY IT #2 Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences

Now that we can recognize an arithmetic sequence, we will find the terms if we are given the first term and the common
difference. The terms can be found by beginning with the first term and adding the common difference repeatedly. In
addition, any term can also be found by plugging in the values of and into formula below.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given the first term and the common difference of an arithmetic sequence, find the first several terms.
   1. Add the common difference to the first term to find the second term.
   2. Add the common difference to the second term to find the third term.
   3. Continue until all of the desired terms are identified.
   4. Write the terms separated by commas within brackets.

EXAMPLE 2

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences                            and  .
Write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with

     Solution
Adding is the same as subtracting 3. Beginning with the first term, subtract 3 from each term to find the next term.

The first five terms are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1249

     Analysis
As expected, the graph of the sequence consists of points on a line as shown in Figure 2.

                                       Figure 2

TRY IT #3 List the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with      and                  .

       ...

            HOW TO

Given any first term and any other term in an arithmetic sequence, find a given term.

1. Substitute the values given for     into the formula                        to solve for
                                                                 and into the formula
2. Find a given term by substituting the appropriate values for

EXAMPLE 3

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences

Given      and      , find .

     Solution
The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term 8 and the common difference .

We know the fourth term equals 14; we know the fourth term has the form                    .

We can find the common difference .

Find the fifth term by adding the common difference to the fourth term.

     Analysis
Notice that the common difference is added to the first term once to find the second term, twice to find the third term,
three times to find the fourth term, and so on. The tenth term could be found by adding the common difference to the
first term nine times or by using the equation

TRY IT #4 Given               and      , find .
1250 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

     Using Recursive Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences

        Some arithmetic sequences are defined in terms of the previous term using a recursive formula. The formula provides
        an algebraic rule for determining the terms of the sequence. A recursive formula allows us to find any term of an
        arithmetic sequence using a function of the preceding term. Each term is the sum of the previous term and the common
        difference. For example, if the common difference is 5, then each term is the previous term plus 5. As with any recursive
        formula, the first term must be given.

          Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence

          The recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference is:

           ...

              HOW TO

Given an arithmetic sequence, write its recursive formula.
 1. Subtract any term from the subsequent term to find the common difference.
 2. State the initial term and substitute the common difference into the recursive formula for arithmetic sequences.

  EXAMPLE 4

Writing a Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence.

     Solution               . The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term.
The first term is given as

Substitute the initial term and the common difference into the recursive formula for arithmetic sequences.

     Analysis
We see that the common difference is the slope of the line formed when we graph the terms of the sequence, as shown
in Figure 3. The growth pattern of the sequence shows the constant difference of 11 units.

                                                                              Figure 3
       Q&A Do we have to subtract the first term from the second term to find the common difference?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1251

                    No. We can subtract any term in the sequence from the subsequent term. It is, however, most common to
                    subtract the first term from the second term because it is often the easiest method of finding the
                    common difference.

       TRY IT #5 Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence.

Using Explicit Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences

We can think of an arithmetic sequence as a function on the domain of the natural numbers; it is a linear function
because it has a constant rate of change. The common difference is the constant rate of change, or the slope of the
function. We can construct the linear function if we know the slope and the vertical intercept.

To find the y-intercept of the function, we can subtract the common difference from the first term of the sequence.
Consider the following sequence.

The common difference is , so the sequence represents a linear function with a slope of . To find the

-intercept, we subtract from                                         . You can also find the -intercept by graphing

the function and determining where a line that connects the points would intersect the vertical axis. The graph is shown

in Figure 4.

                                              Figure 4

Recall the slope-intercept form of a line is  When dealing with sequences, we use in place of and in

place of If we know the slope and vertical intercept of the function, we can substitute them for and in the slope-

intercept form of a line. Substituting for the slope and for the vertical intercept, we get the following equation:

We do not need to find the vertical intercept to write an explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence. Another explicit

formula for this sequence is                  , which simplifies to

Explicit Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence

An explicit formula for the term of an arithmetic sequence is given by

           ...

              HOW TO

Given the first several terms for an arithmetic sequence, write an explicit formula.
 1. Find the common difference,
1252 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

           2. Substitute the common difference and the first term into

          EXAMPLE 5
        Writing the nth Term Explicit Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
        Write an explicit formula for the arithmetic sequence.

             Solution
        The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term.

        The common difference is 10. Substitute the common difference and the first term of the sequence into the formula and
        simplify.

             Analysis
        The graph of this sequence, represented in Figure 5, shows a slope of 10 and a vertical intercept of .

                                                                                      Figure 5
               TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the following arithmetic sequence.

      Finding the Number of Terms in a Finite Arithmetic Sequence

        Explicit formulas can be used to determine the number of terms in a finite arithmetic sequence. We need to find the
        common difference, and then determine how many times the common difference must be added to the first term to
        obtain the final term of the sequence.

                       ...

                         HOW TO
          Given the first three terms and the last term of a finite arithmetic sequence, find the total number of terms.
           1. Find the common difference
           2. Substitute the common difference and the first term into
           3. Substitute the last term for and solve for

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1253

  EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Number of Terms in a Finite Arithmetic Sequence
Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence.

     Solution
The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term.

The common difference is  . Substitute the common difference and the initial term of the sequence into the  term
formula and simplify.

Substitute for and solve for

There are eight terms in the sequence.

       TRY IT #7 Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence.

Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Sequences

In many application problems, it often makes sense to use an initial term of instead of In these problems, we alter
the explicit formula slightly to account for the difference in initial terms. We use the following formula:

  EXAMPLE 7
Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Sequences
A five-year old child receives an allowance of $1 each week. His parents promise him an annual increase of $2 per week.

 Write a formula for the child's weekly allowance in a given year.
 What will the child's allowance be when he is 16 years old?

     Solution



The situation can be modeled by an arithmetic sequence with an initial term of 1 and a common difference of 2.
Let be the amount of the allowance and be the number of years after age 5. Using the altered explicit formula for
an arithmetic sequence we get:



We can find the number of years since age 5 by subtracting.

We are looking for the child's allowance after 11 years. Substitute 11 into the formula to find the child's allowance at
age 16.

The child's allowance at age 16 will be $23 per week.
1254 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

     TRY IT #8  A woman decides to go for a 10-minute run every day this week and plans to increase the time of
                her daily run by 4 minutes each week. Write a formula for the time of her run after n weeks. How
                long will her daily run be 8 weeks from today?

     MEDIA
     Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with arithmetic sequences.
     Arithmetic Sequences (http://openstax.org/l/arithmeticseq)

        13.2 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is an arithmetic             2. How is the common                 3. How do we determine
    sequence?                            difference of an arithmetic          whether a sequence is
                                         sequence found?                      arithmetic?

4. What are the main                 5. Describe how linear
    differences between using a          functions and arithmetic
    recursive formula and using          sequences are similar. How
    an explicit formula to               are they different?
    describe an arithmetic
    sequence?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the common difference for the arithmetic sequence provided.

6.                                   7.

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is arithmetic. If so find the common difference.

8.                                   9.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence given the first term and common
difference.

10.        ,                         11.               ,

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the arithmetic series given two terms.

12.                                  13.

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the arithmetic sequence given the first term and common
difference.

14. First term is 3, common          15. First term is 4, common          16. First term is 5, common
      difference is 4, find the 5th        difference is 5, find the 4th        difference is 6, find the 8th

      term.                                term.                                term.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1255

17. First term is 6, common          18. First term is 7, common
      difference is 7, find the 6th        difference is 8, find the 7th

      term.                                term.

For the following exercises, find the first term given two terms from an arithmetic sequence.

19. Find the first term or of        20. Find the first term or of        21. Find the first term or of
      an arithmetic sequence if            an arithmetic sequence if            an arithmetic sequence if
                  and                                  and                                  and

22. Find the first term or of        23. Find the first term or of
      an arithmetic sequence if            an arithmetic sequence if
                  and                                   and

For the following exercises, find the specified term given two terms from an arithmetic sequence.

24.        and                       25.  and

     Find                                                  Find

For the following exercises, use the recursive formula to write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence.

26.                                  27.

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each arithmetic sequence.

28.                                  29.                                  30.

31.                                  32.                                  33.

34.                                  35.                                  36.

37.

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the given arithmetic sequence, and then find the specified term.

38.               Find the           39.                         Find     40.                  Find the
      17th term.                           the 14th term.                       12th term.

For the following exercises, use the explicit formula to write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence.

41.                                  42.

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each arithmetic sequence.

43.                                  44.                                  45.

46.                                  47.                                  48.

49.                                  50.                                  51.
1256 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

52.

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given finite arithmetic sequence.

53.                              54.                   55.

Graphical

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown represents an arithmetic sequence.
56.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      13.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1257

57.

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the first 5 terms of the arithmetic sequence.

58.                                  59.                       60.

Technology

For the following exercises, follow the steps to work with the arithmetic sequence  using a graphing
calculator:

· Press [MODE]

      Select SEQ in the fourth line

      Select DOT in the fifth line

      Press [ENTER]

· Press [Y=]

           is the first counting number for the sequence. Set

           is the pattern for the sequence. Set

              is the first number in the sequence. Set

· Press [2ND] then [WINDOW] to go to TBLSET

      Set

      Set

      Set Indpnt: Auto and Depend: Auto

· Press [2ND] then [GRAPH] to go to the TABLE
1258 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

61. What are the first seven          62. Use the scroll-down arrow             63. Press [WINDOW]. Set
      terms shown in the column
      with the heading                to scroll to        What                  ,                   ,

                                      value is given for                        ,                   ,

                                                                                   , and

                                                                                   Then press

                                                                                [GRAPH]. Graph the

                                                                                sequence as it appears on

                                                                                the graphing calculator.

For the following exercises, follow the steps given above to work with the arithmetic sequence                    using a
graphing calculator.

64. What are the first seven          65. Graph the sequence as it
      terms shown in the column             appears on the graphing
      with the heading in                   calculator. Be sure to
      the TABLE feature?                    adjust the WINDOW
                                            settings as needed.

Extensions                            67. Give two examples of                  68. Find the 5th term of the
                                                                                      arithmetic sequence
66. Give two examples of                    arithmetic sequences
      arithmetic sequences                  whose 10th terms are
      whose 4th terms are

69. Find the 11th term of the         70. At which term does the                71. At which term does the
      arithmetic sequence                   sequence                                  sequence
                                                                        exceed
                                            151?                                      begin to have negative
                                                                                      values?

72. For which terms does the          73. Write an arithmetic                   74. Write an arithmetic
      finite arithmetic sequence            sequence using a recursive                sequence using an explicit
                                have        formula. Show the first 4                 formula. Show the first 4
                                            terms, and then find the                  terms, and then find the
      integer values?                       31st term.                                28th term.

13.3 Geometric Sequences

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Find the common ratio for a geometric sequence.
           List the terms of a geometric sequence.
           Use a recursive formula for a geometric sequence.
           Use an explicit formula for a geometric sequence.

Many jobs offer an annual cost-of-living increase to keep salaries consistent with inflation. Suppose, for example, a
recent college graduate finds a position as a sales manager earning an annual salary of $26,000. He is promised a 2%
cost of living increase each year. His annual salary in any given year can be found by multiplying his salary from the
previous year by 102%. His salary will be $26,520 after one year; $27,050.40 after two years; $27,591.41 after three years;
and so on. When a salary increases by a constant rate each year, the salary grows by a constant factor. In this section, we
will review sequences that grow in this way.

Finding Common Ratios

The yearly salary values described form a geometric sequence because they change by a constant factor each year.
Each term of a geometric sequence increases or decreases by a constant factor called the common ratio. The sequence

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       13.3 · Geometric Sequences 1259

below is an example of a geometric sequence because each term increases by a constant factor of 6. Multiplying any
term of the sequence by the common ratio 6 generates the subsequent term.

Definition of a Geometric Sequence

A geometric sequence is one in which any term divided by the previous term is a constant. This constant is called the
common ratio of the sequence. The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the sequence by the
previous term. If is the initial term of a geometric sequence and is the common ratio, the sequence will be

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a set of numbers, determine if they represent a geometric sequence.
 1. Divide each term by the previous term.
 2. Compare the quotients. If they are the same, a common ratio exists and the sequence is geometric.

EXAMPLE 1

Finding Common Ratios
Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

  Solution  

Divide each term by the previous term to determine whether a common ratio exists.



The sequence is geometric because there is a common ratio. The common ratio is 2.



The sequence is not geometric because there is not a common ratio.

     Analysis
The graph of each sequence is shown in Figure 1. It seems from the graphs that both (a) and (b) appear have the form of
the graph of an exponential function in this viewing window. However, we know that (a) is geometric and so this
interpretation holds, but (b) is not.

              Figure 1
1260 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Q&A            If you are told that a sequence is geometric, do you have to divide every term by the previous term
               to find the common ratio?

               No. If you know that the sequence is geometric, you can choose any one term in the sequence and divide
               it by the previous term to find the common ratio.

TRY IT #1 Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

TRY IT #2 Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

Writing Terms of Geometric Sequences

Now that we can identify a geometric sequence, we will learn how to find the terms of a geometric sequence if we are

given the first term and the common ratio. The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by beginning with the first

term and multiplying by the common ratio repeatedly. For instance, if the first term of a geometric sequence is

and the common ratio is          we can find subsequent terms by multiplying    to get then multiplying the result

to get and so on.

The first four terms are

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given the first term and the common factor, find the first four terms of a geometric sequence.

1. Multiply the initial term, by the common ratio to find the next term,

2. Repeat the process, using     to find and then to find until all four terms have been identified.

3. Write the terms separated by commons within brackets.

EXAMPLE 2

Writing the Terms of a Geometric Sequence                          and
List the first four terms of the geometric sequence with    to find and so on.

     Solution  to find           Repeat the process, using
Multiply by

The first four terms are

TRY IT #3 List the first five terms of the geometric sequence with              and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       13.3 · Geometric Sequences 1261

Using Recursive Formulas for Geometric Sequences

A recursive formula allows us to find any term of a geometric sequence by using the previous term. Each term is the
product of the common ratio and the previous term. For example, suppose the common ratio is 9. Then each term is
nine times the previous term. As with any recursive formula, the initial term must be given.

  Recursive Formula for a Geometric Sequence
  The recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio and first term is

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given the first several terms of a geometric sequence, write its recursive formula.
   1. State the initial term.
   2. Find the common ratio by dividing any term by the preceding term.
   3. Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for a geometric sequence.

  EXAMPLE 3
Using Recursive Formulas for Geometric Sequences
Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence.

     Solution
The first term is given as 6. The common ratio can be found by dividing the second term by the first term.

Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for geometric sequences and define

     Analysis
The sequence of data points follows an exponential pattern. The common ratio is also the base of an exponential
function as shown in Figure 2

     Figure 2

Q&A  Do we have to divide the second term by the first term to find the common ratio?
     No. We can divide any term in the sequence by the previous term. It is, however, most common to divide
1262 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

                            the second term by the first term because it is often the easiest method of finding the common ratio.
               TRY IT #4 Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence.

Using Explicit Formulas for Geometric Sequences

Because a geometric sequence is an exponential function whose domain is the set of positive integers, and the common
ratio is the base of the function, we can write explicit formulas that allow us to find particular terms.

Let's take a look at the sequence                         This is a geometric sequence with a common ratio of 2 and

an exponential function with a base of 2. An explicit formula for this sequence is

The graph of the sequence is shown in Figure 3.

                                                                            Figure 3
Explicit Formula for a Geometric Sequence
The th term of a geometric sequence is given by the explicit formula:

EXAMPLE 4

Writing Terms of Geometric Sequences Using the Explicit Formula

Given a geometric sequence with    and              find

     Solution
The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term and the common ratio

Find the common ratio using the given fourth term.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   13.3 · Geometric Sequences 1263

Find the second term by multiplying the first term by the common ratio.

     Analysis
The common ratio is multiplied by the first term once to find the second term, twice to find the third term, three times to
find the fourth term, and so on. The tenth term could be found by multiplying the first term by the common ratio nine
times or by multiplying by the common ratio raised to the ninth power.

TRY IT #5 Given a geometric sequence with  and                           , find

  EXAMPLE 5

Writing an Explicit Formula for the th Term of a Geometric Sequence
Write an explicit formula for the term of the following geometric sequence.

     Solution
The first term is 2. The common ratio can be found by dividing the second term by the first term.

The common ratio is 5. Substitute the common ratio and the first term of the sequence into the formula.

The graph of this sequence in Figure 4 shows an exponential pattern.

                                                                       Figure 4
TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the following geometric sequence.
1264 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Solving Application Problems with Geometric Sequences                                             instead of  In these

In real-world scenarios involving geometric sequences, we may need to use an initial term of
problems, we can alter the explicit formula slightly by using the following formula:

EXAMPLE 6

Solving Application Problems with Geometric Sequences
In 2013, the number of students in a small school is 284. It is estimated that the student population will increase by 4%
each year.

 Write a formula for the student population.            Estimate the student population in 2020.

     Solution



The situation can be modeled by a geometric sequence with an initial term of 284. The student population will be

104% of the prior year, so the common ratio is 1.04.

Let be the student population and be the number of years after 2013. Using the explicit formula for a geometric
sequence we get



We can find the number of years since 2013 by subtracting.

We are looking for the population after 7 years. We can substitute 7 for to estimate the population in 2020.

The student population will be about 374 in 2020.

TRY IT #7  A business starts a new website. Initially the number of hits is 293 due to the curiosity factor. The
           business estimates the number of hits will increase by 2.6% per week.

            Write a formula for the number of hits.  Estimate the number of hits in 5 weeks.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with geometric sequences.

Geometric Sequences (http://openstax.org/l/geometricseq)
Determine the Type of Sequence (http://openstax.org/l/sequencetype)
Find the Formula for a Sequence (http://openstax.org/l/sequenceformula)

        13.3 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is a geometric           2. How is the common ratio of   3. What is the procedure for
    sequence?                        a geometric sequence            determining whether a
                                     found?                          sequence is geometric?

4. What is the difference        5. Describe how exponential
    between an arithmetic            functions and geometric
    sequence and a geometric         sequences are similar. How
    sequence?                        are they different?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     13.3 · Geometric Sequences 1265

Algebraic

For the following exercises, find the common ratio for the geometric sequence.

6.                               7.                                8.

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is geometric. If so, find the common ratio.

9.                               10.                               11.

12.                              13.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence, given the first term and common ratio.

14.                              15.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence, given any two terms.

16.                              17.

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence, given the first term and common ratio.

18. The first term is  and the   19. The first term is 16 and the
                       Find the        common ratio is Find
      common ratio is                  the 4th term.
      5th term.

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence, given the first four terms.

20.                              21.
      Find                             Find

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence.

22.                              23.

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each geometric sequence.

24.                              25.                               26.

27.                              28.                                    29.

30.                              31.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence.

32.                              33.
1266 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each geometric sequence.

34.                              35.                              36.

37.                              38.                                   39.

40.                              41.

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence given.

42. Let                          43. Let                    Find
      Find

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given finite geometric sequence.

44.                              45.

Graphical

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown represents a geometric sequence.

46.                                                    47.

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the first five terms of the geometric sequence.

48.                              49.                              50.

Extensions                       52. Use explicit formulas to     53. Find the 5th term of the
                                       give two examples of             geometric sequence
51. Use recursive formulas to          geometric sequences
      give two examples of             whose 7th terms are
      geometric sequences
      whose 3rd terms are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1267

54. Find the 7th term of the geometric      55. At which term does the       56. At which term does the
      sequence                                    sequence                         sequence

                                                  exceed                           begin to have integer
                                                                                   values?

57. For which term does the                 58. Use the recursive formula    59. Use the explicit formula to
      geometric sequence                          to write a geometric             write a geometric
                                first have        sequence whose common            sequence whose common
      a non-integer value?                        ratio is an integer. Show        ratio is a decimal number
                                                  the first four terms, and        between 0 and 1. Show the
                                                  then find the 10th term.         first 4 terms, and then find
                                                                                   the 8th term.

60. Is it possible for a
      sequence to be both
      arithmetic and geometric?
      If so, give an example.

13.4 Series and Their Notations

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Use summation notation.
           Use the formula for the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic series.
           Use the formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series.
           Use the formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series.
           Solve annuity problems.

A parent decides to start a college fund for their daughter. They plan to invest $50 in the fund each month. The fund
pays 6% annual interest, compounded monthly. How much money will they have saved when their daughter is ready to
start college in 6 years? In this section, we will learn how to answer this question. To do so, we need to consider the
amount of money invested and the amount of interest earned.

Using Summation Notation

To find the total amount of money in the college fund and the sum of the amounts deposited, we need to add the
amounts deposited each month and the amounts earned monthly. The sum of the terms of a sequence is called a series.
Consider, for example, the following series.

The nth partial sum of a series is the sum of a finite number of consecutive terms beginning with the first term. The
notation represents the partial sum.

Summation notation is used to represent series. Summation notation is often known as sigma notation because it uses
the Greek capital letter sigma, to represent the sum. Summation notation includes an explicit formula and specifies
the first and last terms in the series. An explicit formula for each term of the series is given to the right of the sigma. A
variable called the index of summation is written below the sigma. The index of summation is set equal to the lower
limit of summation, which is the number used to generate the first term in the series. The number above the sigma,
called the upper limit of summation, is the number used to generate the last term in a series.
1268 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

If we interpret the given notation, we see that it asks us to find the sum of the terms in the series  for

through        We can begin by substituting the terms for and listing out the terms of this series.

We can find the sum of the series by adding the terms:

Summation Notation
The sum of the first terms of a series can be expressed in summation notation as follows:

This notation tells us to find the sum of from          to

is called the index of summation, 1 is the lower limit of summation, and is the upper limit of summation.

      Q&A      Does the lower limit of summation have to be 1?

               No. The lower limit of summation can be any number, but 1 is frequently used. We will look at examples
               with lower limits of summation other than 1.

      ...

           HOW TO

Given summation notation for a series, evaluate the value.

 1. Identify the lower limit of summation.
 2. Identify the upper limit of summation.
 3. Substitute each value of from the lower limit to the upper limit into the formula.
 4. Add to find the sum.

  EXAMPLE 1
Using Summation Notation
Evaluate

Solution

According to the notation, the lower limit of summation is 3 and the upper limit is 7. So we need to find the sum of

from       to      We find the terms of the series by substituting  and into the function We add the

terms to find the sum.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1269

       TRY IT #1 Evaluate

Using the Formula for Arithmetic Series

Just as we studied special types of sequences, we will look at special types of series. Recall that an arithmetic sequence is
a sequence in which the difference between any two consecutive terms is the common difference, The sum of the
terms of an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series. We can write the sum of the first terms of an
arithmetic series as:

We can also reverse the order of the terms and write the sum as

If we add these two expressions for the sum of the first terms of an arithmetic series, we can derive a formula for the
sum of the first terms of any arithmetic series.

Because there are terms in the series, we can simplify this sum to
We divide by 2 to find the formula for the sum of the first terms of an arithmetic series.

  Formula for the Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Series
  An arithmetic series is the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence. The formula for the sum of the first terms
  of an arithmetic sequence is

...

     HOW TO

Given terms of an arithmetic series, find the sum of the first terms.

1. Identify and           and into the formula
2. Determine
3. Substitute values for
4. Simplify to find
1270 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

  EXAMPLE 2

Finding the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Series
Find the sum of each arithmetic series.

                                                                                         

  Solution


We are given           and

Count the number of terms in the sequence to find

Substitute values for       and into the formula and simplify.


We are given           and

Use the formula for the general term of an arithmetic sequence to find

Substitute values for       into the formula and simplify.

         substitute         into the given explicit formula.

To find

We are given that           To find substitute         into the given explicit formula.

Substitute values for       and into the formula and simplify.

Use the formula to find the sum of each arithmetic series.
       TRY IT #2
       TRY IT #3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1271

TRY IT #4

EXAMPLE 3

Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Series
On the Sunday after a minor surgery, a woman is able to walk a half-mile. Each Sunday, she walks an additional quarter-
mile. After 8 weeks, what will be the total number of miles she has walked?

Solution

This problem can be modeled by an arithmetic series with     and           We are looking for the total number of
                                                                           To find we can use the explicit formula
miles walked after 8 weeks, so we know that        and we are looking for
for an arithmetic sequence.

We can now use the formula for arithmetic series.

She will have walked a total of 11 miles.

TRY IT #5  A man earns $100 in the first week of June. Each week, he earns $12.50 more than the previous
           week. After 12 weeks, how much has he earned?

Using the Formula for Geometric Series

Just as the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series, the sum of the terms in a geometric
sequence is called a geometric series. Recall that a geometric sequence is a sequence in which the ratio of any two
consecutive terms is the common ratio, We can write the sum of the first terms of a geometric series as

Just as with arithmetic series, we can do some algebraic manipulation to derive a formula for the sum of the first terms
of a geometric series. We will begin by multiplying both sides of the equation by

Next, we subtract this equation from the original equation.

Notice that when we subtract, all but the first term of the top equation and the last term of the bottom equation cancel
out. To obtain a formula for divide both sides by

  Formula for the Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Series
  A geometric series is the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence. The formula for the sum of the first terms of a
1272 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

          geometric sequence is represented as

  ...

       HOW TO

Given a geometric series, find the sum of the first n terms.
 1. Identify

2. Substitute values for          and into the formula
3. Simplify to find

  EXAMPLE 4

Finding the First n Terms of a Geometric Series
Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric series.

  for the series                                       

  Solution



           and we are given that

We can find by dividing the second term of the series by the first.

Substitute values for             into the formula and simplify.

                                 into the given explicit formula.

Find by substituting

We can see from the given explicit formula that          The upper limit of summation is 6, so

Substitute values for            and into the formula, and simplify.

Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric series.

  TRY IT #6                      for the series

  TRY IT #7

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1273

EXAMPLE 5

Solving an Application Problem with a Geometric Series
At a new job, an employee's starting salary is $26,750. He receives a 1.6% annual raise. Find his total earnings at the end
of 5 years.

Solution

The problem can be represented by a geometric series with                         and     Substitute values for

and into the formula and simplify to find the total amount earned at the end of 5 years.

He will have earned a total of $138,099.03 by the end of 5 years.

TRY IT #8               At a new job, an employee's starting salary is $32,100. She receives a 2% annual raise. How much
                        will she have earned by the end of 8 years?

Using the Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

Thus far, we have looked only at finite series. Sometimes, however, we are interested in the sum of the terms of an
infinite sequence rather than the sum of only the first terms. An infinite series is the sum of the terms of an infinite
sequence. An example of an infinite series is

                                                                                  where the upper limit of summation is infinity. Because
This series can also be written in summation notation as

the terms are not tending to zero, the sum of the series increases without bound as we add more terms. Therefore, the
sum of this infinite series is not defined. When the sum is not a real number, we say the series diverges.

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined

If the terms of an infinite geometric sequence approach 0, the sum of an infinite geometric series can be defined. The
terms in this series approach 0:

The common ratio        As gets very large, the values of get very small and approach 0. Each successive term

affects the sum less than the preceding term. As each succeeding term gets closer to 0, the sum of the terms

approaches a finite value. The terms of any infinite geometric series with             approach 0; the sum of a geometric

series is defined when

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined

The sum of an infinite series is defined if the series is geometric and

...

     HOW TO

Given the first several terms of an infinite series, determine if the sum of the series exists.

1. Find the ratio of the second term to the first term.

2. Find the ratio of the third term to the second term.

3. Continue this process to ensure the ratio of a term to the preceding term is constant throughout. If so, the series

is geometric.

4. If a common ratio, was found in step 3, check to see if                        . If so, the sum is defined. If not, the sum is

not defined.
1274 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 6

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Series is Defined
Determine whether the sum of each infinite series is defined.

                                                         
                                                                    

  Solution

 The ratio of the second term to the first is          which is not the same as the ratio of the third term to the second,

The series is not geometric.

 The ratio of the second term to the first is the same as the ratio of the third term to the second. The series is

geometric with a common ratio of The sum of the infinite series is defined.

 The given formula is exponential with a base of         the series is geometric with a common ratio of  The sum of

the infinite series is defined.

 The given formula is not exponential; the series is not geometric because the terms are increasing, and so cannot

yield a finite sum.

Determine whether the sum of the infinite series is defined.
       TRY IT #9

       TRY IT #10

                                      
       TRY IT #11

Finding Sums of Infinite Series

When the sum of an infinite geometric series exists, we can calculate the sum. The formula for the sum of an infinite
series is related to the formula for the sum of the first terms of a geometric series.

We will examine an infinite series with                What happens to as increases?

The value of decreases rapidly. What happens for greater values of

As gets very large, gets very small. We say that, as increases without bound, approaches 0. As approaches 0,
         approaches 1. When this happens, the numerator approaches This give us a formula for the sum of an infinite

geometric series.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1275

Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

The formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series with       is

  ...

       HOW TO

Given an infinite geometric series, find its sum.

1. Identify and           and into the formula,
2. Confirm that
3. Substitute values for
4. Simplify to find

EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series
Find the sum, if it exists, for the following:

                                                                             

                                                                   
     Solution

 There is not a constant ratio; the series is not geometric.

There is a constant ratio; the series is geometric.           and              so the sum exists. Substitute

            and  into the formula and simplify to find the sum:

                                                                   Find by substituting     into the given explicit

The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric with
formula:

Substitute       and      into the formula, and simplify to find the sum:

 The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric, but       The sum does not exist.

  EXAMPLE 8
Finding an Equivalent Fraction for a Repeating Decimal
Find an equivalent fraction for the repeating decimal
1276 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

     Solution                                          so we can rewrite the repeating decimal as a sum of terms.
We notice the repeating decimal

Looking for a pattern, we rewrite the sum, noticing that we see the first term multiplied to 0.1 in the second term, and
the second term multiplied to 0.1 in the third term.

Notice the pattern; we multiply each consecutive term by a common ratio of 0.1 starting with the first term of 0.3. So,
substituting into our formula for an infinite geometric sum, we have

Find the sum, if it exists.
       TRY IT #12

                                 
       TRY IT #13

                          
TRY IT #14

Solving Annuity Problems

At the beginning of the section, we looked at a problem in which a parent invested a set amount of money each month
into a college fund for six years. An annuity is an investment in which the purchaser makes a sequence of periodic,
equal payments. To find the amount of an annuity, we need to find the sum of all the payments and the interest earned.
In the example, the parent invests $50 each month. This is the value of the initial deposit. The account paid 6% annual
interest, compounded monthly. To find the interest rate per payment period, we need to divide the 6% annual
percentage interest (APR) rate by 12. So the monthly interest rate is 0.5%. We can multiply the amount in the account
each month by 100.5% to find the value of the account after interest has been added.

We can find the value of the annuity right after the last deposit by using a geometric series with  and

                     After the first deposit, the value of the annuity will be $50. Let us see if we can determine the

amount in the college fund and the interest earned.

We can find the value of the annuity after deposits using the formula for the sum of the first      terms of a geometric
                                                                                                          into the formula,
series. In 6 years, there are 72 months, so            We can substitute

and simplify to find the value of the annuity after 6 years.

After the last deposit, the parent will have a total of $4,320.44 in the account. Notice, the parent made 72 payments of

$50 each for a total of            This means that because of the annuity, the parent earned $720.44 interest in

their college fund.

...

     HOW TO

Given an initial deposit and an interest rate, find the value of an annuity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1277

1. Determine the value of the initial deposit.
2. Determine the number of deposits.
3. Determine

      a. Divide the annual interest rate by the number of times per year that interest is compounded.
      b. Add 1 to this amount to find

4. Substitute values for                      into the formula for the sum of the first terms of a geometric series,

5. Simplify to find the value of the annuity after deposits.

EXAMPLE 9

Solving an Annuity Problem
A deposit of $100 is placed into a college fund at the beginning of every month for 10 years. The fund earns 9% annual
interest, compounded monthly, and paid at the end of the month. How much is in the account right after the last
deposit?

Solution

The value of the initial deposit is $100, so    A total of 120 monthly deposits are made in the 10 years, so

To find divide the annual interest rate by 12 to find the monthly interest rate and add 1 to represent the new monthly

deposit.

Substitute                                      into the formula for the sum of the first terms of a geometric series,
and simplify to find the value of the annuity.

So the account has $19,351.43 after the last deposit is made.

TRY IT #15  At the beginning of each month, $200 is deposited into a retirement fund. The fund earns 6%
            annual interest, compounded monthly, and paid into the account at the end of the month. How
            much is in the account if deposits are made for 10 years?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with series.

Arithmetic Series (http://openstax.org/l/arithmeticser)
Geometric Series (http://openstax.org/l/geometricser)
Summation Notation (http://openstax.org/l/sumnotation)

        13.4 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is an partial sum?  2. What is the difference          3. What is a geometric series?
                                between an arithmetic
                                sequence and an arithmetic
                                series?
1278 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

4. How is finding the sum of an  5. What is an annuity?
    infinite geometric series
    different from finding the
         partial sum?

Algebraic

For the following exercises, express each description of a sum using summation notation.

6. The sum of terms              7. The sum from of             to  8. The sum of         from

     from  to                                          of                  to

9. The sum that results from
    adding the number 4 five
    times

For the following exercises, express each arithmetic sum using summation notation.

10.                                                        11.

12.

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first terms of each arithmetic sequence.

13.                              14.                                15.

For the following exercises, express each geometric sum using summation notation.

16.                                                        17.

18.

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first terms of each geometric sequence, and then state
the indicated sum.

19.                              20.                                21.

For the following exercises, determine whether the infinite series has a sum. If so, write the formula for the sum. If not,
state the reason.

                                                                         

22.                              23.                                24.

25. 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      13.4 · Series and Their Notations 1279

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the following scenario. Javier makes monthly deposits into a savings account. He opened
the account with an initial deposit of $50. Each month thereafter he increased the previous deposit amount by $20.

26. Graph the arithmetic          27. Graph the arithmetic series
      sequence showing one              showing the monthly sums
      year of Javier's deposits.        of one year of Javier's
                                        deposits.

                                                                          
For the following exercises, use the geometric series

28. Graph the first 7 partial     29. What number does
      sums of the series.               seem to be approaching in
                                        the graph? Find the sum to
                                        explain why this makes
                                        sense.

Numeric

For the following exercises, find the indicated sum.

30.                               31.                                            32.

33.

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first terms of an arithmetic series to find the sum.

34.                                                                         35.

36.                               37.

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first terms of a geometric series to find the partial sum.

38. for the series                39. for the series                             40.

41.
1280 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

        For the following exercises, find the sum of the infinite geometric series.
        42. 43. 44. 

               
        45.

For the following exercises, determine the value of the annuity for the indicated monthly deposit amount, the number of
deposits, and the interest rate.

46. Deposit amount:              total  47. Deposit amount:                    48. Deposit amount:
                                              total deposits: interest
deposits: interest rate:                      rate: compounded                 total deposits: interest
                                              monthly
compounded monthly                                                             rate:      compounded

                                                                               quarterly

49. Deposit amount:

total deposits:       interest

rate:       compounded

semi-annually

Extensions

50. The sum of terms                    51. Write an explicit formula          52. Find the smallest value of n
                                              for such that                          such that
from        through is
                                                                  Assume this
       What is x?
                                              is an arithmetic series.

53. How many terms must be              54. Write  as an infinite              55. The sum of an infinite
      added before the series                                                        geometric series is five
                                has a   geometric series using                       times the value of the first
      sum less than                                                                  term. What is the common
                                        summation notation. Then                     ratio of the series?

                                        use the formula for finding

                                        the sum of an infinite

                                        geometric series to convert

                                        to a fraction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           13.5 · Counting Principles 1281

56. To get the best loan rates       57. Karl has two years to save
      available, the Coleman                            to buy a used car
      family want to save enough
      money to place 20% down              when he graduates. To the
      on a $160,000 home. They             nearest dollar, what would
      plan to make monthly                 his monthly deposits need
      deposits of $125 in an               to be if he invests in an
      investment account that              account offering a 4.2%
      offers 8.5% annual interest          annual interest rate that
      compounded semi-                     compounds monthly?
      annually. Will the Colemans
      have enough for a 20%
      down payment after five
      years of saving? How much
      money will they have
      saved?

Real-World Applications              59. A boulder rolled down a           60. A scientist places 50 cells in
                                           mountain, traveling 6 feet            a petri dish. Every hour, the
58. Keisha devised a week-long             in the first second. Each             population increases by
      study plan to prepare for            successive second, its                1.5%. What will the cell
      finals. On the first day, she        distance increased by 8               count be after 1 day?
      plans to study for hour,             feet. How far did the
      and each successive day              boulder travel after 10
      she will increase her study          seconds?
      time by minutes. How
      many hours will Keisha
      have studied after one
      week?

61. A pendulum travels a             62. Rachael deposits $1,500
      distance of 3 feet on its            into a retirement fund each
      first swing. On each                 year. The fund earns 8.2%
      successive swing, it travels         annual interest,
         the distance of the               compounded monthly. If
                                           she opened her account
      previous swing. What is the          when she was 19 years old,
      total distance traveled by           how much will she have by
      the pendulum when it                 the time she is 55? How
      stops swinging?                      much of that amount will
                                           be interest earned?

13.5 Counting Principles

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Solve counting problems using the Addition Principle.
           Solve counting problems using the Multiplication Principle.
           Solve counting problems using permutations involving n distinct objects.
           Solve counting problems using combinations.
           Find the number of subsets of a given set.
           Solve counting problems using permutations involving n non-distinct objects.

A new company sells customizable cases for tablets and smartphones. Each case comes in a variety of colors and can be
personalized for an additional fee with images or a monogram. A customer can choose not to personalize or could
1282 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

        choose to have one, two, or three images or a monogram. The customer can choose the order of the images and the
        letters in the monogram. The company is working with an agency to develop a marketing campaign with a focus on the
        huge number of options they offer. Counting the possibilities is challenging!

        We encounter a wide variety of counting problems every day. There is a branch of mathematics devoted to the study of
        counting problems such as this one. Other applications of counting include secure passwords, horse racing outcomes,
        and college scheduling choices. We will examine this type of mathematics in this section.

     Using the Addition Principle

        The company that sells customizable cases offers cases for tablets and smartphones. There are 3 supported tablet
        models and 5 supported smartphone models. The Addition Principle tells us that we can add the number of tablet
        options to the number of smartphone options to find the total number of options. By the Addition Principle, there are 8
        total options, as we can see in Figure 1.

                                 Figure 1

The Addition Principle

According to the Addition Principle, if one event can occur in ways and a second event with no common outcomes

can occur in ways, then the first or second event can occur in  ways.

  EXAMPLE 1

Using the Addition Principle
There are 2 vegetarian entrée options and 5 meat entrée options on a dinner menu. What is the total number of entrée
options?

     Solution
We can add the number of vegetarian options to the number of meat options to find the total number of entrée options.

There are 7 total options.

TRY IT #1  A student is shopping for a new computer. He is deciding among 3 desktop computers and 4
           laptop computers. What is the total number of computer options?

Using the Multiplication Principle

The Multiplication Principle applies when we are making more than one selection. Suppose we are choosing an

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         13.5 · Counting Principles 1283

appetizer, an entrée, and a dessert. If there are 2 appetizer options, 3 entrée options, and 2 dessert options on a fixed-
price dinner menu, there are a total of 12 possible choices of one each as shown in the tree diagram in Figure 2.

                                                                              Figure 2

The possible choices are:

 1. soup, chicken, cake
 2. soup, chicken, pudding
 3. soup, fish, cake
 4. soup, fish, pudding
 5. soup, steak, cake
 6. soup, steak, pudding
 7. salad, chicken, cake
 8. salad, chicken, pudding
 9. salad, fish, cake
10. salad, fish, pudding
11. salad, steak, cake
12. salad, steak, pudding

We can also find the total number of possible dinners by multiplying.

We could also conclude that there are 12 possible dinner choices simply by applying the Multiplication Principle.

The Multiplication Principle

According to the Multiplication Principle, if one event can occur in  ways and a second event can occur in ways
after the first event has occurred, then the two events can occur in      ways. This is also known as the
Fundamental Counting Principle.

  EXAMPLE 2

Using the Multiplication Principle
Diane packed 2 skirts, 4 blouses, and a sweater for her business trip. She will need to choose a skirt and a blouse for
each outfit and decide whether to wear the sweater. Use the Multiplication Principle to find the total number of possible
outfits.

     Solution
To find the total number of outfits, find the product of the number of skirt options, the number of blouse options, and
the number of sweater options.
1284 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

There are 16 possible outfits.

TRY IT #2  A restaurant offers a breakfast special that includes a breakfast sandwich, a side dish, and a
           beverage. There are 3 types of breakfast sandwiches, 4 side dish options, and 5 beverage choices.
           Find the total number of possible breakfast specials.

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects

The Multiplication Principle can be used to solve a variety of problem types. One type of problem involves placing objects
in order. We arrange letters into words and digits into numbers, line up for photographs, decorate rooms, and more. An
ordering of objects is called a permutation.

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects Using the Multiplication Principle

To solve permutation problems, it is often helpful to draw line segments for each option. That enables us to determine
the number of each option so we can multiply. For instance, suppose we have four paintings, and we want to find the
number of ways we can hang three of the paintings in order on the wall. We can draw three lines to represent the three
places on the wall.

There are four options for the first place, so we write a 4 on the first line.

After the first place has been filled, there are three options for the second place so we write a 3 on the second line.

After the second place has been filled, there are two options for the third place so we write a 2 on the third line. Finally,
we find the product.

There are 24 possible permutations of the paintings.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given distinct options, determine how many permutations there are.

   1. Determine how many options there are for the first situation.
   2. Determine how many options are left for the second situation.
   3. Continue until all of the spots are filled.
   4. Multiply the numbers together.

  EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Number of Permutations Using the Multiplication Principle
At a swimming competition, nine swimmers compete in a race.

 How many ways can they place first, second, and third?
 How many ways can they place first, second, and third if a swimmer named Ariel wins first place? (Assume there

is only one contestant named Ariel.)

 How many ways can all nine swimmers line up for a photo?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     13.5 · Counting Principles 1285

     Solution

 Draw lines for each place.

There are 9 options for first place. Once someone has won first place, there are 8 remaining options for second place.
Once first and second place have been won, there are 7 remaining options for third place.

Multiply to find that there are 504 ways for the swimmers to place.

 Draw lines for describing each place.

We know Ariel must win first place, so there is only 1 option for first place. There are 8 remaining options for second
place, and then 7 remaining options for third place.

Multiply to find that there are 56 ways for the swimmers to place if Ariel wins first.



Draw lines for describing each place in the photo.

There are 9 choices for the first spot, then 8 for the second, 7 for the third, 6 for the fourth, and so on until only 1 person
remains for the last spot.

There are 362,880 possible permutations for the swimmers to line up.

     Analysis                                                                                            distinct objects
Note that in part c, we found there were 9! ways for 9 people to line up. The number of permutations of
can always be found by

A family of five is having portraits taken. Use the Multiplication Principle to find the following.
       TRY IT #3 How many ways can the family line up for the portrait?

TRY IT #4 How many ways can the photographer line up 3 family members?

TRY IT #5        How many ways can the family line up for the portrait if the parents are required to stand on each
                 end?

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects Using a Formula

For some permutation problems, it is inconvenient to use the Multiplication Principle because there are so many

numbers to multiply. Fortunately, we can solve these problems using a formula. Before we learn the formula, let's look

at two common notations for permutations. If we have a set of objects and we want to choose objects from the set in

order, we write  Another way to write this is     a notation commonly seen on computers and calculators. To

calculate        we begin by finding the number of ways to line up all objects. We then divide by        to cancel

out the    items that we do not wish to line up.

Let's see how this works with a simple example. Imagine a club of six people. They need to elect a president, a vice
president, and a treasurer. Six people can be elected president, any one of the five remaining people can be elected vice
president, and any of the remaining four people could be elected treasurer. The number of ways this may be done is

                        Using factorials, we get the same result.
1286 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

        There are 120 ways to select 3 officers in order from a club with 6 members. We refer to this as a permutation of 6 taken
        3 at a time. The general formula is as follows.

Note that the formula stills works if we are choosing all objects and placing them in order. In that case we would be

dividing by      or which we said earlier is equal to 1. So the number of permutations of objects taken at a

time is or just

Formula for Permutations of n Distinct Objects

Given distinct objects, the number of ways to select objects from the set in order is

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a word problem, evaluate the possible permutations.

 1. Identify from the given information.
 2. Identify from the given information.
 3. Replace and in the formula with the given values.
 4. Evaluate.

EXAMPLE 4

Finding the Number of Permutations Using the Formula
A professor is creating an exam of 9 questions from a test bank of 12 questions. How many ways can she select and
arrange the questions?

Solution

Substitute       and             into the permutation formula and simplify.

There are 79,833,600 possible permutations of exam questions!

Analysis

We can also use a calculator to find permutations. For this problem, we would enter 12, press the      function, enter 9,

and then press the equal sign. The  function may be located under the MATH menu with probability commands.

Q&A          Could we have solved Example 4 using the Multiplication Principle?

             Yes. We could have multiplied                                   to find the same answer.

A play has a cast of 7 actors preparing to make their curtain call. Use the permutation formula to find the following.
       TRY IT #6 How many ways can the 7 actors line up?

TRY IT #7 How many ways can 5 of the 7 actors be chosen to line up?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             13.5 · Counting Principles 1287

Find the Number of Combinations Using the Formula

So far, we have looked at problems asking us to put objects in order. There are many problems in which we want to

select a few objects from a group of objects, but we do not care about the order. When we are selecting objects and the

order does not matter, we are dealing with combinations. A selection of objects from a set of objects where the

order does not matter can be written as   Just as with permutations,             can also be written as  In this

case, the general formula is as follows.

An earlier problem considered choosing 3 of 4 possible paintings to hang on a wall. We found that there were 24 ways to

select 3 of the 4 paintings in order. But what if we did not care about the order? We would expect a smaller number

because selecting paintings 1, 2, 3 would be the same as selecting paintings 2, 3, 1. To find the number of ways to select

3 of the 4 paintings, disregarding the order of the paintings, divide the number of permutations by the number of ways

to order 3 paintings. There are           ways to order 3 paintings. There are or 4 ways to select 3 of the 4

paintings. This number makes sense because every time we are selecting 3 paintings, we are not selecting 1 painting.
There are 4 paintings we could choose not to select, so there are 4 ways to select 3 of the 4 paintings.

Formula for Combinations of n Distinct Objects

Given distinct objects, the number of ways to select objects from the set is

           ...

              HOW TO

Given a number of options, determine the possible number of combinations.

 1. Identify from the given information.
 2. Identify from the given information.
 3. Replace and in the formula with the given values.
 4. Evaluate.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Number of Combinations Using the Formula
A fast food restaurant offers five side dish options. Your meal comes with two side dishes.

 How many ways can you select your side dishes?    How many ways can you select 3 side dishes?
                                                   We want to choose 3 side dishes from 5 options.
     Solution

 We want to choose 2 side dishes from 5 options.

Analysis

We can also use a graphing calculator to find combinations. Enter 5, then press  enter 3, and then press the equal

sign. The  function may be located under the MATH menu with probability commands.

Q&A        Is it a coincidence that parts (a) and (b) in Example 5 have the same answers?

           No. When we choose r objects from n objects, we are not choosing      objects. Therefore,
1288 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

TRY IT #8  An ice cream shop offers 10 flavors of ice cream. How many ways are there to choose 3 flavors for
           a banana split?

Finding the Number of Subsets of a Set

We have looked only at combination problems in which we chose exactly objects. In some problems, we want to
consider choosing every possible number of objects. Consider, for example, a pizza restaurant that offers 5 toppings.
Any number of toppings can be ordered. How many different pizzas are possible?

To answer this question, we need to consider pizzas with any number of toppings. There is        way to order a

pizza with no toppings. There are                      ways to order a pizza with exactly one topping. If we continue this process,

we get

There are 32 possible pizzas. This result is equal to
We are presented with a sequence of choices. For each of the objects we have two choices: include it in the subset or
not. So for the whole subset we have made choices, each with two options. So there are a total of
possible resulting subsets, all the way from the empty subset, which we obtain when we say "no" each time, to the
original set itself, which we obtain when we say "yes" each time.

  Formula for the Number of Subsets of a Set

  A set containing n distinct objects has subsets.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Number of Subsets of a Set
A restaurant offers butter, cheese, chives, and sour cream as toppings for a baked potato. How many different ways are
there to order a potato?

     Solution                                                                 into the formula.
We are looking for the number of subsets of a set with 4 objects. Substitute

There are 16 possible ways to order a potato.

TRY IT #9  A sundae bar at a wedding has 6 toppings to choose from. Any number of toppings can be
           chosen. How many different sundaes are possible?

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects

We have studied permutations where all of the objects involved were distinct. What happens if some of the objects are
indistinguishable? For example, suppose there is a sheet of 12 stickers. If all of the stickers were distinct, there would be

     ways to order the stickers. However, 4 of the stickers are identical stars, and 3 are identical moons. Because all of the
objects are not distinct, many of the permutations we counted are duplicates. The general formula for this situation
is as follows.

In this example, we need to divide by the number of ways to order the 4 stars and the ways to order the 3 moons to find
the number of unique permutations of the stickers. There are ways to order the stars and ways to order the moon.

There are 3,326,400 ways to order the sheet of stickers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  13.5 · Counting Principles 1289

Formula for Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects

If there are elements in a set and  are alike,  are alike,          are alike, and so on through  the number of
permutations can be found by

EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects
Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word DISTINCT.

     Solution                                                             and                     into the formula.
There are 8 letters. Both I and T are repeated 2 times. Substitute

There are 10,080 arrangements.

      TRY IT #10 Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word CARRIER.

      MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with combinations and permutations.
      Combinations (http://openstax.org/l/combinations)
      Permutations (http://openstax.org/l/permutations)

        13.5 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

For the following exercises, assume that there are ways an event    can happen,  ways an event       can happen, and

that       are non-overlapping.

1. Use the Addition Principle of  2. Use the Multiplication
    counting to explain how
    many ways event                 Principle of counting to
    can occur.
                                    explain how many ways

                                    event       can occur.

Answer the following questions.   4. Describe how the               5. What is the term for the
                                      permutation of objects            arrangement that selects
3. When given two separate            differs from the                  objects from a set of
    events, how do we know            permutation of choosing           objects when the order of
    whether to apply the              objects from a set of             the objects is not
    Addition Principle or the         objects. Include how each is      important? What is the
    Multiplication Principle          calculated.                       formula for calculating the
    when calculating possible                                           number of possible
    outcomes? What                                                      outcomes for this type of
    conjunctions may help to                                            arrangement?
    determine which operations
    to use?
1290 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Numeric

For the following exercises, determine whether to use the Addition Principle or the Multiplication Principle. Then perform
the calculations.

6. Let the set                     7. Let the set
                                       How many ways are there to choose a positive or
    How many ways are there to         an odd number from
    choose a negative or an even
    number from

8. How many ways are there to      9. How many ways are there to     10. How many outcomes are
    pick a red ace or a club from      pick a paint color from 5           possible from tossing a
    a standard card playing            shades of green, 4 shades of        pair of coins?
    deck?                              blue, or 7 shades of yellow?

11. How many outcomes are          12. How many two-letter           13. How many ways are there
      possible from tossing a            strings--the first letter         to construct a string of 3
      coin and rolling a 6-sided         from and the second               digits if numbers can be
      die?                               letter from can be                repeated?
                                         formed from the sets
                                                            and

14. How many ways are there
      to construct a string of 3
      digits if numbers cannot be
      repeated?

For the following exercises, compute the value of the expression.

15.                                16.                               17.

18.                                19.                               20.

21.                                22.                               23.

24.

For the following exercises, find the number of subsets in each given set.

25.                                26.                               27. A set containing 5 distinct

                                                                            numbers, 4 distinct letters,

                                                                            and 3 distinct symbols

28. The set of even numbers        29. The set of two-digit
      from 2 to 28                       numbers between 1 and
                                         100 containing the digit 0

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 13.5 · Counting Principles 1291

For the following exercises, find the distinct number of arrangements.

30. The letters in the word         31. The letters in the word         32. The letters in the word
      "juggernaut"                        "academia"                          "academia" that begin and
                                                                              end in "a"

33. The symbols in the string       34. The symbols in the string
      #,#,#,@,@,$,$,$,%,%,%,%             #,#,#,@,@,$,$,$,%,%,%,%
                                          that begin and end with
                                          "%"

Extensions                          36. The number of 5-element         37. Can      ever equal
                                          subsets from a set                     Explain.
35. The set, consists of                  containing elements is
                        whole             equal to the number of
                                          6-element subsets from
      numbers, each being the             the same set. What is the
      same number of digits               value of (Hint: the order
      long. How many digits long          in which the elements for
      is a number from (Hint:             the subsets are chosen is
      use the fact that a whole           not important.)
      number cannot start with
      the digit 0.)

38. Suppose a set has 2,048         39. How many arrangements
      subsets. How many distinct          can be made from the
      objects are contained in            letters of the word
                                          "mountains" if all the
                                          vowels must form a string?

Real-World Applications             41. A cell phone company            42. In horse racing, a "trifecta"
                                          offers 6 different voice            occurs when a bettor wins
40. A family consisting of 2              packages and 8 different            by selecting the first three
      parents and 3 children is to        data packages. Of those, 3          finishers in the exact order
      pose for a picture with 2           packages include both               (1st place, 2nd place, and
      family members in the               voice and data. How many            3rd place). How many
      front and 3 in the back.            ways are there to choose            different trifectas are
                                          either voice or data, but           possible if there are 14
    How many                              not both?                           horses in a race?

      arrangements are possible
      with no restrictions?

    How many

      arrangements are possible
      if the parents must sit in
      the front?

    How many

      arrangements are possible
      if the parents must be next
      to each other?
1292 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

43. A wholesale T-shirt              44. Hector wants to place           45. An art store has 4 brands
      company offers sizes small,          billboard advertisements            of paint pens in 12
      medium, large, and extra-            throughout the county for           different colors and 3 types
      large in organic or non-             his new business. How               of ink. How many paint
      organic cotton and colors            many ways can Hector                pens are there to choose
      white, black, gray, blue,            choose 15 neighborhoods             from?
      and red. How many                    to advertise in if there are
      different T-shirts are there         30 neighborhoods in the
      to choose from?                      county?

46. How many ways can a              47. How many ways can a             48. A conductor needs 5
      committee of 3 freshmen              baseball coach arrange the          cellists and 5 violinists to
      and 4 juniors be formed              order of 9 batters if there         play at a diplomatic event.
      from a group of                      are 15 players on the               To do this, he ranks the
      freshmen and juniors?                team?                               orchestra's 10 cellists and
                                                                               16 violinists in order of
                                                                               musical proficiency. What
                                                                               is the ratio of the total
                                                                               cellist rankings possible to
                                                                               the total violinist rankings
                                                                               possible?

49. A motorcycle shop has 10         50. A skateboard shop stocks        51. Just-For-Kicks Sneaker
      choppers, 6 bobbers, and 5           10 types of board decks, 3          Company offers an online
      café racers--different               types of trucks, and 4 types        customizing service. How
      types of vintage                     of wheels. How many                 many ways are there to
      motorcycles. How many                different skateboards can           design a custom pair of
      ways can the shop choose             be constructed?                     Just-For-Kicks sneakers if a
      3 choppers, 5 bobbers, and                                               customer can choose from
      2 café racers for a weekend                                              a basic shoe up to 11
      showcase?                                                                customizable options?

52. A car wash offers the            53. Suni bought 20 plants to        54. How many unique ways
      following optional services          arrange along the border            can a string of Christmas
      to the basic wash: clear             of her garden. How many             lights be arranged from 9
      coat wax, triple foam                distinct arrangements can           red, 10 green, 6 white, and
      polish, undercarriage                she make if the plants are          12 gold color bulbs?
      wash, rust inhibitor, wheel          comprised of 6 tulips, 6
      brightener, air freshener,           roses, and 8 daisies?
      and interior shampoo. How
      many washes are possible
      if any number of options
      can be added to the basic
      wash?

13.6 Binomial Theorem

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Apply the Binomial Theorem.

A polynomial with two terms is called a binomial. We have already learned to multiply binomials and to raise binomials

to powers, but raising a binomial to a high power can be tedious and time-consuming. In this section, we will discuss a

shortcut that will allow us to find                    without multiplying the binomial by itself times.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   13.6 · Binomial Theorem 1293

Identifying Binomial Coefficients

In Counting Principles, we studied combinations. In the shortcut to finding     we will need to use combinations to

find the coefficients that will appear in the expansion of the binomial. In this case, we use the notation  instead of

  but it can be calculated in the same way. So

The combination         is called a binomial coefficient. An example of a binomial coefficient is

Binomial Coefficients                                then the binomial coefficient is
If and are integers greater than or equal to 0 with

  Q&A          Is a binomial coefficient always a whole number?

               Yes. Just as the number of combinations must always be a whole number, a binomial coefficient will
               always be a whole number.

EXAMPLE 1

Finding Binomial Coefficients
Find each binomial coefficient.

                        

  Solution

Use the formula to calculate each binomial coefficient. You can also use the  function on your calculator.

                                                                              

  Analysis

Notice that we obtained the same result for parts (b) and (c). If you look closely at the solution for these two parts, you

will see that you end up with the same two factorials in the denominator, but the order is reversed, just as with

combinations.

  TRY IT #1 Find each binomial coefficient.

                                  

Using the Binomial Theorem

When we expand          by multiplying, the result is called a binomial expansion, and it includes binomial coefficients.

If we wanted to expand            we might multiply  by itself fifty-two times. This could take hours! If we

examine some simple binomial expansions, we can find patterns that will lead us to a shortcut for finding more

complicated binomial expansions.
1294 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

First, let's examine the exponents. With each successive term, the exponent for decreases and the exponent for
increases. The sum of the two exponents is for each term.
Next, let's examine the coefficients. Notice that the coefficients increase and then decrease in a symmetrical pattern. The
coefficients follow a pattern:

These patterns lead us to the Binomial Theorem, which can be used to expand any binomial.

Another way to see the coefficients is to examine the expansion of a binomial in general form,  to successive
powers 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Can you guess the next expansion for the binomial

                                                               Figure 1

See Figure 1, which illustrates the following:

· There are  terms in the expansion of

· The degree (or sum of the exponents) for each term is

· The powers on begin with and decrease to 0.

· The powers on begin with 0 and increase to

· The coefficients are symmetric.

To determine the expansion on                          we see  thus, there will be 5+1 = 6 terms. Each term has a combined

degree of 5. In descending order for powers of the pattern is as follows:

· Introduce  and then for each successive term reduce the exponent on by 1 until                is reached.
· Introduce       and then increase the exponent on by 1 until is reached.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           13.6 · Binomial Theorem 1295

The next expansion would be

But where do those coefficients come from? The binomial coefficients are symmetric. We can see these coefficients in an
array known as Pascal's Triangle, shown in Figure 2. Pascal didn't invent the triangle. The underlying principles had been
developed and written about for over 1500 years, first by the Indian mathematician (and poet) Pingala in the second
century BCE. Others throughout Asia and Europe worked with the concepts throughout, and the triangle was first
published in its graphical form by Omar Khayyam, an Iranian mathematician and astronomer, for whom the triangle is
named in Iran. French mathematician Blaise Pascal repopularized it when he republished it and used it to solve a
number of probability problems.

                                              Figure 2

To generate Pascal's Triangle, we start by writing a 1. In the row below, row 2, we write two 1's. In the 3rd row, flank the

ends of the rows with 1's, and add  to find the middle number, 2. In the row, flank the ends of the row with 1's.

Each element in the triangle is the sum of the two elements immediately above it.

To see the connection between Pascal's Triangle and binomial coefficients, let us revisit the expansion of the binomials
in general form.

The Binomial Theorem
The Binomial Theorem is a formula that can be used to expand any binomial.

...

     HOW TO

Given a binomial, write it in expanded form.

1. Determine the value of according to the exponent.

2. Evaluate the  through            using the Binomial Theorem formula.

3. Simplify.
1296 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 2

Expanding a Binomial
Write in expanded form.

  Solution   

 Substitute         into the formula. Evaluate the     through      terms. Simplify.

 Substitute         into the formula. Evaluate the     through      terms. Notice that is in the place that was

occupied by and that is in the place that was occupied by So we substitute them. Simplify.

  Analysis

Notice the alternating signs in part b. This happens because    raised to odd powers is negative, but  raised to

even powers is positive. This will occur whenever the binomial contains a subtraction sign.

     TRY IT #2 Write in expanded form.

                         

Using the Binomial Theorem to Find a Single Term

Expanding a binomial with a high exponent such as             can be a lengthy process.

Sometimes we are interested only in a certain term of a binomial expansion. We do not need to fully expand a binomial
to find a single specific term.

Note the pattern of coefficients in the expansion of

The second term is       The third term is                    We can generalize this result.

The (r+1)th Term of a Binomial Expansion

The          term of the binomial expansion of         is:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Given a binomial, write a specific term without fully expanding.
   1. Determine the value of according to the exponent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    13.6 · Binomial Theorem 1297

    2. Determine                            term of the binomial expansion.
    3. Determine
    4. Replace in the formula for the

EXAMPLE 3

Writing a Given Term of a Binomial Expansion

Find the tenth term of          without fully expanding the binomial.

     Solution                                 we will use              in our calculations.
Because we are looking for the tenth term,

    TRY IT #3 Find the sixth term of          without fully expanding the binomial.

    MEDIA

    Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with binomial expansion.

    The Binomial Theorem (http://openstax.org/l/binomialtheorem)
    Binomial Theorem Example (http://openstax.org/l/btexample)

        13.6 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What is a binomial           2. What role do binomial               3. What is the Binomial
    coefficient, and how it is      coefficients play in a                 Theorem and what is its
    calculated?                     binomial expansion? Are                use?
                                    they restricted to any type of
                                    number?

4. When is it an advantage to
    use the Binomial Theorem?
    Explain.

Algebraic

For the following exercises, evaluate the binomial coefficient.

5.                              6.                                     7.

8.                              9.                                     10.
1298 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

11.                                    12.

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand each binomial.

13.                                    14.                                15.

16.                                    17.                                18.

19.                                    20.                                21.

22.

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to write the first three terms of each binomial.

23.                                    24.                                25.

26.                                    27.                                28.

29.

For the following exercises, find the indicated term of each binomial without fully expanding the binomial.

30. The fourth term of                 31. The fourth term of             32. The third term of

33. The eighth term of                 34. The seventh term of            35. The fifth term of

36. The tenth term of                  37. The ninth term of              38. The fourth term of

39. The eighth term of

Graphical

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand the binomial                      Then find and graph
each indicated sum on one set of axes.

40. Find and graph               such  41. Find and graph           such  42. Find and graph      such

     that  is the first term                that       is the sum of the       that  is the sum of the

     of the expansion.                      first two terms of the             first three terms of the

                                            expansion.                         expansion.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     13.7 · Probability 1299

43. Find and graph       such      44. Find and graph         such

that        is the sum of the      that      is the sum of the

first four terms of the            first five terms of the

expansion.                         expansion.

Extensions

45. In the expansion of                each term has the      46. In the expansion of
                                   successively takes on                         the coefficient of
form                , where
                                                                               is the same as the
the value                If                  what is                coefficient of which other
                                                                    term?

the corresponding term?

47. Consider the expansion of      48. Find                         49. Which expression cannot
                      What is the                                         be expanded using the
                                   and write the answer as a              Binomial Theorem?
      exponent of in the           binomial coefficient in the            Explain.
      term?
                                                                            ·
                                   form               Prove it.             ·

                                   Hint: Use the fact that, for             ·
                                   any integer such that
                                                                            ·

13.7 Probability

Learning Objectives

In this section, you will:
           Construct probability models.
           Compute probabilities of equally likely outcomes.
           Compute probabilities of the union of two events.
           Use the complement rule to find probabilities.
           Compute probability using counting theory.

Figure 1 An example of a "spaghetti model," which can be used to predict possible paths of a tropical storm.1
1300 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Residents of the Southeastern United States are all too familiar with charts, known as spaghetti models, such as the one
in Figure 1. They combine a collection of weather data to predict the most likely path of a hurricane. Each colored line
represents one possible path. The group of squiggly lines can begin to resemble strands of spaghetti, hence the name.
In this section, we will investigate methods for making these types of predictions.

Constructing Probability Models

Suppose we roll a six-sided number cube. Rolling a number cube is an example of an experiment, or an activity with an
observable result. The numbers on the cube are possible results, or outcomes, of this experiment. The set of all possible
outcomes of an experiment is called the sample space of the experiment. The sample space for this experiment is

                       An event is any subset of a sample space.

The likelihood of an event is known as probability. The probability of an event is a number that always satisfies
               where 0 indicates an impossible event and 1 indicates a certain event. A probability model is a mathematical

description of an experiment listing all possible outcomes and their associated probabilities. For instance, if there is a 1%
chance of winning a raffle and a 99% chance of losing the raffle, a probability model would look much like Table 1.

                                                       Outcome             Probability

                                                       Winning the raffle  1%

                                                       Losing the raffle   99%

                                                       Table 1

The sum of the probabilities listed in a probability model must equal 1, or 100%.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Given a probability event where each event is equally likely, construct a probability model.

 1. Identify every outcome.
 2. Determine the total number of possible outcomes.
 3. Compare each outcome to the total number of possible outcomes.

  EXAMPLE 1

Constructing a Probability Model
Construct a probability model for rolling a single, fair die, with the event being the number shown on the die.

     Solution
Begin by making a list of all possible outcomes for the experiment. The possible outcomes are the numbers that can be
rolled: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. There are six possible outcomes that make up the sample space.
Assign probabilities to each outcome in the sample space by determining a ratio of the outcome to the number of
possible outcomes. There is one of each of the six numbers on the cube, and there is no reason to think that any
particular face is more likely to show up than any other one, so the probability of rolling any number is

                              Outcome Roll of 1 Roll of 2 Roll of 3 Roll of 4 Roll of 5 Roll of 6

                             Probability

                          Table 2

1 The figure is for illustrative purposes only and does not model any particular storm.
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           13.7 · Probability 1301

Q&A  Do probabilities always have to be expressed as fractions?

     No. Probabilities can be expressed as fractions, decimals, or percents. Probability must always be a
     number between 0 and 1, inclusive of 0 and 1.

TRY IT #1 Construct a probability model for tossing a fair coin.

Computing Probabilities of Equally Likely Outcomes

Let be a sample space for an experiment. When investigating probability, an event is any subset of When the
outcomes of an experiment are all equally likely, we can find the probability of an event by dividing the number of
outcomes in the event by the total number of outcomes in Suppose a number cube is rolled, and we are interested in
finding the probability of the event "rolling a number less than or equal to 4." There are 4 possible outcomes in the
event and 6 possible outcomes in so the probability of the event is

  Computing the Probability of an Event with Equally Likely Outcomes

  The probability of an event in an experiment with sample space with equally likely outcomes is given by

     is a subset of so it is always true that

  EXAMPLE 2

Computing the Probability of an Event with Equally Likely Outcomes
A six-sided number cube is rolled. Find the probability of rolling an odd number.

     Solution
The event "rolling an odd number" contains three outcomes. There are 6 equally likely outcomes in the sample space.
Divide to find the probability of the event.

TRY IT #2 A number cube is rolled. Find the probability of rolling a number greater than 2.

Computing the Probability of the Union of Two Events

We are often interested in finding the probability that one of multiple events occurs. Suppose we are playing a card

game, and we will win if the next card drawn is either a heart or a king. We would be interested in finding the probability

of the next card being a heart or a king. The union of two events  is the event that occurs if

either or both events occur.

Suppose the spinner in Figure 2 is spun. We want to find the probability of spinning orange or spinning a
1302 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

                                                       Figure 2

There are a total of 6 sections, and 3 of them are orange. So the probability of spinning orange is  There are a

total of 6 sections, and 2 of them have a So the probability of spinning a is  If we added these two

probabilities, we would be counting the sector that is both orange and a twice. To find the probability of spinning an
orange or a we need to subtract the probability that the sector is both orange and has a

The probability of spinning orange or a is

Probability of the Union of Two Events

The probability of the union of two events and (written          ) equals the sum of the probability of  and the
                                                                                                         and and
probability of minus the probability of and occurring together which is called the intersection of

is written as  ).

EXAMPLE 3

Computing the Probability of the Union of Two Events
A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a heart or a 7.

     Solution
A standard deck contains an equal number of hearts, diamonds, clubs, and spades. So the probability of drawing a heart
is There are four 7s in a standard deck, and there are a total of 52 cards. So the probability of drawing a 7 is

The only card in the deck that is both a heart and a 7 is the 7 of hearts, so the probability of drawing both a heart and a 7

is Substitute                                            into the formula.

The probability of drawing a heart or a 7 is

       TRY IT #3 A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a red card or an ace.

Computing the Probability of Mutually Exclusive Events

Suppose the spinner in Figure 2 is spun again, but this time we are interested in the probability of spinning an orange or
a There are no sectors that are both orange and contain a so these two events have no outcomes in common.
Events are said to be mutually exclusive events when they have no outcomes in common. Because there is no overlap,
there is nothing to subtract, so the general formula is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              13.7 · Probability 1303

Notice that with mutually exclusive events, the intersection of and is the empty set. The probability of spinning an

orange is  and the probability of spinning a is We can find the probability of spinning an orange or a simply

by adding the two probabilities.

The probability of spinning an orange or a is                    is given by
  Probability of the Union of Mutually Exclusive Events
  The probability of the union of two mutually exclusive events

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Given a set of events, compute the probability of the union of mutually exclusive events.
   1. Determine the total number of outcomes for the first event.
   2. Find the probability of the first event.
   3. Determine the total number of outcomes for the second event.
   4. Find the probability of the second event.
   5. Add the probabilities.

  EXAMPLE 4

Computing the Probability of the Union of Mutually Exclusive Events
A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a heart or a spade.

     Solution
The events "drawing a heart" and "drawing a spade" are mutually exclusive because they cannot occur at the same
time. The probability of drawing a heart is and the probability of drawing a spade is also so the probability of
drawing a heart or a spade is

       TRY IT #4 A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing an ace or a king.

Using the Complement Rule to Compute Probabilities

We have discussed how to calculate the probability that an event will happen. Sometimes, we are interested in finding
the probability that an event will not happen. The complement of an event denoted is the set of outcomes in the
sample space that are not in For example, suppose we are interested in the probability that a horse will lose a race. If
event is the horse winning the race, then the complement of event is the horse losing the race.
To find the probability that the horse loses the race, we need to use the fact that the sum of all probabilities in a
probability model must be 1.

The probability of the horse winning added to the probability of the horse losing must be equal to 1. Therefore, if the
probability of the horse winning the race is the probability of the horse losing the race is simply
1304 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

The Complement Rule
The probability that the complement of an event will occur is given by

EXAMPLE 5

Using the Complement Rule to Calculate Probabilities
Two six-sided number cubes are rolled.

 Find the probability that the sum of the numbers rolled is less than or equal to 3.
 Find the probability that the sum of the numbers rolled is greater than 3.

     Solution

The first step is to identify the sample space, which consists of all the possible outcomes. There are two number cubes,

and each number cube has six possible outcomes. Using the Multiplication Principle, we find that there are  or

total possible outcomes. So, for example, 1-1 represents a 1 rolled on each number cube.

                                                         Table 3

 We need to count the number of ways to roll a sum of 3 or less. These would include the following outcomes: 1-1,

1-2, and 2-1. So there are only three ways to roll a sum of 3 or less. The probability is

 Rather than listing all the possibilities, we can use the Complement Rule. Because we have already found the

probability of the complement of this event, we can simply subtract that probability from 1 to find the probability that
the sum of the numbers rolled is greater than 3.

TRY IT #5  Two number cubes are rolled. Use the Complement Rule to find the probability that the sum is
           less than 10.

Computing Probability Using Counting Theory

Many interesting probability problems involve counting principles, permutations, and combinations. In these problems,
we will use permutations and combinations to find the number of elements in events and sample spaces. These

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           13.7 · Probability 1305

problems can be complicated, but they can be made easier by breaking them down into smaller counting problems.

Assume, for example, that a store has 8 cellular phones and that 3 of those are defective. We might want to find the

probability that a couple purchasing 2 phones receives 2 phones that are not defective. To solve this problem, we need

to calculate all of the ways to select 2 phones that are not defective as well as all of the ways to select 2 phones. There

are 5 phones that are not defective, so there are  ways to select 2 phones that are not defective. There are 8

phones, so there are    ways to select 2 phones. The probability of selecting 2 phones that are not defective is:

EXAMPLE 6

Computing Probability Using Counting Theory
A child randomly selects 5 toys from a bin containing 3 bunnies, 5 dogs, and 6 bears.

 Find the probability that only bears are chosen.  Find the probability that 2 bears and 3 dogs are chosen.
 Find the probability that at least 2 dogs are chosen.

     Solution

 We need to count the number of ways to choose only bears and the total number of possible ways to select 5
toys. There are 6 bears, so there are  ways to choose 5 bears. There are 14 toys, so there are             ways to

choose any 5 toys.

 We need to count the number of ways to choose 2 bears and 3 dogs and the total number of possible ways to
select 5 toys. There are 6 bears, so there are     ways to choose 2 bears. There are 5 dogs, so there are

ways to choose 3 dogs. Since we are choosing both bears and dogs at the same time, we will use the Multiplication

Principle. There are                   ways to choose 2 bears and 3 dogs. We can use this result to find the probability.

 It is often easiest to solve "at least" problems using the Complement Rule. We will begin by finding the

probability that fewer than 2 dogs are chosen. If less than 2 dogs are chosen, then either no dogs could be chosen, or

1 dog could be chosen.

When no dogs are chosen, all 5 toys come from the 9 toys that are not dogs. There are  ways to choose toys

from the 9 toys that are not dogs. Since there are 14 toys, there are  ways to choose the 5 toys from all of the

toys.

If there is 1 dog chosen, then 4 toys must come from the 9 toys that are not dogs, and 1 must come from the 5 dogs.
Since we are choosing both dogs and other toys at the same time, we will use the Multiplication Principle. There are

                       ways to choose 1 dog and 1 other toy.

Because these events would not occur together and are therefore mutually exclusive, we add the probabilities to find
the probability that fewer than 2 dogs are chosen.

We then subtract that probability from 1 to find the probability that at least 2 dogs are chosen.
1306 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

TRY IT #6  A child randomly selects 3 gumballs from a container holding 4 purple gumballs, 8 yellow
           gumballs, and 2 green gumballs.

            Find the probability that all 3 gumballs selected are purple.
            Find the probability that no yellow gumballs are selected.
            Find the probability that at least 1 yellow gumball is selected.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with probability.

Introduction to Probability (http://openstax.org/l/introprob)
Determining Probability (http://openstax.org/l/determineprob)

        13.7 SECTION EXERCISES

Verbal

1. What term is used to             2. What is a sample space?           3. What is an experiment?
    express the likelihood of an
    event occurring? Are there
    restrictions on its values? If
    so, what are they? If not,
    explain.

4. What is the difference           5. The union of two sets is
    between events and                  defined as a set of elements
    outcomes? Give an example           that are present in at least
    of both using the sample            one of the sets. How is this
    space of tossing a coin 50          similar to the definition used
    times.                              for the union of two events
                                        from a probability model?
                                        How is it different?

Numeric

For the following exercises, use the spinner shown in Figure 3 to find the probabilities indicated.

6. Landing on red                                              Figure 3  8. Not landing on blue
                                    7. Landing on a vowel
9. Landing on purple or a
    vowel                           10. Landing on blue or a vowel 11. Landing on green or blue

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          13.7 · Probability 1307

12. Landing on yellow or a        13. Not landing on yellow or a
      consonant                         consonant

For the following exercises, two coins are tossed.

14. What is the sample space?     15. Find the probability of           16. Find the probability of
                                        tossing two heads.                    tossing exactly one tail.

17. Find the probability of
      tossing at least one tail.

For the following exercises, four coins are tossed.

18. What is the sample space?     19. Find the probability of           20. Find the probability of
                                        tossing exactly two heads.            tossing exactly three
                                                                              heads.

21. Find the probability of       22. Find the probability of           23. Find the probability of
      tossing four heads or four        tossing all tails.                    tossing not all tails.
      tails.

24. Find the probability of       25. Find the probability of
      tossing exactly two heads         tossing either two heads or
      or at least two tails.            three heads.

For the following exercises, one card is drawn from a standard deck of  cards. Find the probability of drawing the
following:

26. A club                        27. A two                             28. Six or seven

29. Red six                       30. An ace or a diamond               31. A non-ace

32. A heart or a non-jack

For the following exercises, two dice are rolled, and the results are summed.

33. Construct a table showing the sample space of           34. Find the probability of rolling a sum of
      outcomes and sums.

35. Find the probability of rolling at least one four or a  36. Find the probability of rolling an odd sum less
      sum of                                                      than

37. Find the probability of rolling a sum greater than      38. Find the probability of
      or equal to                                                 rolling a sum less than

39. Find the probability of       40. Find the probability of           41. Find the probability of
      rolling a sum less than or        rolling a sum between                 rolling a sum of or
      greater than                      and inclusive.
1308 13 · Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

42. Find the probability of
      rolling any sum other than
        or

For the following exercises, a coin is tossed, and a card is pulled from a standard deck. Find the probability of the
following:

43. A head on the coin or a          44. A tail on the coin or red ace    45. A head on the coin or a
      club                                                                      face card

46. No aces

For the following exercises, use this scenario: a bag of M&Ms contains    blue, brown,  orange, yellow, red, and
green M&Ms. Reaching into the bag, a person grabs 5 M&Ms.

47. What is the probability of       48. What is the probability of       49. What is the probability of
      getting all blue M&Ms?               getting blue M&Ms?                   getting blue M&Ms?

50. What is the probability of
      getting no brown M&Ms?

Extensions

Use the following scenario for the exercises that follow: In the game of Keno, a player starts by selecting numbers
from the numbers to After the player makes his selections, winning numbers are randomly selected from
numbers to A win occurs if the player has correctly selected or of the winning numbers. (Round all
answers to the nearest hundredth of a percent.)

51. What is the percent chance       52. What is the percent chance       53. What is the percent chance
      that a player selects exactly        that a player selects exactly        that a player selects all 5
      3 winning numbers?                   4 winning numbers?                   winning numbers?

54. What is the percent chance       55. How much less is a player's
      of winning?                          chance of selecting 3
                                           winning numbers than the
                                           chance of selecting either 4
                                           or 5 winning numbers?

Real-World Applications

Use this data for the exercises that follow: In 2013, there were roughly 317 million citizens in the United States, and
about 40 million were elderly (aged 65 and over).2

56. If you meet a U.S. citizen,      57. If you meet five U.S.            58. If you meet five U.S.
      what is the percent chance           citizens, what is the                citizens, what is the
      that the person is elderly?          percent chance that exactly          percent chance that three
      (Round to the nearest                one is elderly? (Round to            are elderly? (Round to the
      tenth of a percent.)                 the nearest tenth of a               nearest tenth of a percent.)
                                           percent.)

2 United States Census Bureau. http://www.census.gov
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        13.7 · Probability 1309

59. If you meet five U.S.         60. It is predicted that by 2030,
      citizens, what is the             one in five U.S. citizens will
      percent chance that four          be elderly. How much
      are elderly? (Round to the        greater will the chances of
      nearest thousandth of a           meeting an elderly person
      percent.)                         be at that time? What
                                        policy changes do you
                                        foresee if these statistics
                                        hold true?
1310 13 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

Addition Principle if one event can occur in ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in

ways, then the first or second event can occur in  ways

annuity an investment in which the purchaser makes a sequence of periodic, equal payments

arithmetic sequence a sequence in which the difference between any two consecutive terms is a constant

arithmetic series the sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence

binomial coefficient the number of ways to choose r objects from n objects where order does not matter; equivalent

to  denoted

binomial expansion the result of expanding         by multiplying

Binomial Theorem a formula that can be used to expand any binomial

combination a selection of objects in which order does not matter

common difference the difference between any two consecutive terms in an arithmetic sequence

common ratio the ratio between any two consecutive terms in a geometric sequence

complement of an event the set of outcomes in the sample space that are not in the event

diverge a series is said to diverge if the sum is not a real number

event any subset of a sample space

experiment an activity with an observable result

explicit formula a formula that defines each term of a sequence in terms of its position in the sequence

finite sequence a function whose domain consists of a finite subset of the positive integers         for some

positive integer

Fundamental Counting Principle if one event can occur in ways and a second event can occur in ways after the

first event has occurred, then the two events can occur in           ways; also known as the Multiplication Principle

geometric sequence a sequence in which the ratio of a term to a previous term is a constant

geometric series the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence

index of summation in summation notation, the variable used in the explicit formula for the terms of a series and

written below the sigma with the lower limit of summation

infinite sequence a function whose domain is the set of positive integers

infinite series the sum of the terms in an infinite sequence

lower limit of summation the number used in the explicit formula to find the first term in a series

Multiplication Principle if one event can occur in ways and a second event can occur in ways after the first event

has occurred, then the two events can occur in     ways; also known as the Fundamental Counting Principle

mutually exclusive events events that have no outcomes in common

n factorial the product of all the positive integers from 1 to

nth partial sum the sum of the first terms of a sequence

nth term of a sequence a formula for the general term of a sequence

outcomes the possible results of an experiment

permutation a selection of objects in which order matters

probability a number from 0 to 1 indicating the likelihood of an event

probability model a mathematical description of an experiment listing all possible outcomes and their associated

probabilities

recursive formula a formula that defines each term of a sequence using previous term(s)

sample space the set of all possible outcomes of an experiment

sequence a function whose domain is a subset of the positive integers

series the sum of the terms in a sequence

summation notation a notation for series using the Greek letter sigma; it includes an explicit formula and specifies

the first and last terms in the series

term a number in a sequence

union of two events the event that occurs if either or both events occur

upper limit of summation the number used in the explicit formula to find the last term in a series

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              13 · Chapter Review 1311

Key Equations

  Formula for a factorial

  recursive formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence
  explicit formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence
  recursive formula for term of a geometric sequence
  explicit formula for term of a geometric sequence
  sum of the first terms of an arithmetic series
  sum of the first terms of a geometric series
  sum of an infinite geometric series with

  number of permutations of distinct objects taken at a time
  number of combinations of distinct objects taken at a time
  number of permutations of non-distinct objects

  Binomial Theorem
               term of a binomial expansion

   probability of an event with equally likely outcomes
             probability of the union of two events

  probability of the union of mutually exclusive events
         probability of the complement of an event
1312 13 · Chapter Review

Key Concepts

13.1 Sequences and Their Notations

· A sequence is a list of numbers, called terms, written in a specific order.
· Explicit formulas define each term of a sequence using the position of the term. See Example 1, Example 2, and

    Example 3.
· An explicit formula for the term of a sequence can be written by analyzing the pattern of several terms. See

    Example 4.
· Recursive formulas define each term of a sequence using previous terms.
· Recursive formulas must state the initial term, or terms, of a sequence.
· A set of terms can be written by using a recursive formula. See Example 5 and Example 6.
· A factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined recursively.
· The factorial of is the product of all integers from 1 to See Example 7.

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences

· An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between any two consecutive terms is a constant.

· The constant between two consecutive terms is called the common difference.

· The common difference is the number added to any one term of an arithmetic sequence that generates the

subsequent term. See Example 1.

· The terms of an arithmetic sequence can be found by beginning with the initial term and adding the common

difference repeatedly. See Example 2 and Example 3.

· A recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference is given by                          See

Example 4.

· As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be given.

· An explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference is given by                       See

Example 5.

· An explicit formula can be used to find the number of terms in a sequence. See Example 6.

· In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula slightly to       See Example 7.

13.3 Geometric Sequences

· A geometric sequence is a sequence in which the ratio between any two consecutive terms is a constant.

· The constant ratio between two consecutive terms is called the common ratio.

· The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the sequence by the previous term. See Example 1.

· The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by beginning with the first term and multiplying by the common

ratio repeatedly. See Example 2 and Example 4.

· A recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio is given by         for         .

· As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be given. See Example 3.

· An explicit formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio is given by                 See Example 5.

· In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula slightly to       See Example 6.

13.4 Series and Their Notations

· The sum of the terms in a sequence is called a series.
· A common notation for series is called summation notation, which uses the Greek letter sigma to represent the

    sum. See Example 1.
· The sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series.
· The sum of the first terms of an arithmetic series can be found using a formula. See Example 2 and Example 3.
· The sum of the terms in a geometric sequence is called a geometric series.
· The sum of the first terms of a geometric series can be found using a formula. See Example 4 and Example 5.
· The sum of an infinite series exists if the series is geometric with
· If the sum of an infinite series exists, it can be found using a formula. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8.
· An annuity is an account into which the investor makes a series of regularly scheduled payments. The value of an

    annuity can be found using geometric series. See Example 9.

13.5 Counting Principles

· If one event can occur in ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in ways, then the first

or second event can occur in     ways. See Example 1.

· If one event can occur in ways and a second event can occur in ways after the first event has occurred, then the

two events can occur in          ways. See Example 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            13 · Exercises 1313

· A permutation is an ordering of objects.

· If we have a set of objects and we want to choose objects from the set in order, we write

· Permutation problems can be solved using the Multiplication Principle or the formula for              See Example 3 and

   Example 4.

· A selection of objects where the order does not matter is a combination.

· Given distinct objects, the number of ways to select objects from the set is            and can be found using a

   formula. See Example 5.

· A set containing distinct objects has subsets. See Example 6.

· For counting problems involving non-distinct objects, we need to divide to avoid counting duplicate permutations.

   See Example 7.

13.6 Binomial Theorem

·  is called a binomial coefficient and is equal to  See Example 1.

· The Binomial Theorem allows us to expand binomials without multiplying. See Example 2.
· We can find a given term of a binomial expansion without fully expanding the binomial. See Example 3.

13.7 Probability

· Probability is always a number between 0 and 1, where 0 means an event is impossible and 1 means an event is
    certain.

· The probabilities in a probability model must sum to 1. See Example 1.
· When the outcomes of an experiment are all equally likely, we can find the probability of an event by dividing the

    number of outcomes in the event by the total number of outcomes in the sample space for the experiment. See
    Example 2.
· To find the probability of the union of two events, we add the probabilities of the two events and subtract the
    probability that both events occur simultaneously. See Example 3.
· To find the probability of the union of two mutually exclusive events, we add the probabilities of each of the events.
    See Example 4.
· The probability of the complement of an event is the difference between 1 and the probability that the event occurs.
    See Example 5.
· In some probability problems, we need to use permutations and combinations to find the number of elements in
    events and sample spaces. See Example 6.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Sequences and Their Notation      2. Evaluate                             3. Write the first four terms of
                                                                              the sequence defined by the
1. Write the first four terms of                                              explicit formula
    the sequence defined by the
    recursive formula

4. Write the first four terms of
    the sequence defined by the
    explicit formula

Arithmetic Sequences              6. Is the sequence                      7. An arithmetic sequence has
5. Is the sequence                                        arithmetic? If
                                                                          the first term           and
    arithmetic? If so, find the       so, find the common
    common difference.                difference.                         common difference

                                                                          What are the first five

                                                                          terms?
1314 13 · Exercises

8. An arithmetic sequence has          9. Write a recursive formula        10. Write a recursive formula
                                           for the arithmetic sequence           for the arithmetic
terms                and                                                         sequence

       What is the first                                                         and then find the 31st term.

term?

11. Write an explicit formula          12. How many terms are in the
      for the arithmetic                     finite arithmetic sequence
      sequence

Geometric Sequences                    14. Is the sequence 4, 16, 28,      15. A geometric sequence has
13. Find the common ratio for                40 ... geometric? If so find
                                             the common ratio. If not,     terms  and
      the geometric sequence                 explain why.

                                                                                  . What are

                                                                           the first five terms?

16. A geometric sequence has           17. What are the first five         18. Write a recursive formula
                                             terms of the geometric              for the geometric
the first term                   and         sequence                            sequence

common ratio                     What

is the 8th term?

19. Write an explicit formula for the  20. How many terms are in the
      geometric sequence                     finite geometric sequence

Series and Their Notation

21. Use summation notation to          22. Use summation notation to       23. Use the formula for the
                                             write the sum that results          sum of the first terms of
write the sum of terms                       from adding the number              an arithmetic series to find
                                                 twenty times.                   the sum of the first eleven
       from               to                                                     terms of the arithmetic
                                                                                 series 2.5, 4, 5.5, ... .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              13 · Exercises 1315

24. A ladder has tapered             25. Use the formula for the          26. The fees for the first three
      rungs, the lengths of which          sum of the first n terms of          years of a hunting club
      increase by a common                 a geometric series to find           membership are given in
      difference. The first rung is             for the series                  Table 1. If fees continue to
      5 inches long, and the last                                               rise at the same rate, how
      rung is 20 inches long.                                                   much will the total cost be
      What is the sum of the                                                    for the first ten years of
      lengths of the rungs?                                                     membership?

                                                                          Year     Membership
                                                                                         Fees

                                                                          1        $1500

                                                                          2        $1950

                                                                          3        $2535

                                                                          Table 1

27. Find the sum of the infinite     28. A ball has a bounce-back         29. Alejandro deposits $80 of
      geometric series                     ratio of the height of the           his monthly earnings into
                                                                                an annuity that earns
                                           previous bounce. Write a             6.25% annual interest,
                                           series representing the              compounded monthly.
                                           total distance traveled by           How much money will he
                                           the ball, assuming it was            have saved after 5 years?
                                           initially dropped from a
                                           height of 5 feet. What is the
                                           total distance? (Hint: the
                                           total distance the ball
                                           travels on each bounce is
                                           the sum of the heights of
                                           the rise and the fall.)

30. The twins Hoa and Binh
      both opened retirement
      accounts on their 21st
      birthday. Hoa deposits
      $4,800.00 each year,
      earning 5.5% annual
      interest, compounded
      monthly. Binh deposits
      $3,600.00 each year,
      earning 8.5% annual
      interest, compounded
      monthly. Which twin will
      earn the most interest by
      the time they are years
      old? How much more?
1316 13 · Exercises

Counting Principles                      32. In a group of musicians,       33. How many ways are there
31. How many ways are there                        play piano, play               to construct a 4-digit code
                                                                                  if numbers can be
      to choose a number from                  trumpet, and play both             repeated?
      the set                                  piano and trumpet. How
                                               many musicians play either
      that is divisible by either              piano or trumpet?
      or

34. A palette of water color             35. Calculate                      36. In a group of first-year,
      paints has 3 shades of                                                          second-year, third-
      green, 3 shades of blue, 2
      shades of red, 2 shades of                                                  year, and fourth-year
      yellow, and 1 shade of                                                      students, how many ways
      black. How many ways are                                                    can a president, vice
      there to choose one shade                                                   president, and treasurer be
      of each color?                                                              elected?

37. Calculate                            38. A coffee shop has 7            39. How many subsets does
                                               Guatemalan roasts, 4               the set
                                               Cuban roasts, and 10 Costa                                       have?
                                               Rican roasts. How many
                                               ways can the shop choose
                                               2 Guatemalan, 2 Cuban,
                                               and 3 Costa Rican roasts
                                               for a coffee tasting event?

40. A day spa charges a basic            41. How many distinct ways         42. How many distinct
      day rate that includes use               can the word DEADWOOD              rearrangements of the
      of a sauna, pool, and                    be arranged?                       letters of the word
      showers. For an extra                                                       DEADWOOD are there if
      charge, guests can choose                                                   the arrangement must
      from the following                                                          begin and end with the
      additional services:                                                        letter D?
      massage, body scrub,
      manicure, pedicure, facial,
      and straight-razor shave.
      How many ways are there
      to order additional services
      at the day spa?

Binomial Theorem                         44. Use the Binomial Theorem       45. Use the Binomial Theorem
43. Evaluate the binomial                      to expand                          to write the first three
                                                                                  terms of
      coefficient

46. Find the fourth term of
                          without fully

      expanding the binomial.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         13 · Exercises 1317

Probability                                              48. What is the probability that a roll includes a
For the following exercises, assume two die are rolled.
47. Construct a table showing the sample space.

49. What is the probability of       50. What is the probability that a roll includes a 2 or
      rolling a pair?                      results in a pair?

51. What is the probability that     52. What is the probability of rolling a 5 or a 6?
      a roll doesn't include a 2 or
      result in a pair?

53. What is the probability that
      a roll includes neither a 5
      nor a 6?

For the following exercises, use the following data: An elementary school survey found that 350 of the 500 students
preferred soda to milk. Suppose 8 children from the school are attending a birthday party. (Show calculations and round
to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

54. What is the percent chance       55. What is the percent chance    56. What is the percent chance
      that all the children                that at least one of the          that exactly 3 of the
      attending the party prefer           children attending the            children attending the
      soda?                                party prefers milk?               party prefer soda?

57. What is the percent chance
      that exactly 3 of the
      children attending the
      party prefer milk?

Practice Test                        2. Write the first four terms of  3. Is the sequence
                                         the sequence defined by the
1. Write the first four terms of         explicit formula                  arithmetic? If so find the
    the sequence defined by the                                            common difference.
    recursive formula

4. An arithmetic sequence has        5. Write a recursive formula      6. Write an explicit formula for
                                         for the arithmetic sequence       the arithmetic sequence
the first term         and
                                         and then find the 22nd term.      and then find the 32nd term.
common difference

What is the 6th term?

7. Is the sequence                   8. What is the 11th term of the   9. Write a recursive formula
                                         geometric sequence                for the geometric sequence
    geometric? If so find the
    common ratio. If not,
    explain why.
1318 13 · Exercises

10. Write an explicit formula       11. Use summation notation to         12. A community baseball
      for the geometric                                                         stadium has 10 seats in the
      sequence                      write the sum of terms                      first row, 13 seats in the
                                                                                second row, 16 seats in the
                                    from                    to                  third row, and so on. There
                                                                                are 56 rows in all. What is
                                                                                the seating capacity of the
                                                                                stadium?

13. Use the formula for the         14. Find the sum of the infinite      15. Ramla deposits $3,600 into
      sum of the first terms of           geometric series                      a retirement fund each
      a geometric series to find                                                year. The fund earns 7.5%
                                                                                annual interest,
                                                                                compounded monthly. If
                                                                                she opened her account
                                                                                when she was 20 years old,
                                                                                how much will she have by
                                                                                the time she's 55? How
                                                                                much of that amount was
                                                                                interest earned?

16. In a competition of 50          17. A buyer of a new sedan can        18. To allocate annual
      professional ballroom               custom order the car by               bonuses, a manager must
      dancers, 22 compete in the          choosing from 5 different             choose his top four
      fox-trot competition, 18            exterior colors, 3 different          employees and rank them
      compete in the tango                interior colors, 2 sound              first to fourth. In how many
      competition, and 6                  systems, 3 motor designs,             ways can he create the
      compete in both the fox-            and either manual or                  "Top-Four" list out of the
      trot and tango                      automatic transmission.               32 employees?
      competitions. How many              How many choices does
      dancers compete in the              the buyer have?
      fox-trot or tango
      competitions?

19. A music group needs to          20. A self-serve frozen yogurt        21. How many distinct ways
      choose 3 songs to play at           shop has 8 candy toppings             can the word
      the annual Battle of the            and 4 fruit toppings to               EVANESCENCE be arranged
      Bands. How many ways                choose from. How many                 if the anagram must end
      can they choose their set if        ways are there to top a               with the letter E?
      have 15 songs to pick               frozen yogurt?
      from?

22. Use the Binomial Theorem        23. Find the seventh term of
      to expand                                            without fully

                                          expanding the binomial.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             13 · Exercises 1319

For the following exercises, use the spinner in Figure 1.

24. Construct a probability                                     Figure 1  26. What is the probability of
      model showing each                                                        landing on blue?
      possible outcome and its       25. What is the probability of
      associated probability. (Use         landing on an odd
      the first letter for colors.)        number?

27. What is the probability of       28. What is the probability of       29. A bowl of candy holds 16
      landing on blue or an odd            landing on anything other            peppermint, 14
      number?                              than blue or an odd                  butterscotch, and 10
                                           number?                              strawberry flavored
                                                                                candies. Suppose a person
                                                                                grabs a handful of 7
                                                                                candies. What is the
                                                                                percent chance that exactly
                                                                                3 are butterscotch? (Show
                                                                                calculations and round to
                                                                                the nearest tenth of a
                                                                                percent.)
1320 13 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1321

 A PROOFS, IDENTITIES, AND TOOLKIT FUNCTIONS

Important Proofs and Derivations

Product Rule

Proof:

Let          and

Write in exponent form.

        and

Multiply.

Change of Base Rule

where and are positive, and
Proof:
Let
Write in exponent form.

Take the     of both sides.

When

Heron's Formula

where
Proof:
Let and be the sides of a triangle, and be the height.
1322 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

So          .

We can further name the parts of the base in each triangle established by the height such that

Using the Pythagorean Theorem,                      and

Since           then             Expanding, we find that

We can then add to each side of the equation to get

Substitute this result into the equation                 yields

Then replacing        with gives

Solve for to get

Since             we get an expression in terms of and

Therefore,

And since         then

Access for free at openstax.org
                               A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1323

Properties of the Dot Product
Proof:

Proof:

Proof:

Standard Form of the Ellipse centered at the Origin
Derivation
An ellipse consists of all the points for which the sum of distances from two foci is constant:
1324 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Consider a vertex.

Then,
Consider a covertex.

Then

Access for free at openstax.org
               A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1325

Let

Because  then

Standard Form of the Hyperbola

Derivation
A hyperbola is the set of all points in a plane such that the absolute value of the difference of the distances between two
fixed points is constant.
1326 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Diagram 1: The difference of the distances from Point P to the foci is constant:
Diagram 2: When the point is a vertex, the difference is

Define as a positive number such that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1327

Trigonometric Identities

                                   Pythagorean Identities
                                     Even-Odd Identities
                                     Cofunction Identities

                                   Fundamental Identities
                              Sum and Difference Identities

                                   Double-Angle Formulas
                            Table A1
1328 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

                                     Half-Angle Formulas
                                     Reduction Formulas
                                 Product-to-Sum Formulas
                                 Sum-to-Product Formulas

                                           Law of Sines
                                         Law of Cosines
                            Table A1

Access for free at openstax.org
                              A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1329

ToolKit Functions

                   Figure A1

                   Figure A2
1330 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

                                                    Figure A3

Trigonometric Functions

Unit Circle

                                                    Figure A4

Angle

Cosine                           1                             0

Table A2

Access for free at openstax.org
                           A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1331

Angle

Sine      0                   1

Tangent   0             1     Undefined

Secant    1                2  Undefined

Cosecant Undefined   2        1

Cotangent Undefined     1     0

Table A2
1332 A · Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1333

Answer Key

Chapter 1

Try It

1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials

1.                              2.  4 (or 4.0), terminating;     3.  rational and repeating;
                                                 repeating;         rational and terminating;
                                                                    irrational;
                                     -0.85, terminating             rational and terminating;
                                                                    irrational

4.  positive, irrational; right 5.      a.          6. N W I Q Q'  10 26  2  4.5  25
   negative, rational; left                b. 0                       
   positive, rational; right
   negative, irrational; left           c.                    XX
   positive, rational; right                             X XX
                                                    X XXX

                                        d.                       X

                                            e.                X

                                    4.763763763...

7.  11, commutative             8.               9. Constants Variables  5;  11;  9;  26

property of multiplication,

associative property of                 a.

multiplication, inverse

property of multiplication,

identity property of                b. 2(L + W)     2            L, W

multiplication;                     c.              4

 33, distributive property;
 26, distributive property;
 commutative
property of addition,

associative property of

addition, inverse property of

addition, identity property of

addition;

 0, distributive property,

inverse property of addition,

identity property of addition

10.  4;  11;             ;      11. 1,152 cm2                    12. 
    1728;  3                                                        
                                                                             
13.
1334

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation

1.                                    2.                                  3.     
                                                                               

4.                                    5.                                  6.       

7.                                    8.                                  9.   
                                                                             

                                        

10.                                   11.                                 12. 
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             

13. Number of cells:

      length of a cell:

      m; total length:

      m or               m.

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents

1.                                    2.    Notice the                    3.

                                           absolute value signs around

                                           x and y? That's because

                                           their value must be positive!

4.          We do not need the        5.                                  6.

     absolute value signs for
     because that term will
     always be nonnegative.

7.                                    8.                                  9.

10.                                   11.                                 12.

13.

1.4 Polynomials

1. The degree is 6, the leading 2.                                        3.

     term is         and the leading

     coefficient is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1335

4.                               5.                                  6.

7.                               8.

1.5 Factoring Polynomials

1.                               2.                                  3. 
                                                                       
4.                               5.
                                                                     6.

7.                               8.

1.6 Rational Expressions

1.                               2.                                  3.

4.                               5.

1.1 Section Exercises            3. The Associative Properties       5.

1. irrational number. The             state that the sum or
    square root of two does not
    terminate, and it does not        product of multiple
    repeat a pattern. It cannot
    be written as a quotient of       numbers can be grouped
    two integers, so it is
    irrational.                       differently without affecting

                                      the result. This is because

                                      the same operation is

                                      performed (either addition

                                      or subtraction), so the terms

                                      can be re-ordered.

7.                               9.                                  11. 9

13. -2                           15. 4                               17. 0

19. 9                            21. 25                              23.

25. 17                           27. 4                               29.

31.                              33.                                 35.

37.                              39.                                 41.

43.                              45.                                 47.
1336                              51.                                53.
                                  57.
49.                               63. true                           59. inverse property of
55. irrational number                                                      addition
61. 68.4
67. rational                                                         65. irrational

1.2 Section Exercises

1. No, the two expressions are    3. It is a method of writing very  5. 81
                                      small and very large
     not the same. An exponent        numbers.

     tells how many times you

     multiply the base. So is

     the same as           which

     is 8. is the same as

     which is 9.

7. 243                            9.                                 11.

13. 1                             15.                                17.
                                                                     23. 16,000,000,000
19.                               21.

25.                               27.                                29.

31.                               33.                                35.

37.                               39.                                41.

43.                               45. 0.00135 m                      47.

49. 0.00000000003397 in.          51. 12,230,590,464                 53.

55.                               57.

59. 0.000000000000000000000000000000000662606957

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1337

1.3 Section Exercises               3. The principal square root is  5. 16
                                        the nonnegative root of the
1. When there is no index, it is        number.
    assumed to be 2 or the
    square root. The expression
    would only be equal to the
    radicand if the index were 1.

7. 10                               9. 14                            11.

13.                                 15. 25                           17.

19.                                 21.                              23.

25.                                 27.                              29.

31.                                 33.                              35.

37.                                 39.                              41.

43.                                 45.                              47.

49.                                 51.                              53.

55.                                 57.                              59.

61.                                 63.                              65. 500 feet

67.                                 69.                              71.

73.

1.4 Section Exercises               3. Use the distributive          5. 2
                                        property, multiply, combine
1. The statement is true. In            like terms, and simplify.
    standard form, the
    polynomial with the highest
    value exponent is placed
    first and is the leading term.
    The degree of a polynomial
    is the value of the highest
    exponent, which in standard
    form is also the exponent of
    the leading term.
1338                                   9. 2                              11.
                                       15.
7. 8                                   21.                               17.
13.                                    27.
19.                                    33.                               23.
25.                                    39.
31.                                    45.                               29.
37.                                    51.
43.                                    57.                               35.
49.
55.                                                                      41.

                                                                         47.

                                                                         53.       m2

1.5 Section Exercises

1. The terms of a polynomial do            3. Divide the term into the   5.

     not have to have a common               sum of two terms, factor

     factor for the entire polynomial        each portion of the

     to be factorable. For example,          expression separately, and

      and  don't have a                      then factor out the GCF of

     common factor, but the whole            the entire expression.

     polynomial is still factorable:

7.                                     9.                                11.

13.                                    15.                               17.

19.                                    21.                               23.

25.                                    27.                               29.

31.                                    33.                               35.

37.                                    39.                               41.

43.                                          45.                              47.

49.                                    51.                               53.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1339

55.                                57.                                    59.

1.6 Section Exercises

1. You can factor the              3. True. Multiplication and       5.

     numerator and                      division do not require

     denominator to see if any of       finding the LCD because the

     the terms can cancel one           denominators can be

     another out.                       combined through those

                                        operations, whereas

                                        addition and subtraction

                                        require like terms.

7.                                 9.                                11.

13.                                15.                               17.

19.                                21.                               23.

25.                                27.                               29.

31.                                33.                               35.

37.                                39.                               41.

43.                                45.                               47.

49.                                51.                               53.

55.                                57.

Review Exercises                   3. 53                             5.
                                   9. whole                          11. irrational
1.                                 15.                               17.
7.                                 21.                               23. 14
13.

19.
1340

25.                              27.   29.
                                       35.
31.                              33.   41.
                                       47.
37.                              39.   53.

43.                              45.       59.
                                       65.
49.                              51.
                                       5. 3,141,500
55.                              57.   11.
                                       17.
61.                              63.   23.
                                       29.
67.                              69.

Practice Test

1. rational                      3.

7.                               9. 9

13. 21                           15.

19.                              21.

25.                              27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    1341

Chapter 2

Try It
2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs

1.                             2. x-intercept is    y-intercept 3.

                               is

4.

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable

1.                    2.                                 3.

4.                    5.           Excluded values       6.

                          are      and

7.                    8.                                 9.

10. Horizontal line:  11. Parallel lines: equations are      12.

                          written in slope-intercept form.
1342

2.3 Models and Applications

1. 11 and 25                     2.                      3. 45 mi/h
                                                             3.
4.    cm,     cm                 5. 250 ft2

2.4 Complex Numbers

1.                               2.

4.                               5.                      6.

7.

2.5 Quadratic Equations

1.                                   2.                         3.
                                                         6.
4.                               5.                      9. units

7.                               8.

2.6 Other Types of Equations

1.                               2.                      3.

4.                               5. extraneous solution  6.  extraneous solution

7.                               8.                      9.

10.   is not a solution.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1343

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities

1.                                  2.                                3.

4.                                  5.                                6.   

7.                                  8.                                9.

10.    or          in interval

     notation, this would be

                 

2.1 Section Exercises

1. Answers may vary. Yes. It is 3. The y-intercept is the point 5. The x-intercept is          and

     possible for a point to be on       where the graph crosses the       the y-intercept is

     the x-axis or on the y-axis         y-axis.

     and therefore is considered

     to NOT be in one of the

     quadrants.

7. The x-intercept is         and 9. The x-intercept is           and 11.
    the y-intercept is                        the y-intercept is

13.                                 15.                               17.

19.                                 21.                               23.

25.                                 27.                               29.
1344

31.                              33.           35.
                                                              1
      not collinear
                                                        02
37.                              39.                    33
                                                        64

                                            41.

      xy

      -3 0

      0 1.5

      33

43.                              45.        47.

49.                              51.        53.

55.                  shorter 57.            59. Midpoint of each diagonal

                                                 is the same point  .

                                                 Note this is a characteristic

                                                 of rectangles, but not other

                                                 quadrilaterals.

61. 37mi                         63. 54 ft

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1345

2.2 Section Exercises           3. The exponent of the             5. If we insert either value into
                                    variable is 1. It is called a      the equation, they make an
1. It means they have the same      first-degree equation.             expression in the equation
    slope.                                                             undefined (zero in the
                                                                       denominator).
7.                              9.
                                                                   11.
13.                             15.
                                                                   17.
19.          when we solve this 21.                                23.

     we get     which is                                           29.

     excluded, therefore NO                                        35.
                                                                   41.
     solution

25.                             27.

31.                             33.

37.                             39.

      Parallel                       Perpendicular
43.
                                45.                                47.
                                                                         Answers may vary.

49.                             51.                                53.
                                                                         Yes they are perpendicular.
     Answers may vary.
                                                                   59. 220 mi
55. 30 ft                       57. $57.50
1346

2.3 Section Exercises                                            5.

1. Answers may vary. Possible 3.                                 11. 300 min
    answers: We should define                                    17.
    in words what our variable is                                23. $5,000 at 8% and $15,000 at
    representing. We should
    declare the variable. A                                            12%
    heading.                                                     29.

7. Ann: Beth:                    9.

13.                              15. 6 devices

19. 4 h                          21. She traveled for 2 h at 20
                                       mi/h, or 40 miles.

25.                              27. Plan A

31.      or 0.8                  33.                             35.

37.                              39.                             41. length = 360 ft; width = 160
                                                                       ft
43. 405 mi                       45.
                                                                 47. 28.7

49.                              51.                             53.

2.4 Section Exercises

1. Add the real parts together 3. Possible answer: times         5.

     and the imaginary parts          equals -1, which is not

     together.                        imaginary.

7.                               9.                              11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1347

13.                                15.                                17.

19.                           21.                                23.

25.                           27. 25                             29.

31.                           33.                                35.

37.                           39.                                41.

43. 128i                      45.                                47.

49. 0                         51.                                53.

55.

2.5 Section Exercises         3. We want to take advantage       5. One, when no linear term is
                                                                     present (no x term), such as
1. It is a second-degree           of the zero property of                        Two, when the
    equation (the highest                                            equation is already in the
    variable exponent is 2).       multiplication in the fact        form

                                   that if  then it must

                                   follow that each factor

                                   separately offers a solution

                                   to the product being zero:

7.                            9.                                 11.

13.                           15.                                17.

19.                           21.                                23.

25.                           27.                                29.

31.                           33. Not real                       35. One rational
1348                                 39.                               41.

37. Two real; rational               45.       and                     47.         and
43.

49.                                       51.          7 ft. and 53. maximum at

                                               17 ft.

55. The quadratic equation would be       57. 3 feet
      The two values of are 20 and 60.

2.6 Section Exercises                3. They are probably trying to    5. A rational exponent is a
                                         enter negative 9, but taking      fraction: the denominator of
1. This is not a solution to the         the square root of is not         the fraction is the root or
    radical equation, it is a value      a real number. The negative       index number and the
    obtained from squaring               sign is in front of this, so      numerator is the power to
    both sides and thus                  your friend should be taking      which it is raised.
    changing the signs of an             the square root of 9, cubing
    equation which has caused            it, and then putting the
    it not to be a solution in the       negative sign in front,
    original equation.                   resulting in

7.                                   9.                                11.

13.                                  15.                               17.

19.                                  21.                               23.

25.                                  27.                               29.

31.                                  33.                               35.

37.                                  39.                               41.
                                                                       47. 10 in.
43.                                  45.

49. 90 kg

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1349

2.7 Section Exercises                5. We start by finding the

1. When we divide both sides 3.           x-intercept, or where the
    by a negative it changes the
    sign of both sides so the             function = 0. Once we have
    sense of the inequality sign
    changes.                              that point, which is         we

                                          graph to the right the

                                          straight line graph

                                          and then when we draw it to

                                          the left we plot positive y

                                          values, taking the absolute

                                          value of them.

7.           9.                      11. 

13.          15. All real numbers    17.                        

19.          21. No solution         23.

25.          27.

29.  

       

31.                                  33.                  

           
1350

35.                              37. It is never less than zero.     39. Where the blue line is

                                      No solution.                        above the orange line;

                                                                          point of intersection is

                                                                          

41. Where the blue line is       43.                                 45. 

      above the orange line;

      always. All real numbers.

      

47.                              49.                                 51.

53.                              55. Where the blue is below         57. Where the blue is below
                                       the orange; always. All real        the orange;

                                     numbers.  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1351

59.               61.             63.

Review Exercises  3.              5.
                  9. midpoint is
1. x-intercept:                   11.
    y-intercept:                         xy
                                         0 -2
7.                                       32
                                         66

13.               15.             17. No solution
                                  23. females 17, males 56
19.               21.
                                  29. horizontal component
25. 84 mi         27.                   vertical component

31.               33.             35.
                                  41.
37.               39.             47.
                                  53.
43.               45.             59.

49.               51.

55.               57.
1352                             63.                              65. No solution

61.                              69. Where the blue is below
                                       the orange line; point of
67.                                    intersection is

                                            

Practice Test

1.                               3.                               5. 

     xy
     02
     25
     48

7.                               9.                               11.

13.                              15.                              17.

19.                              21.                              23.

25.                              27.                              29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1353

Chapter 3

Try It

3.1 Functions and Function Notation

1.  yes                           2.                                  3. yes

     yes (Note: If two players                                        6.
    had been tied for, say, 4th
                                                                      9.  yes, because each bank
    place, then the name would
                                                                          account has a single balance
    not have been a function of                                           at any given time;

    rank.)                                                               no, because several

4.                                5.                                      bank account numbers may
                                                                          have the same balance;
7.                                8.       or
                                                                         no, because the same
10.  Yes, letter grade is a       11. yes
                                                                          output may correspond to
      function of percent grade;                                          more than one input.
                                                                      12. No, because it does not
    No, it is not one-to-one.
                                                                            pass the horizontal line
      There are 100 different                                               test.
      percent numbers we could
      get but only about five
      possible letter grades, so
      there cannot be only one
      percent number that
      corresponds to each letter
      grade.

3.2 Domain and Range

1.                                2.                                  3.   

4.                                5.  values that are less than       6. domain =[1950,2002] range
                                                                          = [47,000,000,89,000,000]
                                      or equal to -2, or values that
                                      are greater than or equal to
                                      -1 and less than 3

                                    

                                    
1354

7. domain:  range:                 8.

      

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs

1.                                     2.   3.

    per year.

4. The local maximum appears to

    occur at       and the local

    minimum occurs at

    The function is increasing on

                    and

    decreasing on

3.4 Composition of Functions                2. A gravitational force is still a

1.                                          force, so  makes
    No, the functions are not the same.
                                            sense as the acceleration of

                                            a planet at a distance r from

                                            the Sun (due to gravity), but

                                                       does not make

                                            sense.

3.                     and         4.       5.  8  20

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1355

6.                         7. Possible answer:

3.5 Transformation of Functions

1.                              2. The graphs of      and  are 3.

                                shown below. The

                                transformation is a horizontal

                                shift. The function is shifted to

                                the left by 2 units.

4.                         5.                              6. 

                                                                     -2  0           2     4

                           

                                                                   

                                                                     -2 0 2             4

                                                                     15 10 5 unknown

7.                         8. even                         9.
                                                                          24 68

                                                                          9 12 15 0

    Notice:     looks the

    same as  .
1356

10.                                 11.             so using the

                                         square root function we

                                         get

3.6 Absolute Value Functions

1. using the variable for           2.                                 3.      or

     passing,

3.7 Inverse Functions               2. Yes                             3. Yes

1.

4. The domain of function           5.              In 60              6.  3  5.6

     is        and the range             minutes, 50 miles are         9.

     of function is                      traveled.

                                                    To travel

                                         60 miles, it will take 70

                                         minutes.

7.                                  8.

                                                              

                                                               

3.1 Section Exercises               3. When a vertical line            5. When a horizontal line
                                        intersects the graph of a          intersects the graph of a
1. A relation is a set of ordered       relation more than once,           function more than once,
    pairs. A function is a special      that indicates that for that       that indicates that for that
    kind of relation in which no        input there is more than one       output there is more than
    two ordered pairs have the          output. At any particular          one input. A function is one-
    same first coordinate.              input value, there can be          to-one if each output
                                        only one output if the             corresponds to only one
                                        relation is to be a function.      input.

7. function                         9. function                        11. function

13. function                        15. function                       17. function

19. function                        21. function                       23. function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1357

25. not a function                27.                       29.

31.                                      33.                           35. a.              b.

37. a.        b.    or 39.                                  41. not a function

                                                

43. function                      45. function              47. function

49. function                      51. function              53. 

                                                                                or

55. not a function so it is also  57. one-to- one function  59. function, but not one-to-
      not a one-to-one function                                   one

61. function                      63. function              65. not a function

67.                               69.

71.           

73.                                                         75. 20
                                                                81.
77.                               79.
1358

83.                                 85.                             87.

89.                                 91.  The height of a rocket
    The number of cubic
                                          above ground after 1
      yards of dirt required for a        second is 200 ft.
      garden of 100 square feet
      is 1.                             The height of a rocket

                                          above ground after 2
                                          seconds is 350 ft.

3.2 Section Exercises               3. There is no restriction on   5. Graph each formula of the
                                                                        piecewise function over its
1. The domain of a function         for           because you           corresponding domain. Use
    depends upon what values                                            the same scale for the
    of the independent variable     can take the cube root of           -axis and -axis for each
    make the function                                                   graph. Indicate inclusive
    undefined or imaginary.         any real number. So the             endpoints with a solid circle
                                                                        and exclusive endpoints
                                    domain is all real numbers,         with an open circle. Use an

                                        When dealing with              arrow to indicate  or 

                                    the set of real numbers, you        Combine the graphs to find
                                    cannot take the square root         the graph of the piecewise
                                    of negative numbers. So             function.
                                    -values are restricted for

                                                    to nonnegative

                                    numbers and the domain is

                                       

7.                                  9.                              11.  

13.                                 15.                             17.                                

19.                               21.                               23. 

25.                                  27. domain:  range             29. domain:  range:

31. domain:  range:                 33. domain:   range:            35. domain:
                                            
                                                                                 range:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        1359

37. domain:   range: 39. domain:         41. domain:  

        

43. domain:    45. domain:  

47.                                 49.

51.                                 53. domain:   
1360

55.                                           57.                          59. Many answers. One

                                                                           function is

      window:                    range:

      window:  range:

61.  The fixed cost is $500.
    The cost of making 25

      items is $750.

    The domain is [0, 100]

      and the range is [500,
      1500].

3.3 Section Exercises                    3. The absolute maximum and 5.
                                             minimum relate to the
1. Yes, the average rate of                  entire graph, whereas the
    change of all linear                     local extrema relate only to
    functions is constant.                   a specific region around an
                                             open interval.

7. 3                                     9.        11.

13.                                      15.       17.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          1361

19. increasing on                  21. increasing on            23. local maximum:
                                                                      local minimum:
                                           
                                                                29. -4
decreasing on                            decreasing on

25. absolute maximum at                             
      approximately
      absolute minimum at          27.  -3000  -1250
      approximately

31. 27                             33. -0.167                   35. Local minimum at

37. Local minimum at                                                decreasing on 
                    decreasing on
                    increasing on                                   increasing on 

                                   39. Local maximum at         41. A

43.                                            local minima at

                                               and

                                               decreasing on

                                               and

                                   on          increasing
                                                      and
                                           

                                   45. 2.7 gallons per minute   47. approximately -0.6
                                                                      milligrams per day

3.4 Section Exercises              3. Yes. Sample answer: Let   Then

1. Find the numbers that make          and
    the function in the                So
    denominator equal to
    zero, and check for any
    other domain restrictions on
       and such as an even-
    indexed root or zeros in the
    denominator.
1362

5.                domain:           7.                               9.
                           domain:      domain:
                                                                        domain: 
               domain:                  domain:
                                                                     domain: 
    domain:                               
                                                            domain:  domain: 
                                        domain:                         
                                                       

                                                                                  domain:

                                                       

11.  3                              13.
                                                17.
   
   

15.

19.                              21.                     23.          
                                                                          
25.                                                         
                                 27. sample:
                                                         29. sample:

31. sample:                      33. sample:             35. sample:

37. sample:                      39. sample:             41. sample:

43. 2                            45. 5                   47. 4
49. 0                            51. 2                   53. 1
55. 4                            57. 4                   59. 9
61. 4                            63. 2                   65. 3
67. 11                           69. 0                   71. 7

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            1363

73.                                       75.                               77.
79.
85. False                             81. 2                              83.  

                                      87.                  ;             89.

91. c                                 93.                     and 95.
                                            square inches                       square units

97. 
    3.38 hours

3.5 Section Exercises                 3. A horizontal compression        5. For a function substitute
                                          results when a constant                    for in
1. A horizontal shift results             greater than 1 is multiplied
    when a constant is added to           by the input. A vertical           Simplify. If the resulting
    or subtracted from the                compression results when a         function is the same as the
    input. A vertical shifts results      constant between 0 and 1 is        original function,
    when a constant is added to           multiplied by the output.
    or subtracted from the                                                                        then the
    output.                                                                  function is even. If the
                                                                             resulting function is the
                                                                             opposite of the original
                                                                             function,
                                                                             then the original function is
                                                                             odd. If the function is not
                                                                             the same or the opposite,
                                                                             then the function is neither
                                                                             odd nor even.

7.                                    9.                                 11. The graph of          is a

                                                                         horizontal shift to the left

                                                                         43 units of the graph of

13. The graph of             is a     15. The graph of        is a       17. The graph of     is a

    horizontal shift to the right          vertical shift up 8 units of  vertical shift down 7 units

    4 units of the graph of                the graph of                  of the graph of

19. The graph of                      21. decreasing on                  23. decreasing on 
      is a horizontal shift to the        and increasing on 
      left 4 units and a vertical
      shift down 1 unit of the
      graph of
1364

25.                                      27.                              29.

31.                                      33.                              35.

37.                                 39.                              41.

43.                                 45.                              47. even

49. odd                             51. even                         53. The graph of is a vertical
                                                                           reflection (across the
                                                                           -axis) of the graph of

55. The graph of is a vertical      57. The graph of is a            59. The graph of is a
      stretch by a factor of 4 of         horizontal compression by        horizontal stretch by a
      the graph of                        a factor of of the graph         factor of 3 of the graph of

                                          of

61. The graph of is a               63.                              65.

      horizontal reflection across

      the -axis and a vertical

      stretch by a factor of 3 of

      the graph of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               1365

67.                                 69. The graph of the function     71. The graph of       is

                                            is shifted to the left 1       stretched vertically by a factor

                                    unit, stretched vertically by a        of 2, shifted horizontally 4 units

                                    factor of 4, and shifted down 5        to the right, reflected across the

                                    units.                                 horizontal axis, and then

                                                                           shifted vertically 3 units up.

73. The graph of the function       75. The graph of the function is       77. The graph of                is
                     is compressed        stretched horizontally by a
                                          factor of 3 and then shifted     shifted right 4 units and then
      vertically by a factor of           vertically downward by 3 units.
                                                                           reflected across the vertical line
1366

79.                                     81.

3.6 Section Exercises

1. Isolate the absolute value      3. The graph of the absolute    5. The distance from x to 8 can
                                       value function does not
     term so that the equation is      cross the -axis, so the         be represented using the
                                       graph is either completely      absolute value statement: 
     of the form            Form       above or completely below       x - 8  = 4.
                                       the -axis.
     one equation by setting the

     expression inside the

     absolute value symbol,

     equal to the expression on

     the other side of the

     equation, Form a second

     equation by setting equal

     to the opposite of the

     expression on the other side

     of the equation, Solve

     each equation for the

     variable.

7.  x - 10   15                    9. There are no x-intercepts.   11. (-4, 0) and (2, 0)

13.                                15.                             17.

19.                                     21.                             23.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1367

25.                                     27.                 29.

31.                                     33. range:          35.

37. There is no solution for       39.                      41.

     that will keep the function                            5. Given a function
                                                                solve for in terms of
     from having a -intercept.                                  Interchange the and
                                                                Solve the new equation for
     The absolute value                                             The expression for is the
                                                                inverse,
     function always crosses the
                                                            11.
     -intercept when

3.7 Section Exercises              3. Yes. For example,
                                       is its own inverse.
1. Each output of a function
    must have exactly one
    output for the function to be
    one-to-one. If any horizontal
    line crosses the graph of a
    function more than once,
    that means that -values
    repeat and the function is
    not one-to-one. If no
    horizontal line crosses the
    graph of the function more
    than once, then no -values
    repeat and the function is
    one-to-one.

7.                                 9.
1368                                        15. domain of                  16.                  and

13. domain of                                                                 This tells us that and

                                 19. one-to-one                                are inverse functions
                                 25.
17.                              31.                         21. one-to-one
23. not one-to-one
29.                                                          27.

                                                             33.

35.                              37.                         39.

41.                              43.                               45.
                                                                         Given the Fahrenheit
               1 4 7 12 16                                               temperature, this
                                                                         formula allows you to
               3 6 9 13 14                                               calculate the Celsius
                                                                         temperature.

47.                              3. not a function           5.
      The time for the car to                                11. function
      travel 180 miles is 3.6
      hours.

Review Exercises

1. function

7. one-to-one                    9. function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              1369

13.                  15.                             17.             or

19.                  21.                              23.

25.                  27. increasing                  29. increasing
                         decreasing 
31. local minimum                                    constant
      local maximum  33.
                                                                            
35.                                             37.
39.                            41.                             43. sample:
45.                                                  49.
                     47.
1370

51.                                   53.  55.

57. even                         59. odd   61. even
63.                              65.       67.

69.                              71.       73. The function is one-to-one.

75.

Practice Test                    3. -16    5. The graph is a parabola and
                                               the graph fails the
1. The relation is a function.                 horizontal line test.

7.                               9.        11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 1371

13.                              15.        17.

19.                          21.        23.
25.
31. yes                      27.        29.
                             33.

Chapter 4

Try It
4.1 Linear Functions

1.                           2.

     decreasing because

3.                           4.         5.

6. Possible answers include  7.              8.

         or
1372

9.                                    10.

    

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions

1.                                    2.  41,100  2020             3. 21.57 miles
   The y-intercept is

                    . If the company
    does not produce a single
    doughnut, they still incur a
    cost of $25,000.

4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data

1.                                    2. 150.871 billion gallons;

                                           extrapolation

4.1 Section Exercises                                              5. The point of intersection is
                                                                                  This is because for
1. Terry starts at an elevation 3.
    of 3000 feet and descends                                          the horizontal line, all of the
    70 feet per second.                                                   coordinates are and for

7. Yes                                9. Yes                           the vertical line, all of the
13. Yes                               15. Increasing                   coordinates are The point
19. Decreasing                        21. Increasing                   of intersection is on both
25. 2                                 27. -2                           lines and therefore will have
31.                                   33.                              these two characteristics.

                                                                   11. No

                                                                   17. Decreasing

                                                                   23. Decreasing

                                                                   29.

                                                                   35.

37. perpendicular                     39. parallel                 41.

Access for free at openstax.org
43.    45.                                                                                                                 1373

49. Line 1: m = -2 Line 2: m = 1 51.       47. Line 1: m = -10 Line 2: m =
      Neither                                    -10 Parallel

53.    55.                                 57. 0
                                           63.
59.    61.                                 69. A

65. F  67. C                                           75.
71.          73.

77.                                   79.  81.
1374

83.                                    85.          87.

89. Linear,                      91. Linear,  93. Linear,
95. Linear,                      97.          99.

101.                             103.               105.

      

107.                             109.         111.

113.                             115. $45 per training session. 117. The rate of change is 0.1.

                                                    For every additional

                                                    minute talked, the

                                                    monthly charge increases

                                                    by $0.1 or 10 cents. The

                                                    initial value is 24. When

                                                    there are no minutes

                                                    talked, initially the charge

                                                    is $24.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            1375

119. The slope is -400. this         121. C
       means for every year
       between 1960 and 1989,
       the population dropped
       by 400 per year in the city.

4.2 Section Exercises                3. To determine the initial        5. 6 square units
                                         value, find the output when
1. Determine the independent             the input is equal to zero.
    variable. This is the variable
    upon which the output
    depends.

7. 20.01 square units                9. 2,300                           11. 64,170

13.                                  15. (-30, 0) Thirty years before 17. Ten years after the model

                                          the start of this model, the       began

                                          town had no citizens. (0,

                                          75,000) Initially, the town

                                          had a population of 75,000.

19.                                  21.          : The x-intercept is 23. At age 5.8 months

                                          not a plausible set of data

                                          for this model because it

                                          means the baby weighed 0

                                          pounds 15 months prior to

                                          birth.  : The baby

                                          weighed 7.5 pounds at

                                          birth.

25.                                  27.          In roughly 59         29. 2063

                                          years, the number of

                                          people inflicted with the

                                          common cold would be 0.

                                                  Initially there

                                          were 12,025 people

                                          afflicted by the common

                                          cold.

31.                                  33. In 2070, the company's         35.

                                          profit will be zero.

37. (10, 0) In the year 1990, the    39. Hawaii                         41. During the year 1933
      company's profits were
      zero

43. $105,620                         45.  696 people  4 years           47.  C(x) = 0.15x + 10
                                         174 people per year                The flat monthly fee is
                                         305 people
                                         P(t) = 305 + 174t                    $10 and there is a $0.15 fee
                                         2,219 people                         for each additional minute
                                                                              used

                                                                            $113.05
1376                              51.                               53. More than 133 minutes
                                      5.5 billion cubic feet
49. P(t) = 190t + 4,360               During the year 2017

55. More than $42,857.14          57. More than $66,666.67 in
      worth of jewelry                  sales

4.3 Section Exercises             3. We predict a value outside     5. The closer the number is to
                                      the domain and range of the       1, the less scattered the
1. When our model no longer           data.                             data, the closer the number
    applies, after some value in                                        is to 0, the more scattered
    the domain, the model itself                                        the data.
    doesn't hold.

7. 61.966 years                   9.                                11.

                                      No.                                No.

13.                                   15.

     Interpolation. About

17.                                                            19.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       1377

21.                                          23. Yes, trend appears linear       25.

                                             because        and will

                                             exceed 12,000 near

                                             midyear, 2016, 24.6 years

                                             since 1992.

27.                                          29.                                      31.

33.                                                    35.            If 18,980 units
      Yes, the function is a good fit.
                                                            are sold, the company will

                                                            have a profit of zero

                                                            dollars.

37.                                     39.                                 41.

Review Exercises                        3. Increasing                       5.
                                        9.
1. Yes                                  15.                                 11. Not linear.
7. 3
13. parallel                            21.                                 17. Line 1:      Line 2:

19.                                                                                        Parallel

                                                                                 23. More than 250

25. 118,000                             27.                                 29.  800
                                                                                100 students per year
                                                                               
1378                             33. $91,625          35. Extrapolation

31. 18,500

37.                              39. 2023             41.

43. 2027                         45. 7,660            5. y = -1.5x - 6
                                                      11. Perpendicular
Practice Test                    3. Increasing        17.
                                 9. No
1. Yes                           15. y = -0.25x + 12
7. y = -2x - 1
13. (-7, 0); (0, -2)

19. 150                          21. 165,000                Slope = -1 and y-intercept = 6
                                                      23. y = 875x + 10,625

Access for free at openstax.org
25.  375                           27.                                                                                                              1379

                                                                            29. In early 2018

     dropped an average of
    46.875, or about 47 people

    per year

     y = -46.875t + 1250

31. y = 0.00455x + 1979.5          33. r = 0.999

Chapter 5

Try It

5.1 Quadratic Functions

1. The path passes through the 2.                           in         3. The domain is all real
                                                                           numbers. The range is
    origin and has vertex at            general form;
                                                                                       or 
              so                                            in

                               To       standard form

    make the shot,

    would need to be about 4

    but                 he

    doesn't make it.

4. y-intercept at (0, 13), No      5.  3 seconds  256 feet
    intercepts                        7 seconds

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions

1.       is a power function       2. As approaches positive or        3. The degree is 6. The leading

    because it can be written as        negative infinity,                  term is         The leading

                  The other             decreases without bound: as         coefficient is

    functions are not power                                 

    functions.                          because of the negative
                                        coefficient.

4. As                                                  5. The leading term is

                                                            so it is a degree 3
                                                            polynomial. As approaches
    It has the shape of an even degree power                positive infinity,
    function with a negative coefficient.                   increases without bound; as

                                                            approaches negative

                                                            infinity,  decreases

                                                            without bound.
1380

6. y-intercept                         7. There are at most 12             8. The end behavior indicates
    x-intercepts                           intercepts and at most 11           an odd-degree polynomial
    and                                    turning points.                     function; there are 3
                                                                               intercepts and 2 turning
                                                                               points, so the degree is odd
                                                                               and at least 3. Because of
                                                                               the end behavior, we know
                                                                               that the lead coefficient
                                                                               must be negative.

9. The intercepts are

                    and           the

    y-intercept is       and the

    graph has at most 2 turning

    points.

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions

1. y-intercept                         2. The graph has a zero of -5       3.
    x-intercepts
                                           with multiplicity 3, a zero of

                             and           -1 with multiplicity 2, and a

                                           zero of 3 with multiplicity 4.

4. Because is a polynomial             5.                                          6. The minimum occurs at
                                                                                       approximately the point
    function and since           is                                                                  and the maximum
                                                                                       occurs at approximately the
    negative and         is                                                            point

    positive, there is at least one

    real zero between             and

5.4 Dividing Polynomials

1.                                     2.                                      3.

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions

1.                                     2. The zeros are 2, -2, and -4.     3. There are no rational zeros.

4. The zeros are                       5.                                      6. There must be 4, 2, or 0
                                                                                   positive real roots and 0
                                                                                   negative real roots. The
                                                                                   graph shows that there are
                                                                                   2 positive real zeros and 0
                                                                                   negative real zeros.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1381

7. 3 meters by 4 meters by 7
    meters

5.6 Rational Functions

1. End behavior: as             2.                                  3.

                        Local

behavior: as

               (there are

no x- or y-intercepts)

                                    The function and the
                                    asymptotes are shifted 3 units
                                    right and 4 units down. As

                                                      and as
                                           

                                    The function is

4. The domain is all real       5. Removable discontinuity at       6. Vertical asymptotes at
                                              Vertical asymptotes:
numbers except             and                                      and          horizontal

                                                                    asymptote at

7. For the transformed reciprocal squared function, we find the     8. Horizontal asymptote at
    rational form.
                                                                        Vertical asymptotes at
                                                                                                y-intercept at

Because the numerator is the same degree as the denominator         x-intercepts at

we know that as                                is the                                          is a

horizontal asymptote. Next, we set the denominator equal to         zero with multiplicity 2, and the

zero, and find that the vertical asymptote is  because as           graph bounces off the x-axis at

               We then set the numerator equal to 0 and             this point.      is a single zero

find the x-intercepts are at        and        Finally, we          and the graph crosses the axis

evaluate the function at 0 and find the y-intercept to be at        at this point.
1382

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions                               2.
                                                                      5.
1.                                                                    3.
    and

3.                               4.

5.8 Modeling Using Variation

1.                               2.

5.1 Section Exercises            3. If       then the function   5. If possible, we can use
                                                                     factoring. Otherwise, we can
1. When written in that form,        becomes a linear function.      use the quadratic formula.
    the vertex can be easily
    identified.

7.              Vertex 9.                                        11.
                                                                       Vertex
                                     Vertex

13.                              15. Minimum is   and            17. Minimum is         and
      Vertex                                                           occurs at    Axis of
                                     occurs at Axis of                 symmetry is

                                     symmetry is

19. Minimum is and occurs        21. Domain is                   23. Domain is        Range
      at Axis of symmetry is           Range is  
                                                                     is 

25. Domain is   Range 27.                                        29.

      is      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1383

31.                                   33.                        35. Vertex: (3, -10), axis of

                                                                      symmetry: x = 3, intercepts:

                                                                               and

37. Vertex:     , axis of                  39.                        41.

     symmetry:          , intercept:

                and

43.                                   45.                        47.

49.                                   50.                        53. The graph is shifted to the

                                                                      right or left (a horizontal

                                                                      shift).

55. The suspension bridge has         57. Domain is    Range     59. Domain:     ; range:
      1,000 feet distance from
      the center.                         is                                

61.                                   63.                        65.

67. 75 feet by 50 feet                69. 3 and 3; product is 9  71. The revenue reaches the
                                                                       maximum value when 1800
                                                                       thousand phones are
                                                                       produced.
1384                               75. 41 trees per acre

73. 2.449 seconds

5.2 Section Exercises              3. As decreases without              5. The polynomial function is
                                                                            of even degree and leading
1. The coefficient of the power    bound, so does            As             coefficient is negative.
    function is the real number
    that is multiplied by the      increases without bound, so
    variable raised to a power.
    The degree is the highest      does
    power appearing in the
    function.

7. Power function                  9. Neither                           11. Neither

13. Degree = 2, Coefficient = -2 15. Degree =4, Coefficient = -2 17. As              ,

                                                                                                           

19. As   ,                                       21. As      ,

                                                                                        

23. As   ,                                       25. y-intercept is       27. y-intercept is

                                           t-intercepts are                             x-intercepts are   and

29. y-intercept is                 31. 3                                33. 5
      x-intercepts are
                        and        37. 5                                39. Yes. Number of turning
                                                                              points is 2. Least possible
35. 3                                                                         degree is 3.

41. Yes. Number of turning         43. Yes. Number of turning           45. Yes. Number of turning
      points is 1. Least possible        points is 0. Least possible          points is 0. Least possible
      degree is 2.                       degree is 1.                         degree is 1.

47.                                         49.

     10    9,500                                 10        -504

     100 99,950,000                              100 -941,094

     -10 9,500                                   -10 1,716

     -100 99,950,000                             -100 1,061,106

     As  ,                                       As       ,

                                                                                     

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             1385

51.                                    53.

     The intercept is      The              The intercept is     . The
     intercepts are              As         intercepts are        As

            ,                                      ,

                                                                        

55.                                    57.

     The intercept is      The              The intercept is            The

     intercept is                               intercept are              

       ,                                    As  ,

                                                               
1386

59.                                            61.                                    63.

      The intercept is             The

      intercepts are

                                   As

      ,

                                             

65.                                     67.                                      69.

5.3 Section Exercises                   3. If we evaluate the function      5. There will be a factor raised
                                            at and at and the sign of           to an even power.
1. The intercept is where the               the function value changes,
    graph of the function                   then we know a zero exists
    crosses the axis, and the               between and
    zero of the function is the
    input value for which

7.                                      9.                                  11.

13.                                     15.                                 17.

19.                                     21.                                 23.

25.        and                          27.         and                     29.                       and

      Sign change confirms.                  Sign change confirms.                                 Sign

                                                                                 change confirms.

31. 0 with multiplicity 2,              33. 0 with multiplicity 2, -2 with  35.       with multiplicity 5, 5
      with multiplicity 5, 4 with             multiplicity 2
      multiplicity 2                                                             with multiplicity 2

37. 0 with multiplicity 4, 2 with       39. with multiplicity 2, 0 with
      multiplicity 1, -1 with                 multiplicity 3
      multiplicity 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 1387

41.                                                  43. x-intercepts,  with multiplicity 2,

                                                     with multiplicity 1, intercept           As

                                                                                                    

45. x-intercepts  with multiplicity 3,               47. x-intercepts                    with

     with multiplicity 2, intercept            As    multiplicity 1, intercept       As

                                                                                                  

49.                                       51.                                53. -4, -2, 1, 3 with multiplicity
                                                                                   1
55. -2, 3 each with multiplicity 57.
      2                                                                      59.

61.                                  63.                                       65.
                                                                       71. global min
67. local max                        69. global min
      local min                                                        77.

73.                                  75.
1388

79.

5.4 Section Exercises

1. The binomial is a factor of   3.

     the polynomial.

5.                                         7.

9.                                              11.
                                                     15.
13.

17.                              19.                             21.
                                                                 27.
23.                              25.                             33.
                                                                 39. Yes
29.                              31.                             45.
35.                              37.
41. Yes                          43. No

47.                              49.

51.                                        53.

55.                                   57.                             59.

61.                              63.                             65.

67.                              69.                             71.

73.

5.5 Section Exercises            3. Rational zeros can be        5. Polynomial functions can
                                     expressed as fractions          have repeated zeros, so the
1. The theorem can be used to        whereas real zeros include      fact that number is a zero
    evaluate a polynomial.           irrational numbers.             doesn't preclude it being a
                                                                     zero again.
7.                               9.
                                                                 11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1389

13.                              15.                              17.

19.                              21.                              23.

25.                              27.                              29.

31.                              33.                              35.

37.                              39.                              41.

43.                              45.                              47. 1 positive, 1 negative

49. 3 or 1 positive, 0 negative  51. 0 positive, 3 or 1 negative       53. 2 or 0 positive, 2 or 0
                                                                             negative

55. 2 or 0 positive, 2 or 0 negative 57.                                59.

61.                              63.                              65.
                                                                  71. 8 by 4 by 6 inches
67.                              69.
1390                              75. 8 by 5 by 3 inches               77. Radius = 6 meters, Height =
                                                                             2 meters
73. 5.5 by 4.5 by 3.5 inches

79. Radius = 2.5 meters, Height
      = 4.5 meters

5.6 Section Exercises             3. The numerator and                 5. Yes. The numerator of the
                                      denominator must have a              formula of the functions
1. The rational function will be      common factor.                       would have only complex
    represented by a quotient of                                           roots and/or factors
    polynomial functions.                                                  common to both the
                                                                           numerator and
                                                                           denominator.

7.                                9.                                   11. V.A. at  H.A. at

                                                                                    Domain is all reals

13. V.A. at          H.A. at      15. V.A. at                    H.A.  17. V.A. at  H.A. at
                                        at     Domain is all reals
             Domain is all reals                                            Domain is all reals

19. V.A. at        H.A. at        21. none                             23.

             Domain is all reals

25. Local behavior:                              27. Local behavior:

                                                                                                 

    End behavior:                                         End behavior:       

29. Local behavior:                                              31.
                                  
                                                          

    End behavior:           

Access for free at openstax.org
                    1391

33.  35.       37.

39.       41.

43.
1392

45.                                   47.

49.                                             51.

53.                              55.       57.

59.                              61.       63.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1393

65.                                          67.

     2.01 2.001 2.0001 1.99 1.999                      -4.1 -4.01 -4.001 -3.99 -3.999

     100 1,000 10,000 -100 -1,000                      82 802 8,002 -798 -7998

      10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000                      10      100 1,000 10,000 100,000
     .125 .0102 .001 .0001 .00001
                                                       1.4286 1.9331 1.992 1.9992 1.999992

     Vertical asymptote  Horizontal               Vertical asymptote       Horizontal
     asymptote                                    asymptote

69.                                          71.       
            -.9 -.99 -.999 -1.1 -1.01

            81 9,801 998,001 121 10,201

       10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000
     .82645 .9803 .998 .9998

     Vertical asymptote          Horizontal
     asymptote

73.                                   75.                             77.

79.                              81.                           83. After about 6.12 hours.

85.                      2 by 2  87.                   Radius
      by 5 feet.                       = 2.52 meters.

5.7 Section Exercises            3. We will need a restriction on 5.
                                     the domain of the answer.
1. It can be too difficult or
    impossible to solve for in
    terms of
1394

7.                               9.        11.

13.                              15.       17.       

19.                              21.       23.
                                           29.
25.                              27.       35.

31.                              33.

37.                                   39.       41.

43.                                   45.       47.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1395

49.                              51.                          53.

55.                   57.             , 3.54  59.                    8.92 in.
                             seconds                                5.64 ft
61.                                   -2, 3.99 ft 65.
      ft  3.26 63.

5.8 Section Exercises

1. The graph will have the  3. No. Multiple variables may 5.
    appearance of a power       jointly vary.
    function.

7.                          9.                11.

13.                         15.               17.

19.                         21.               23.

25.                         27.               29.

31.                         33.               35.

37.                         39.               41.
1396

43.                                45.                                  47. 1.89 years

49. 0.61 years                     51. 3 seconds                53. 48 inches
55. 49.75 pounds                   57. 33.33 amperes            59. 2.88 inches

Review Exercises                                                     3.

1.

5. 300 meters by 150 meters,       7. Yes, degree = 5, leading  9. Yes, degree = 4, leading
    the longer side parallel to        coefficient = 4              coefficient = 1
    river.

11.                                                    13. -3 with multiplicity 2,

                                                                with multiplicity 1, -1 with
                                                                multiplicity 3

15. 4 with multiplicity 1          17. with multiplicity 1, 3 with 19.  with remainder 12
                                         multiplicity 3

21.                                23.           , so factored 25.

                                        form is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            1397

27.                                  29. 0 or 2 positive, 1 negative 31. Intercepts                      ,

                                                                            Asymptotes          and

33. Intercepts (3, 0), (-3, 0), and       35.                               37.

     , Asymptotes

39.                                  41.                               43.
45.
                                     47. 148.5 pounds
Practice Test
                                     3.
1. Degree: 5, leading
    coefficient: -2                  7. 3 with multiplicity 3,   with  9.        with multiplicity 3, 2

5.                                       multiplicity 1, 1 with            with multiplicity 2
                                         multiplicity 2
11.
                                     13.                               15. 1, -2, and - (multiplicity

                                                                            2)
1398

17.                                       19. 2 or 0 positive, 1 negative 21.

23.                              25.                     27.

Chapter 6

Try It

6.1 Exponential Functions

1.         and                   2.                      3. About              billion people;

           represent                                     by the year 2031, India's

     exponential functions.                              population will exceed

                                                         China's by about 0.001

                                                         billion, or 1 million people.

4.    and                             5.                      6.                    Answers

                                                                  may vary due to round-off
                                                                  error. The answer should be
                                                                  very close to

7.                               8. about $3,644,675.88  9. $13,693

10.                              11. $3,659,823.44       12. 3.77E-26 (This is calculator

                                                         notation for the number

                                                         written as                 in

                                                         scientific notation. While

                                                         the output of an

                                                         exponential function is

                                                         never zero, this number is

                                                         so close to zero that for all

                                                         practical purposes we can

                                                         accept zero as the answer.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           1399

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions

1. The domain is   the                 2. The domain is   the             3.

    range is  the horizontal              range is  the horizontal

    asymptote is                          asymptote is

4. The domain is     the               5. The domain is    the            6.                      the
                                                                              domain is
   range is        the horizontal         range is       the horizontal                      the

    asymptote is                           asymptote is                         range is   the

                                                                                horizontal asymptote is

6.3 Logarithmic Functions

1.                        is 2.           is equivalent to            3.                 (recalling
                                             is equivalent                that                          )
    equivalent to                

                   is                 to

    equivalent to                         is equivalent to

4.                                 5.                                 6.

7. The difference in               8. It is not possible to take the
    magnitudes was about               logarithm of a negative
                                       number in the set of real
                                       numbers.
1400

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions

1.                               2.                                   3.

                                                                          The domain is  the
                                                                          range is   and the

                                                                          vertical asymptote is

4.                                    5.                                  6.

     The domain is     the               The domain is  the                  The domain is  the
                                         range is   and the                  range is   and the
     range          and the
                                          vertical asymptote is               vertical asymptote is
     asymptote
                                      8.                                  9.
7.

                                          The domain is          the

                                          range is   and the

     The domain is  the                   vertical asymptote is
     range is   and the

     vertical asymptote is

10.                              11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1401

6.5 Logarithmic Properties                2.
                                                              5.
1.

3.                      4.

6.                      7.

8.                                        9.             can also be

                                                written           by reducing

                                                the fraction to lowest terms.

10.                     11.               this answer 12. The pH increases by about

                             could also be written                0.301.

13.                     14.

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

1.                      2.                               3.

4. The equation has no  5.                               6.                       or
                                                                          or
     solution.

7.                      8.                               9.

10.                     11.                              12.

13.

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models

1.                      2. less than 230 years, 229.3157 3.

                             to be exact

4. 6.026 hours          5. 895 cases on day 15           6. Exponential.

7.
1402

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data

1.  The exponential regression       2.  The logarithmic regression model

    model that fits these data is        that fits these data is

 If spending continues at this        If sales continue at this rate, about

rate, the graduate's credit card     171,000 games will be sold in the year
debt will be $4,499.38 after one     2015.
year.

3.  The logistic regression model

    that fits these data is

 If the population continues

to grow at this rate, there will be

about    seals in 2020.

 To the nearest whole

number, the carrying capacity is

25,657.

6.1 Section Exercises              3. When interest is                5. exponential; the population
                                       compounded, the                    decreases by a proportional
1. Linear functions have a             percentage of interest             rate. .
    constant rate of change.           earned to principal ends up
    Exponential functions              being greater than the
    increase based on a percent        annual percentage rate for
    of the original.                   the investment account.
                                       Thus, the annual percentage
                                       rate does not necessarily
                                       correspond to the real
                                       interest earned, which is the
                                       very definition of nominal.

7. not exponential; the charge     9. The forest represented by       11. After  years, forest A
    decreases by a constant            the function
    amount each visit, so the                                         will have more trees
    statement represents a
    linear function. .                                                than forest B.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1403

13. Answers will vary. Sample      15. exponential growth; The        17. exponential decay; The
      response: For a number of
      years, the population of          growth factor,  is                 decay factor,    is
      forest A will increasingly
      exceed forest B, but              greater than                       between and
      because forest B actually
      grows at a faster rate, the
      population will eventually
      become larger than forest
      A and will remain that way
      as long as the population
      growth models hold. Some
      factors that might
      influence the long-term
      validity of the exponential
      growth model are drought,
      an epidemic that culls the
      population, and other
      environmental and
      biological factors.

19.                                21.                                          23. Linear
25. Neither
31.                                27. Linear                         29.
37.
                                   33.                                35.

                                   39. continuous growth; the         41. continuous decay; the
                                         growth rate is greater than        growth rate is less than

43.                                45.                                47.

49.                                51.                                53.

55.

57.

59. Let be the exponential decay function                   such           61.  fox

     that    Then for some number

63.                                65.                                67.
1404

6.2 Section Exercises              3.                y-intercept:  5.

1. An asymptote is a line that         Domain: all real                y-intercept:  Domain:
    the graph of a function
    approaches, as either              numbers; Range: all real        all real numbers; Range: all
    increases or decreases
    without bound. The                 numbers greater than            real numbers less than
    horizontal asymptote of an
    exponential function tells us
    the limit of the function's
    values as the independent
    variable gets either
    extremely large or
    extremely small.

7.     y-intercept: 9.                                                 11.

               Domain: all real
    numbers; Range: all real
    numbers greater than

13. B                                  y-intercept:                17. E
19. D                              15. A                           23.
                                   21. C

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              1405

25.                                     27.                                  29. As            ,           ;

                                                                                       As      ,

                                             Horizontal asymptote:
                                                           Domain: all real

                                             numbers; Range: all real
                                             numbers strictly greater than

31. As    ,                   ;    33.                                 35.
      As   ,
                              

37.                                39.                                 41.
43.
                                   45.                                 47.

49.                                51. The graph of                    53. The graphs of            and

                                        is the refelction about the          are the same and are

                                        y-axis of the graph of               a horizontal shift to the

                                                For any real                 right of the graph of

                                        number       and function            For any real number n, real

                                                the graph of                 number            and

                                             is the the reflection           function               the

                                        about the y-axis,                    graph of          is the

                                                                             horizontal shift

6.3 Section Exercises

1. A logarithm is an exponent.     3. Since the equation of a          5. The natural logarithm is a
                                       logarithm is equivalent to an       special case of the logarithm
     Specifically, it is the           exponential equation, the           with base in that the
                                       logarithm can be converted          natural log always has base
     exponent to which a base          to the exponential equation            Rather than notating the
                                                  and then properties      natural logarithm as
     is raised to produce a given      of exponents can be applied                      the notation used
                                       to solve for                        is
     value. In the expressions

     given, the base has the

     same value. The exponent,

     in the expression can

     also be written as the

     logarithm,  and the

     value of is the result of

     raising to the power of

7.                                 9.                                  11.

13.                                15.                                 17.
1406

19.                                    21.                                 23.
                                                                           29.
25.                                    27.

31.                                    33.                                 35.

37.                                    39.                                 41.
                                                                           47.
43.                                    45.

49.                                    51.                                 53.

55.                                    57.                                 59. No, the function has no

                                                                                defined value for          To

                                                                                verify, suppose      is in

                                                                                the domain of the function

                                                                                            Then there

                                                                                is some number such

                                                                                that             Rewriting

                                                                                as an exponential equation

                                                                                gives:           which is

                                                                                impossible since no such

                                                                                real number exists.

                                                                                Therefore,         is not the

                                                                                domain of the function

61. Yes. Suppose there exists a        63. No;  so                         65.
      real number such that
                   Rewriting as an              is undefined.
      exponential equation gives
                 which is a real
      number. To verify, let
                 Then, by definition,

6.4 Section Exercises                  3. Shifting the function right or   5. No. A horizontal asymptote
                                           left and reflecting the             would suggest a limit on the
1. Since the functions are                 function about the y-axis will      range, and the range of any
    inverses, their graphs are             affect its domain.                  logarithmic function in
    mirror images about the line                                               general form is all real
              So for every point                                               numbers.
            on the graph of a
    logarithmic function, there
    is a corresponding point
            on the graph of its
    inverse exponential
    function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1407

7. Domain:               Range:  9. Domain:    Range: 11. Domain:  Vertical
       
                                                                          asymptote:

13. Domain:                      15. Domain:   Vertical 17. Domain:  ;

     Vertical asymptote:         asymptote:                   Vertical asymptote:        ;
                                                              End behavior: as
                                                                                   
                                                              and as                

19. Domain:       ; Vertical     21. Domain:  Range:     23. Domain:               Range:
                                           Vertical
     asymptote:           ;                                          Vertical
                                       asymptote:
     End behavior: as                  x-intercept:           asymptote:
                                       y-intercept: DNE       x-intercept:
     ,        and as                                          y-intercept: DNE

        ,              

25. Domain:  Range:              27. B                   29. C
          Vertical

      asymptote:
      x-intercept:
      y-intercept: DNE

31. B                            33. C                   35.

37.                              39. C                        41.
1408

43.                                   45.                                     47.

49.                              51.                                     53.

55.                              57. The graphs of                       59. Recall that the argument of a

                                                    and                       logarithmic function must be

                                                              appear to       positive, so we determine
                                      be the same; Conjecture:
                                      for any positive base                   where        . From the

                                                                              graph of the function

                                                                                           note that the

                                                                              graph lies above the x-axis on

                                                                              the interval           and

                                                                              again to the right of the vertical

                                                                              asymptote, that is 

                                                                              Therefore, the domain is

                                                                                             

6.5 Section Exercises                                                                  5.
                                                                         11.
1. Any root expression can be 3.
    rewritten as an expression
    with a rational exponent so
    that the power rule can be
    applied, making the
    logarithm easier to
    calculate. Thus,

7.                               9.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1409

13.                                15.                                     17.

19.                                21.                                23.

25.                                27.

29.                                                           31.

33.                                35.                              37.

39.  By the quotient rule:                     41. Let and be positive
                                                     integers greater than
     Rewriting as an exponential equation and        Then, by the change-of-
     solving for                                     base formula,

     Checking, we find that
     is defined, so

6.6 Section Exercises

1. Determine first if the          3. The one-to-one property can 5.

     equation can be rewritten so       be used if both sides of the

     that each side uses the            equation can be rewritten as

     same base. If so, the              a single logarithm with the

     exponents can be set equal         same base. If so, the

     to each other. If the              arguments can be set equal

     equation cannot be                 to each other, and the

     rewritten so that each side        resulting equation can be

     uses the same base, then           solved algebraically. The

     apply the logarithm to each        one-to-one property cannot

     side and use properties of         be used when each side of

     logarithms to solve.               the equation cannot be

                                        rewritten as a single

                                        logarithm with the same

                                        base.

7.                                 9.                                 11.
1410                             15.              17.

13. No solution                  21.              23.
                                 27.              29.
19.                              33.              35.
25. no solution                  39. No solution  41. No solution
31.                              45.              47.
37.                              51.
43.                                                     53.
49.

55.                              57.              59. No solution

Access for free at openstax.org
61.                                63.                                                                                                     1411

                                                                     65. about

67. about 5 years                       69.                          71.

73.                                75.                               77. about

79.                                81.

6.7 Section Exercises              3. Doubling time is a measure     5. An order of magnitude is the
                                       of growth and is thus             nearest power of ten by
1. Half-life is a measure of           associated with exponential       which a quantity
    decay and is thus associated       growth models. The                exponentially grows. It is
    with exponential decay             doubling time of a                also an approximate
    models. The half-life of a         substance or quantity is the      position on a logarithmic
    substance or quantity is the       amount of time it takes for       scale; Sample response:
    amount of time it takes for        the initial amount of that        Orders of magnitude are
    half of the initial amount of      substance or quantity to          useful when making
    that substance or quantity         double in size.                   comparisons between
    to decay.                                                            numbers that differ by a
                                                                         great amount. For example,
                                                                         the mass of Saturn is 95
                                                                         times greater than the mass
                                                                         of Earth. This is the same as
                                                                         saying that the mass of
                                                                         Saturn is about times, or
                                                                         2 orders of magnitude
                                                                         greater, than the mass of
                                                                         Earth.
1412

7.               The amount          9. 150                           11. exponential;
                                                                                  17.
    initially present is about 16.7

    units.

13. logarithmic                           15. logarithmic

19. about years                      21. about years                  23. half-lives;   minutes
25.
                                     27. Let         for some non-    29.
                                                                            mg
                                          negative real number

                                          such that          Then,

31. about days                       33.                              35.               So the hourly
                                           half-life: about
37.                                                          minutes       decay rate is about
      after 3 hours:
                                     39.                              41. about minutes
43.                                        doubling time: about
      where is in minutes.                 minutes

49. MMS magnitude:                   45. about minutes                47.

                                     51.                              53. C

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       1413

6.8 Section Exercises              3. Regression analysis is the      5. The y-intercept on the graph
                                       process of finding an              of a logistic equation
1. Logistic models are best            equation that best fits a          corresponds to the initial
    used for situations that have      given set of data points. To       population for the
    limited values. For example,       perform a regression               population model.
    populations cannot grow            analysis on a graphing
    indefinitely since resources       utility, first list the given
    such as food, water, and           points using the STAT then
    space are limited, so a            EDIT menu. Next graph the
    logistic model best                scatter plot using the STAT
    describes populations.             PLOT feature. The shape of
                                       the data points on the
                                       scatter graph can help
                                       determine which regression
                                       feature to use. Once this is
                                       determined, select the
                                       appropriate regression
                                       analysis command from the
                                       STAT then CALC menu.

7. C                               9. B                               11.      ; 175

13.                                15. y-intercept:                   17. koi

19. about months.                  21.                                     23. About 38 wolves

25. About 8.7 years                27.                                29.
1414

31.                                   33.                                   35. When
                                                                            41.
37.                              39.

43. When                         45. When                              47.
49. About 25                     51.                                         53.

55. When                         57.                                   59.

                                      ;                   ; the

                                      regression curves are

                                      symmetrical about          , so

                                      it appears that they are

                                      inverse functions.

Review Exercises

1. exponential decay; The        3.                                    5.

     growth factor,  is

     between and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           1415

7. continuous decay; the       9. domain: all real numbers;               11.
    growth rate is negative.       range: all real numbers strictly             y-intercept:
                                   greater than zero; y-intercept:              Domain: all real numbers;
                                   (0, 3.5);                                    Range: all real numbers
                                                                                greater than

13.                            15.                                   17.

19.                            21.                                   23.

25. Domain:          Vertical  27.                                   29.
      asymptote:
      behavior: as   End                                                 35.
                                                                     41. no solution
    as                 and                                           47.
                                                                     53.
                                                                     59. about days
31.                            33.

37.                            39.

43. no solution                45.

49.                            51. about  years

55.                            57. about minutes

                   
1416

61. exponential                      63.  65. about days

67. logarithmic;

Practice Test

1. About 13 dolphins.            3.       5. y-intercept:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1417

7.                         9.                    11.

13. Domain:      Vertical  15.                   17.

     asymptote:  End

     behavior:

                  and

                 

19.                        21.                   23. no solution

25.                        27.                   29.                    half-

                                                      life: about days

31.                             33. logarithmic
1418                                 37. logistic;

35. exponential;

Chapter 7

Try It

7.1 Angles

1.                               2.                            3.

4.                               5.                            6.

7.                               8.                            9. 1.88

10.  rad/s                       11. 1655 kilometers per hour

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                1419

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry

1.                    2.

3.                                               4. 2

5.                               6. About 52 ft
    missing angle is

7.3 Unit Circle

1.                    2.                                   3.

4. approximately 0.866025403 5.                            6. 
                                                             

7.

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions

1.
2.

3.                                                     4.

5.                    6.                                   7.

8.                               9.

10.
1420

7.1 Section Exercises            3. Whether the angle is          5. Linear speed is a
                                     positive or negative             measurement found by
1.                                   determines the direction. A      calculating distance of an
                                     positive angle is drawn in       arc compared to time.
                                     the counterclockwise             Angular speed is a
                                     direction, and a negative        measurement found by
                                     angle is drawn in the            calculating the angle of an
                                     clockwise direction.             arc compared to time.

7.                                    9.                               11.

13.                              15.                              17.

19.                              21.                              23.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1421

25.                          27.                             29.

31.                          33. radians                     35.  radians

37. radians                  39. radians                     41.               miles

43.             centimeters  45.           meters            47. 104.7198 cm2

49. 0.7697 in2               51.                             53.
                             57.
55.                                                          59.  rad/min              RPM

61. in./s, 4.77 RPM ,        63.                             65.  miles
      deg/s
                             69. 794 miles per hour          71. 2,234 miles per hour
67.

73. 11.5 inches

7.2 Section Exercises        3. The tangent of an angle is   5. For example, the sine of an
                                 the ratio of the opposite       angle is equal to the cosine
1.                               side to the adjacent side.      of its complement; the
                                                                 cosine of an angle is equal
                                                                 to the sine of its
                                                                 complement.

7.                           9.                              11.
13.                          15.                             17.
19.                          21.                             23.
25.                          27.                             29.
31.                          33.                             35.
37.                          39.                             41.
43. 188.3159                 45. 200.6737                    47. 498.3471 ft
1422                               51. 27.372 ft                            53. 22.6506 ft

49. 1060.09 ft
55. 368.7633 ft

7.3 Section Exercises              3. Coterminal angles are                 5. The sine values are equal.
                                       angles that share the same
1. The unit circle is a circle of      terminal side. A reference
    radius 1 centered at the           angle is the size of the
    origin.                            smallest acute angle,
                                       formed by the terminal side
                                       of the angle and the
                                       horizontal axis.

7. I                               9. IV                                    11.

13.                                15.                                      17. 0

19. -1                             21.                                      23.
25.
31.                                27.                                      29.

                                   33.                                      35.    Quadrant IV,

                                                                                                 ,

37.     Quadrant II,                      39.     Quadrant II,

                               ,                                         ,

41.     Quadrant II,                      43. Quadrant III,
                                                                      ,
                 ,

45. Quadrant II,                          47. Quadrant II,
                            ,                                         ,

49. Quadrant IV,                          51.                                      53.

55.                                57.                                      59.

61.                                63.                                      65.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          1423

67.                                69.                                   71.
                                                                         77.
73.                                75.                                   83. 0.9511
79.                                81. -0.1736                           89. -0.7660
85. -0.7071                        87. -0.1392                           95.
91.                                93.                                   101.

97.                                99. 0

103. 37.5 seconds, 97.5
       seconds, 157.5 seconds,
       217.5 seconds, 277.5
       seconds, 337.5 seconds

7.4 Section Exercises              3. Substitute the sine of the         5. The outputs of tangent and
                                       angle in for in the                   cotangent will repeat every
1. Yes, when the reference             Pythagorean Theorem                      units.
    angle is and the terminal                             Solve for and
    side of the angle is in            take the negative solution.
    quadrants I and III. Thus, a
                     the sine and
    cosine values are equal.

7.                                 9.                                    11.

13. 1                              15. 2                                 17.

19.                                21.                                   23.

25. -1                             27. -2                                29.

31. 2                              33.                                   35. -2

37. -1                             39.             ,  , 41.

                                                   ,

                                                ,
1424

43.                                 45. 3.1                     47. 1.4

49.      ,                       ,  51.              ,          53. -0.228

      ,     ,                                           ,

         ,                                   ,          ,

55. -2.414                          57. 1.414                   59. 1.540
61. 1.556                           63.                         65.
67. even                            69. even                    71.
73. 13.77 hours, period:            75. 3.46 inches
                                                                5. 10.385 meters
Review Exercises                    3.                          11.
                                    9.
1.
7.

13.                                 15. 1036.73 miles per hour  17.

19.                                 21.                         23.
                                                                29. 369.2136 ft
25.                                 27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                1425

31.                   33.                             35.

37. all real numbers  39.                             41.

43. 2                 45. -2.5                        47.

49. cosine, secant

Practice Test         3. 6.283 centimeters            5.

1.                    9. 3.351 feet per second,       11.

7.

                           radians per second

13.                   15. real numbers                17. 1

19.                   21. -0.68                       23.

Chapter 8

Try It

8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions

1.                    2. compressed                   3. right

4. 2 units up         5. midline:       amplitude:    6.

                                   period:

                                        phase shift:
1426                                       8.                              9.
                                 or
7. two possibilities:
                                                                                   midline:      amplitude:
10. 7
                                                                                             period:

                                                                                   phase shift:

                                               midline:        amplitude:
                                                         period:

                                               phase shift:  or none

                                               11.

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions

1.                                             2. It would be reflected across 3.

                                               the line      becoming

                                               an increasing function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1427

4. This is a vertical reflection of      5.                          6.

    the preceding graph because

    is negative.

7.

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions

1.                                   2.                              3. 1.9823 or 113.578°
                                                                      6.
                                                                     9.

4.                                   5.

    radians

7.                                   8.

8.1 Section Exercises

1. The sine and cosine               3. The absolute value of the    5. At the point where the
                                         constant (amplitude)            terminal side of intersects
    functions have the property          increases the total range       the unit circle, you can
                                         and the constant (vertical      determine that the
    that                for a            shift) shifts the graph         equals the y-coordinate of
                                         vertically.                     the point.
    certain This means that

    the function values repeat

    for every units on the

    x-axis.
1428

7.                                       9.                                      11.

                                                                                      amplitude: 1; period:

                                                                                      midline:      maximum:

     amplitude: period:                                                               occurs at

     midline:    maximum:                                                             minimum:             occurs at

          occurs at                          amplitude: 4; period:                    one full period is

                                             midline:   maximum                       graphed from         to

     minimum:        occurs at               occurs at   minimum:

               for one period, the            occurs at               one
     graph starts at 0 and ends at
                                             full period occurs from         to

13.                                      15.                                     17.

      amplitude: 4; period: 2; midline:       amplitude: 3; period:

          maximum:               occurs       midline:            maximum:

      at         minimum:                              occurs at                      amplitude: 5; period:

      occurs at                               minimum:            occurs at           midline:             maximum:

                                                        horizontal shift:                       occurs at

                                              vertical translation 5; one             minimum:               occurs at

                                              period occurs from           to                       phase shift:

                                                                                      vertical translation: one full

                                                                                      period can be graphed on

                                                                                                to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        1429

19.                                       21.                                    23. amplitude: 2; midline:
                                                                                                   period: 4;

                                                                                       equation:

                                               amplitude: 1; period:

     amplitude: 1 ; period:                    midline:           maximum:

     midline:   maximum:                            occurs at

     occurs at                                 minimum:           occurs at

     maximum:   occurs at                                phase shift:

                minimum:                       vertical shift: 0

     occurs at            phase shift:

     vertical translation: 1; one

     full period is from      to

25. amplitude: 2; period: 5;         27. amplitude: 4; period: 2;           29. amplitude: 2; period: 2;

     midline:   equation:                 midline:       equation:               midline  equation:

31.                                  33.                                    35.

37.             is symmetric         39.                                    41. Maximum: at   ;

                                                                                 minimum: at

43. A linear function is added to a       45. There is no amplitude because      47. The graph is symmetric with
                                                the function is not bounded.           respect to the y-axis and there
     periodic sine function. The                                                       is no amplitude because the
                                                                                       function's bounds decrease as
     graph does not have an                                                                 grows. There appears to be
                                                                                       a horizontal asymptote at
     amplitude because as the linear                                                   .

     function increases without

     bound the combined function

                will increase

     without bound as well. The

     graph is bounded between the

     graphs of            and

                because sine

     oscillates between -1 and 1.
1430

8.2 Section Exercises

1. Since              is the          3. Answers will vary. Using the  5. The period is the same:
                                          unit circle, one can show
     reciprocal function of               that

          you can plot the

     reciprocal of the coordinates

     on the graph of             to

     obtain the y-coordinates of

          The x-intercepts

     of the graph                are

     the vertical asymptotes for

     the graph of

7. IV                                 9. III                           11. period: 8; horizontal shift: 1
                                                                             unit to left

13. 1.5                               15. 5                            17.

19.                                           21.

      stretching factor: 2; period:                stretching factor: 6; period: 6;
      asymptotes:                                  asymptotes:

23.                                   25.                                                27.

      stretching factor: 1; period:           Stretching factor: 1; period:                   stretching factor: 2; period:
      asymptotes:                             asymptotes:                                     asymptotes:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1431

29.                                  31.

      stretching factor: 4; period:           stretching factor: 7; period:
      asymptotes:                             asymptotes:

33.                                       35.

                                          stretching factor:  period:
                                          asymptotes:
     stretching factor: 2; period:
     asymptotes:

37.                                  39.                                     41.
1432

43.                                    45.                                47.

49.                                         51.                                53.

55.                                    57. 
                                          

                                                     after 0 seconds,

                                            the rocket is 0 mi above the

                                            ground;  after 30

                                            seconds, the rockets is 2 mi

                                            high;

        and                      the         As approaches 60

                                            seconds, the values of

      distance grows without bound          grow increasingly large. The

      as approaches --i.e., at              distance to the rocket is

      right angles to the line              growing so large that the

      representing due north, the           camera can no longer track it.

      boat would be so far away,

      the fisherman could not see it;

       3; when       the boat

      is 3 km away;

       1.73; when                the

      boat is about 1.73 km away;

       1.5 km; when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              1433

8.3 Section Exercises

1. The function          is              3. is the radian measure of  5. In order for any function to
                                             an angle between and         have an inverse, the
     one-to-one on                               whose sine is 0.5.       function must be one-to-one
                                                                          and must pass the
     thus, this interval is the                                           horizontal line test. The
     range of the inverse                                                 regular sine function is not
     function of                                                          one-to-one unless its
                                                                          domain is restricted in some
                           The function                                   way. Mathematicians have
                   is one-to-one on                                       agreed to restrict the sine
              thus, this interval is                                      function to the interval
     the range of the inverse                                                          so that it is one-to-
     function of
                                                                          one and possesses an
                                                                          inverse.

7. True . The angle, that                9.                           11.

     equals           ,          ,

     will be a second quadrant

     angle with reference angle,

        , where equals

             ,      . Since is

     the reference angle for ,

                 and

     =           -

13.                                      15.                          17. 1.98

19. 0.93                                 21. 1.41                     23. 0.56 radians
25. 0                                    27. 0.71                     29. -0.71

31.                                      33. 0.8                      35.

37.                                      39.                          41.

43.                                      45.                          47.

49.                                      51. approximately            53. 0.395 radians

        domain        range
1434

55. 1.11 radians                 57. 1.25 radians               59. 0.405 radians

61. No. The angle the ladder
      makes with the horizontal
      is 60 degrees.

Review Exercises

1. amplitude: 3; period:         3. amplitude: 3; period:             5. amplitude: 3; period:

midline:          no asymptotes  midline:          no asymptotes      midline:     no asymptotes

7. amplitude: 6; period:         9. stretching factor: none; period:  11. stretching factor: 3; period:

midline:          no asymptotes  midline:          asymptotes:        midline:         asymptotes:
                                                                                   where is an
                                                   where is an

                                 integer                              integer

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     1435

13. amplitude: none; period: no      15. amplitude: none; period:            17. amplitude: none; period: no
      phase shift; asymptotes:                                                     phase shift; asymptotes:
                   where is an odd         no phase shift; asymptotes:                          where is an integer
                                                        where is an integer
      integer

19. largest: 20,000; smallest:  21. amplitude: 8,000; period:  23. In 2007, the predicted
      4,000                           10; phase shift: 0             population is 4,413. In
                                                                     2010, the population will be
25. 5 in.                       27. 10 seconds                       11,924.
31.
37.                                                            29.

                                33.                            35. No solution

                                39. The graphs are not symmetrical           41. The graphs appear to be
                                      with respect to the line                     identical.
                                      They are symmetrical with
                                      respect to the -axis.
1436                             3. amplitude: 5; period:           5. amplitude: 1; period:
                                     midline:                           midline:
Practice Test

1. amplitude: 0.5; period:
    midline

7. amplitude: 3; period:         9. amplitude: none; period:        11. amplitude: none; period:
    midline:
                                 midline:  asymptotes:              midline:        asymptotes:

                                           where is an                              where is an integer

                                 integer

13. amplitude: none; period:     15. amplitude: 2; period: 2;       17. amplitude: 1; period: 12;
      midline:                         midline:                           phase shift: midline

19.                              21. period: horizontal shift: 23.                  period: 2;

                                                                    phase shift: 0

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1437

25.                                27. The views are different because 29.

                                        the period of the wave is

                                        Over a bigger domain, there
                                        will be more cycles of the
                                        graph.

31. On the approximate intervals                                   33.

35. This graph is periodic with a       37.                                  39.

     period of

41.                                43.                                  45.
47. False
                                   49. approximately 0.07 radians
1438

Chapter 9

Try It
9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to
Simplify Trigonometric Expressions

1.                                   2.

3.                                   4. This is a difference of squares formula:

5.

9.2 Sum and Difference Identities

1.                               2.      3.

4.                               5.

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas

1.                               2.

3.

4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1439

5.

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas

1.                               2.           3.

4.                               5.

9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations

1.                               2.           3.                            and

4.                               5.

9.1 Section Exercises            , are even.

1. All three functions, , , and
    This is because

     and                                      ,
                                                         7.
3. When   then                        5.                 13.
                                                         19.
          which is undefined.                            25.

9.                                    11.

15.                                   17.

21.                                   23.

27.                                   29. Answers will vary. Sample proof:

31. Answers will vary. Sample proof:
33. Answers will vary. Sample proof:
1440                                         37. False                     39. Proved with negative and
                                                                                 Pythagorean identities
35. False
41. True

9.2 Section Exercises                   3.                      so  is 5.
                                            odd.  is even.
1. The cofunction identities
    apply to complementary                  so
    angles. Viewing the two
    acute angles of a right
    triangle, if one of those
    angles measures the
    second angle measures
               Then
                                   The
    same holds for the other
    cofunction identities. The
    key is that the angles are
    complementary.

7.                                      9.                          11.

13.                                     15.                         17.

19.                                     21.

23.                                     25.                                27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              1441

29.                                     31.                                  33. They are the same.

35. They are the different, try              37. They are the same.          39. They are the different, try

41. They are different, try        43.                                45.    or 0.9659

47.                                49.

51.                                                53. True

55. True. Note that

                                 

     and expand the right hand
     side.

9.3 Section Exercises              3.                                 5. a)  b) c)

1. Use the Pythagorean                  multiplying the top and
    identities and isolate the
    squared term.                       bottom by                and

                                                   respectively.

7. a) b) c)

9.

11.                                13.                                15.
1442

17.                              19.            21. a)               b)  c)

23. a)  b) c)                    25.            27.

29.                              31.            33.

35.                                        37.

39.                              41.            43.
45.
51.                              47.            49.

55.                              53.

                                      57.

59.                                             61.

63.

9.4 Section Exercises            3. Answers will vary. There are 5.
                                     some equations that involve
1. Substitute   into cosine          a sum of two trig
   and   into sine and               expressions where when
                                     converted to a product are
    evaluate.                        easier to solve. For example:

                                                         When

                                     converting the numerator to
                                     a product the equation

                                     becomes:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             1443

7.                              9.                            11.

13.                             15.                           17.

19.                             21.                           23.

25.                             27.                           29.

31.

33.

35.

37.                                                           39.

41.                                43.                                  45. It is an identity.
                                49.                           51.
47. It is not an identity, but
                  is.           55. Start with                Make a substitution and let       and let
                                                     so           becomes
53.

                                     Since               and       we can solve for and in terms of x and y
                                                                     and get
                                     and substitute in for

57.                                                      59.

61.                                         63.
1444

9.5 Section Exercises                     3. If the sine or cosine function 5.
                                              has a coefficient of one,
1. There will not always be                   isolate the term on one side
    solutions to trigonometric                of the equals sign. If the
    function equations. For a                 number it is set equal to has
    basic example,                            an absolute value less than
                                              or equal to one, the
                                              equation has solutions,
                                              otherwise it does not. If the
                                              sine or cosine does not have
                                              a coefficient equal to one,
                                              still isolate the term but
                                              then divide both sides of the
                                              equation by the leading
                                              coefficient. Then, if the
                                              number it is set equal to has
                                              an absolute value greater
                                              than one, the equation has
                                              no solution.

7.                                        9.                               11.

13.                                       15.                              17.

19.                                       21.                              23.

25.                                       27.                              29.

31.                                            33.                         ,

                                                                                   ,

                                                                                      ,

                                                                                ,

                                                                                      ,

35.                                       37.                              39.

41.                                       43. There are no solutions.      45.           ,

47.                              ,            49. There are no solutions.       51. There are no solutions.

                                       ,

                                    ,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1445

53.               55.                          57.

59.                    61. ,        ,               63.  ,                     ,

                                       ,                    ,

65.               67. ,       ,                69. There are no solutions.

                                 ,

71.      ,        73.                          75.

            ,

            ,

77.                  79.                          81.
83.                  85.                          87. There are no solutions.
89.               91. There are no solutions.  93.
95.               97.                          99.
101.              103.                         105.

Review Exercises

1.    ,           3.                                5.

            ,

            ,

7.                9. Yes                            11.

13.
1446

15.

17.                                 19.        21.
                                               27.
23.                                 25.
                                               33.
29.                                 31.        39.
35.                                 37.        45. No solution
41.                                 43.
47.                                 49.  5.
                                         11.
Practice Test                    3.      17.
                                 9.      23.
1. 1                             15.
7.                               21.
13.
19.                              27.

25.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1447

29.                                        31. Amplitude: , period: , 33. Amplitude: 8, fast period:

35.                                        frequency: 60 Hz  , fast frequency: 500
      , 31 second
                                                             Hz, slow period: , slow

                                                             frequency: 10 Hz

Chapter 10

Try It
10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines

1.                         2. Solution 1         3.

                               Solution 2

4. two                     5. about square feet  6. 161.9 yd.
                                                 3. Area = 552 square feet
10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines
                                                          3.
1.                         2.

4. about 8.15 square feet

10.3 Polar Coordinates

1.                             2.
1448

4.                                  5.           or, in the

                                        standard form for a circle,

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs

1. The equation fails the           2. Tests will reveal symmetry    3.

    symmetry test with respect          about the polar axis. The

    to the line  and with               zero is  and the

    respect to the pole. It passes      maximum value is
    the polar axis symmetry
    test.

4. The graph is a rose curve,           5.                                   6.

    even

                                            Rose curve, odd

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers

1.                                      2. 13                            3.

4.                                  5.                               6.

7.                                      8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1449

10.6 Parametric Equations

1.                         2.      3.

4.            5.                   6.

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs           3. The graph of the parametric
                                                equations is in red and the
1.                         2.                   graph of the rectangular
                                                equation is drawn in blue dots
                                                on top of the parametric
                                                equations.

10.8 Vectors

1.                         2.      3.
1450

4.
    Magnitude =

10.1 Section Exercises              3. When the known values are      5. A triangle with two given
                                        the side opposite the             sides and a non-included
1. The altitude extends from            missing angle and another         angle.
    any vertex to the opposite          side and its opposite angle.
    side or to the line containing
    the opposite side at a 90°
    angle.

7.                                  9.                                11.

13.                                 15. one triangle,                 17. two triangles,

                                                                                                     or

19. two triangles,                          21. two triangles,             23. no triangle possible
                                    or

                                                  or

25.             or                  27.                               29.
                                                                      35.
31.                                 33.                               41.

37.                                 39.                                      47.
                                                                      53.
43.                                      45.
                                                                            59. 51.4 feet
49.                                 51.                               65. 5.6 km

55.                                 57.                               71. 24.1 ft
                                                                      77. 8.65 ft2
61. The distance from the           63. 2.6 ft
      satellite to station is
      approximately 1716 miles.
      The satellite is
      approximately 1706 miles
      above the ground.

67. 371 ft                          69. 5936 ft

73. 19,056 ft2                      75. 445,624 square miles

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 1451

10.2 Section Exercises          3. is the semi-perimeter,        5. The Law of Cosines must be
                                    which is half the perimeter      used for any oblique (non-
1. two sides and the angle          of the triangle.                 right) triangle.
    opposite the missing side.

7. 11.3                         9. 34.7                          11. 26.7

13. 257.4                       15. not possible                 17. 95.5°

19. 26.9°                       21.                              23.

25.                                  27. 177.56 in2              29. 0.04 m2

31. 0.91 yd2                    33. 3.0                          35. 29.1

37. 0.5                         39. 70.7°                        41. 77.4°

43. 25.0                        45. 9.3                          47. 43.52

49. 1.41                        51. 0.14                         53. 18.3

55. 48.98                       57.                              59. 7.62

61. 85.1                        63. 24.0 km                      65. 99.9 ft
67. 37.3 miles                  69. 2371 miles                   71.

73. 292.4 miles                 75. 65.4 cm2                     77. 468 ft2
1452

10.3 Section Exercises            3. Determine for the point,        5. The point        has a
                                      then move units from the
1. For polar coordinates, the         pole to plot the point. If is       positive angle but a negative
    point in the plane depends        negative, move units from           radius and is plotted by
    on the angle from the             the pole in the opposite            moving to an angle of
    positive x-axis and distance      direction but along the
    from the origin, while in         same angle. The point is a          and then moving 3 units in
    Cartesian coordinates, the        distance of away from the
    point represents the              origin at an angle of from          the negative direction. This
    horizontal and vertical           the polar axis.
    distances from the origin.                                            places the point 3 units
    For each point in the
    coordinate plane, there is                                            down the negative y-axis.
    one representation, but for
    each point in the polar                                               The point      has a
    plane, there are infinite
    representations.                                                      negative angle and a
                                                                          positive radius and is plotted
                                                                          by first moving to an angle
                                                                          of and then moving 3

                                                                          units down, which is the
                                                                          positive direction for a
                                                                          negative angle. The point is
                                                                          also 3 units down the
                                                                          negative y-axis.

7.                                9.                                 11.

13.                               15.                                17.

19.                               21.                                23.

25.                               27.                                29.             or

                                                                                         circle

31.   line                        33.  line                          35.       hyperbola

37.   circle                      39.        line                    41.

43.                               45.                                     47.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                1453

49.  51.                       53.

55.  57.                       59.

61.  63.                       65.

67.  69.                  71.

73.  75. A vertical line with units 77. A horizontal line with

     left of the y-axis.  units below the x-axis.

79.  81.                       83.
1454

10.4 Section Exercises

1. Symmetry with respect to      3. Test for symmetry; find      5. The shape of the polar
                                     zeros, intercepts, and          graph is determined by
the polar axis is similar to         maxima; make a table of         whether or not it includes a
                                     values. Decide the general      sine, a cosine, and constants
symmetry about the -axis,            type of graph, cardioid,        in the equation.
                                     limaçon, lemniscate, etc.,
symmetry with respect to             then plot points at
                                                       and and
the pole is similar to
                                     sketch the graph.
symmetry about the origin,

and symmetric with respect

to the line      is similar

to symmetry about the
 -axis.

7. symmetric with respect to     9. symmetric with respect to    11. no symmetry
    the polar axis                   the polar axis, symmetric
                                     with respect to the line
                                                symmetric with

                                     respect to the pole

13. no symmetry                  15. symmetric with respect to   17. circle
                                       the pole

19. cardioid                     21. cardioid                     23. one-loop/dimpled limaçon

25. one-loop/dimpled limaçon     27. inner loop/two-loop limaçon  29. inner loop/two-loop limaçon

Access for free at openstax.org
31. inner loop/two-loop limaçon    33. lemniscate                                                                                       1455

                                                                       35. lemniscate

37. rose curve                     39. rose curve                      41. Archimedes' spiral

43. Archimedes' spiral             45.                                 47.

49.                                51.                                 53.

55. They are both spirals, but     57. Both graphs are curves          59. When the width of the
      not quite the same.                with 2 loops. The equation          domain is increased, more
                                         with a coefficient of has           petals of the flower are
                                         two loops on the left, the          visible.
                                         equation with a coefficient
                                         of 2 has two loops side by
                                         side. Graph these from 0 to
                                             to get a better picture.

61. The graphs are three-petal, 63. The graphs are spirals. The 65.

     rose curves. The larger the   smaller the coefficient, the

     coefficient, the greater the  tighter the spiral.

     curve's distance from the

     pole.
1456

67.                              69.                                   71.

                                                                             and at      since
                                                                             is squared

10.5 Section Exercises           3. Polar form converts the real  5.
                                                                      It is used to simplify polar
1. a is the real part, b is the       and imaginary part of the       form when a number has
    imaginary part, and                                               been raised to a power.

                                      complex number in polar

                                      form using       and

7.                               9.                               11.

13.                              15.                              17.

19.                              21.                              23.

25.                              27.                              29.

31.                              33.                              35.

37.                              39.                              41.

43.                                               45.

47.                                   49.                              51.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1457

53.                                     55.                            57.

59.                                61.

10.6 Section Exercises             3. Choose one equation to      5. Some equations cannot be
                                       solve for substitute into      written as functions, like a
1. A pair of functions that is         the other equation and         circle. However, when
    dependent on an external           simplify.                      written as two parametric
    factor. The two functions are                                     equations, separately the
    written in terms of the same                                      equations are functions.
    parameter. For example,
                 and

7.                                 9.                             11.       or

13.                                15.                            17.

19.                                21.                            23.

25.                                27.                            29.

31.                                33.                            35.           Ellipse

37.          Circle 39.                                           41.
43. yes, at                                                       47. answers may vary:
                         45.
                                 1 -3 1
                                 20 7
                                 3 5 17
1458

49. answers may vary: ,

10.7 Section Exercises           3. The arrows show the             5. The parametric equations
                                     orientation, the direction of      show the different vertical
1. plotting points with the          motion according to                and horizontal motions over
    orientation arrow and a          increasing values of               time.
    graphing calculator

7.                               9.                                 11.

13.                              15.                                17.

19.                              21.                                23.

25.                              27.                                29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1459

31.                              33.                       35.

37.                              39. There will be 100 back-and- 41. Take the opposite of the

                                      forth motions.            equation.

43. The parabola opens up.  45.                       47.
1460

49.                                   51.       53.

55.                              57.       59.

61. The -intercept changes.      63.       65.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1461

67. approximately 3.2 seconds 69. 1.6 seconds               71.

73.

10.8 Section Exercises      3. They are unit vectors. They  5. The first number always
                                are used to represent the       represents the coefficient of
1. lowercase, bold letter,      horizontal and vertical         the and the second
    usually                     components of a vector.         represents the
                                They each have a magnitude
                                of 1.

7.                          9. not equal                    11. equal

13. equal                   15.                             17.

19.                                            21.

23.                         25.                             27.

29.                         31.                             33.

35.                         37.                                  39.
1462

41.                                   43.                                 45.

47.                              49.                                 51.

53.                              55.  58.7  12.5                57.            pounds,

                                                                     pounds

59.           pounds,            61. 4.635 miles, 17.764° N of E 63. 17 miles. 10.318 miles

      pounds

65. Distance: 2.868. Direction:  67. 4.924°. 659 km/hr          69. 4.424°
      86.474° North of West, or
      3.526° West of North

71.                              73. 21.801°, relative to the car's 75. parallel: 16.28,

                                      forward direction              perpendicular: 47.28

                                                                     pounds

77. 19.35 pounds, 231.54° from   79. 5.1583 pounds, 75.8° from
      the horizontal                   the horizontal

Review Exercises

1. Not possible                  3.                             5. distance of the plane from
                                                                    point 2.2 km, elevation
                                                                    of the plane: 1.6 km

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     1463

7.   9. 40.6 km  11.

13.  15.         17.

19.  21.              23. symmetric with respect to
                            the line

25.       27.              29. 5

31.  33.         35.

37.  39.         41.

43.       45.         47.
1464

49.                                   51. a.

                                          b. The ball is 14 feet high and 184 feet
                                               from where it was launched.

                                          c. 3.3 seconds

53. not equal                    55. 4i       57.         i                         j
                                 61.
59. Magnitude:                                63.
      Direction:

Practice Test

1.                               3.           5.
                                                     11.
7.                                    9.

13.                              15.          17.

Access for free at openstax.org
19.                               21.                                                                                                           1465

                                                                        23. -4i - 15j

25.

Chapter 11

Try It

11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables

1. Not a solution.                2. The solution to the system is      3.

                                       the ordered pair

4.                                5.                                6. No solution. It is an
                                                                        inconsistent system.

7. The system is dependent so     8. 700 children, 950 adults
    there are infinite solutions
    of the form

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables

1.                                2. No solution.                   3. Infinite number of solutions

                                                                        of the form

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables

1.   and                          2.                                3.
1466

4.

11.4 Partial Fractions

1.                               2.             3.

4.

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations

1.                                   2.

11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination

1.                               2.             3.

4.                               5.             6. $150,000 at 7%, $750,000 at
                                                    8%, $600,000 at 10%

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses

1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           1467

2.                                  3.                                4.

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule

1.                                  2.                                3.

11.1 Section Exercises              3. This means there is no         5. You can solve by
                                        realistic break-even point.       substitution (isolating or
1. No, you can either have              By the time the company           ), graphically, or by addition.
    zero, one, or infinitely many.      produces one unit they are
    Examine graphs.                     already making profit.

7. Yes                              9. Yes                            11.

13.                                 15.                               17. No solutions exist.

19.                                 21.                               23.

25. No solutions exist.             27.                               29.

31.                                 33.                               35.

37.                                 39.                               41. Consistent with one
                                                                            solution
43. Consistent with one             45. Dependent with infinitely
      solution                            many solutions              47.

49.                                 51.                               53.

55.                                 57. They never turn a profit.     59.

61. The numbers are 7.5 and         63. 24,000                        65. 790 second-year students,
      20.5.                                                                 805 first-year students

67. 56 men, 74 women                69. 10 gallons of 10% solution,   71. Swan Peak: $750,000,
                                          15 gallons of 60% solution        Riverside: $350,000

73. $12,500 in the first account,   75. High-tops: 45, Low-tops: 15   77. Infinitely many solutions.
      $10,500 in the second                                                 We need more information.
      account.
1468

11.2 Section Exercises            3. Not necessarily. There could     5. Every system of equations
                                                                          can be solved graphically, by
1. No, there can be only one,          be zero, one, or infinitely        substitution, and by
    zero, or infinitely many                                              addition. However, systems
    solutions.                         many solutions. For                of three equations become
                                                                          very complex to solve
                                       example,   is not a                graphically so other
                                                                          methods are usually
                                       solution to the system             preferable.

                                       below, but that does not

                                       mean that it has no solution.

7. No                             9. Yes                              11.
13.
                                  15.                                 17.

19.                               21.                                 23. No solutions exist

25.                               27.                                 29.

31.                               33.                                 35.

37.                               39.                                 41.

43.                               45.                                 47.

49.                               51. 24, 36, 48                      53. 70 grandparents, 140

                                                                           parents, 190 children

55. Your share was $19.95,        57. There are infinitely many       59. 500 students, 225 children,
      Shani's share was $40, and        solutions; we need more             and 450 adults
      your other roommate's             information
      share was $22.05.

61. The BMW was $49,636, the      63. $400,000 in the account         65. The United States
      Jeep was $42,636, and the         that pays 3% interest,              consumed 26.3%, Japan
      Toyota was $47,727.               $500,000 in the account             7.1%, and China 6.4% of the
                                        that pays 4% interest, and          world's oil.
                                        $100,000 in the account
                                        that pays 2% interest.

67. Saudi Arabia imported         69. Birds were 19.3%, fish were
      16.8%, Canada imported            18.6%, and mammals were
      15.1%, and Mexico 15.0%           17.1% of endangered
                                        species

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1469

11.3 Section Exercises              3. No. There does not need to      5. Choose any number
                                        be a feasible region.
1. A nonlinear system could be          Consider a system that is      between each solution and
    representative of two circles       bounded by two parallel
    that overlap and intersect in       lines. One inequality          plug into  and          If
    two locations, hence two            represents the region above
    solutions. A nonlinear              the upper line; the other                 then there is
    system could be                     represents the region below
    representative of a parabola        the lower line. In this case,  profit.
    and a circle, where the             no points in the plane are
    vertex of the parabola              located in both regions;
    meets the circle and the            hence there is no feasible
    branches also intersect the         region.
    circle, hence three solutions.

7.                                  9.                                 11.

13.                                 15.                                17.

19.                                                                        21.
                                                                       27. No Solutions Exist
23.                                 25.
                                                                                  39.
29. No Solutions Exist              31.

33.                                 35.

37.

41.                                      43.                                45.
1470

47.

49.

51. No Solution Exists           53.  and                    55. 12, 288

57. 2-20 computers

11.4 Section Exercises           3. Graph both sides and     5. If we choose        then
                                     ensure they are equal.
1. No, a quotient of                                         the B-term disappears,
    polynomials can only be
    decomposed if the                                        letting us immediately know
    denominator can be
    factored. For example,                                   that         We could

    cannot be decomposed                                     alternatively plug in
    because the denominator
    cannot be factored.                                                 , giving us a B-value

                                                             of

7.                               9.                          11.
                                                             17.
13.                              15.                         23.
                                                             29.
19.                              21.                         35.
                                                             41.
25.                              27.                         47.
                                                             53.
31.                              33.
                                                                   59.
37.                              39.

43.                              45.

49.                              51.

55.                              57.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            1471

11.5 Section Exercises                     3. Yes, if the dimensions of   5. Not necessarily. To find
                                                                              we multiply the first row of
1. No, they must have the                       are       and the                by the first column of to
    same dimensions. An                                                       get the first entry of To
    example would include two                   dimensions of are             find we multiply the
    matrices of different                                                     first row of by the first
    dimensions. One cannot add                  both products will be         column of to get the first
    the following two matrices                                                entry of Thus, if those
    because the first is a                      defined.                      are unequal, then the matrix
    matrix and the second is a                                                multiplication does not
            matrix.                                                           commute.

                                   has no

    sum.

7.                                         9.                             11. Undidentified; dimensions

                                                                               do not match

13.                                        15.                            17.

19.                                        21.                            23.

25. Undefined; dimensions do 27.                                          29.

     not match.

31.                                        33. Undefined; inner           35.

                                                dimensions do not match.

37.                                        39.                            41.

43.                                        45.                            47.

49.                                        51.                            53.
1472

55.                                 57.                                                                

                                                                            59.

                                                                                                       

11.6 Section Exercises              3. No, there are numerous               5. No. A matrix with 0 entries
                                        correct methods of using                for an entire row would have
1. Yes. For each row, the               row operations on a matrix.             either zero or infinitely
    coefficients of the variables       Two possible ways are the               many solutions.
    are written across the              following: (1) Interchange
    corresponding row, and a            rows 1 and 2. Then
    vertical bar is placed; then                               (2)
    the constants are placed to                                Then divide
    the right of the vertical bar.      row 1 by 9.

7.                                  9.                                      11.

13.                                 15.                                     17. No solutions

19.                                 21.                                     23.
                                                                            29.
25.                                 27.
                                                                            35.
31.                                 33.
                                                                            41.
37.                                 39.
                                                                            47.
43.                                 45.                                     53. 860 red velvet, 1,340

49.                                 51. No solutions exist.                       chocolate
                                                                            59. Banana was 3%, pumpkin
55. 4% for account 1, 6% for        57. $126
      account 2                                                                   was 7%, and rocky road
                                                                                  was 2%

61. 100 almonds, 200 cashews,
      600 pistachios

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           1473

11.7 Section Exercises

1. If      is the inverse of    3. No, because and are           5. Yes. Consider the matrix      The
                                    both 0, so
     then        the identity       which requires us to divide       inverse is found with the following
                                    by 0 in the formula.              calculation:
     matrix. Since is also the

     inverse of

     You can also check by

     proving this for a

     matrix.

7.                              9.                               11.

13.                             15.                              17. There is no inverse

19.                             21.                              23.

25.                             27.                              29.

31.                             33.                              35.

37.                             39.                              41.

43.                             45.                              47.

49.                             51.                              53. Infinite solutions.

55. 50% oranges, 25%            57. 10 straw hats, 50 beanies,   59. Micah ate 6, Joe ate 3, and
      bananas, 20% apples             40 cowboy hats                   Albert ate 3.

61. 124 oranges, 10 lemons, 8
      pomegranates
1474

11.8 Section Exercises

1. A determinant is the sum        3. The inverse does not exist. 5.

     and products of the entries

     in the matrix, so you can

     always evaluate that

     product--even if it does end

     up being 0.

7.                                 9.                              11.

13.                                15.                             17.

19.                                21.                             23.

25.                                27.                             29.

31.                                33.                             35.

37.                                39.                             41.

43. Infinite solutions             45.                             47.
49. Yes; 18, 38                    51. Yes; 33, 36, 37
                                                                   53. $7,000 in first account,
55. 120 children, 1,080 adult      57. 4 gal yellow, 6 gal blue          $3,000 in second account.

61. Strawberries 18%, oranges      63. 100 for movie 1, 230 for    59. 13 green tomatoes, 17 red
      9%, kiwi 10%                       movie 2, 312 for movie 3        tomatoes

                                                                   65. 300 almonds, 400
                                                                         cranberries, 300 cashews

Review Exercises

1. No                              3.                              5.
                                                                   11. Infinite solutions
7. No solutions exist.             9.                              17.
                                                                   23. No solution
13. No solutions exist.            15.

19. 11, 17, 33                     21.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1475

25. No solution               27.                                29.

31.                           33.                        35.

37.                           39.                        41. undefined; dimensions do
                                                               not match
43. undefined; inner          45.
                                                         47.

     dimensions do not match

49. undefined; inner          51.             with infinite 53.

     dimensions do not match       solutions

55.                           57. No solutions exist.    59. No solutions exist.

61.                           63. No inverse exists.     65.
67.                                                      71. 0
                              69. 17% oranges, 34%       77. (x, 5x + 3)
73. 6                               bananas, 39% apples
79.
                              75.
Practice Test
                              3. No solutions exist.     5.
1. Yes
7.                            9.
1476

11.                                    13.                            15.

17.                               19.                            21.
                                                                 27.
23. No solutions exist.           25.

29. 32 or more cell phones per
      day

Chapter 12

Try It
12.1 The Ellipse

1.                                2.                             3. center:        vertices:
                                                                     co-vertices:          foci:

4. Standard form:                      5. Center:     vertices:       6.
                                           and     co-vertices:
     center:       vertices:                                              center:         vertices:
     co-vertices:          foci:                      and                            and     co-

                                                   foci:         and      vertices:       and

                                                                          foci:                  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      1477

7. 
   The people are standing

    358 feet apart.

12.2 The Hyperbola

1. Vertices:           Foci:         2.                          3.

4. vertices:           co-vertices:      5. center:              vertices:          6. The sides of the tower can be
                foci:                                    and          co-vertices:      modeled by the hyperbolic
                                                            and             foci:       equation.
    asymptotes:
                                                                   and

                                                                 asymptotes:

12.3 The Parabola

1. Focus:              Directrix:        2. Focus:  Directrix:                      3.

Endpoints of the latus rectum:           Endpoints of the latus rectum:
1478

4. Vertex:        Axis of               5. Vertex:       Axis of        6. 
                                                                           The depth of the cooker
    symmetry:            Focus:         symmetry:               Focus:
                                                                            is 500 mm
             Directrix:                             Directrix:

    Endpoints of the latus rectum:      Endpoints of the latus rectum:

             and                                    and

12.4 Rotation of Axes

1.  hyperbola  ellipse              2.                                  3.  hyperbola  ellipse

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates                                    3.

1. ellipse;                         2.

4.

12.1 Section Exercises              3. This special case would be a     5. It is symmetric about the
                                        circle.                             x-axis, y-axis, and the origin.
1. An ellipse is the set of all
    points in the plane the sum
    of whose distances from two
    fixed points, called the foci,
    is a constant.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            1479

7. yes;                                   9. yes;                              11.              Endpoints of

                                                                                    major axis  and

                                                                                           Endpoints of minor

                                                                                    axis   and            Foci

                                                                                    at

13.                                       15.                                  17.

      Endpoints of major axis                  Endpoints of major axis               Endpoints of major axis
              and                                                                                             Endpoints of
                                                              Endpoints of
      Endpoints of minor axis                                                        minor axis
                               Foci at         minor axis                Foci        Foci at

                                               at

19.                                       21.                                       23.                   Endpoints
                                                Endpoints of major axis
      Endpoints of major axis                   Endpoints of minor axis                  of major axis
                           Endpoints of                                                  Endpoints of minor axis

      minor axis                                                                                                Foci at
      Foci at

                                               Foci at

25.        Endpoints of                             27. Foci

     major axis
     Endpoints of minor axis

                                 Foci at

29. Focus                                 31. Foci                             33. Center       Vertices
                                                                                     Foci
1480        Vertices                  37. Center  Vertices

35. Center                                 Focus
      Foci
                                           Note that this ellipse is a circle.
                                           The circle has only one focus,
                                           which coincides with the center.

39. Center  Vertices                  41. Center  Vertices                      43. Center     Vertices
      Foci                                  Foci                                      Foci

45. Center  Vertices                  47.                            49.

     Focus

51.                              53.                        55.

57.                              59.              square units. 61.             square units.

63.                              65.              . Distance = 67. Approximately 51.96 feet

                                      17.32 feet

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    1481

12.2 Section Exercises                   3. The foci must lie on the                 5. The center must be the
                                             transverse axis and be in the               midpoint of the line
1. A hyperbola is the set of                 interior of the hyperbola.                  segment joining the foci.
    points in a plane the
    difference of whose
    distances from two fixed
    points (foci) is a positive
    constant.

7. yes                                   9. yes                                      11.               vertices:

                                                                                                       foci:

                                                                                          asymptotes:

13.                vertices:             15.                              vertices:

                   foci:                                           foci:
                                              asymptotes:

     asymptotes:

17.                           vertices:       19.                                vertices:
      asymptotes:         foci:
                                                                          foci:

                                                   asymptotes:

21.                       vertices:                23.                              vertices:
                                                         asymptotes:             foci:
                   foci:

     asymptotes:

25.                       vertices:                27.

                   foci:

     asymptotes:
1482

29.                                        31.

33.                                   35.            37.

39.                                   41.            43.

45.                              47.            49.

51.                              53.            55.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1483

57.                                          59.

61.                                     63.                      65.

67.                                69.

12.3 Section Exercises             3. The graph will open down.  5. The distance between the
                                                                     focus and directrix will
1. A parabola is the set of                                          increase.
    points in the plane that lie
    equidistant from a fixed
    point, the focus, and a fixed
    line, the directrix.

7. yes                             9. yes

11.                                               13.

15.                                                    17.

19.
1484

21.
23.
25.

27.

29.                                        31.

33.                                   35.            37.

39.                                   41.            43.

45.                              47.            49.

51.                              53.            55.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1485

57.                               59.                            61.

63. At the point 2.25 feet above  65. 0.5625 feet                67.
      the vertex.                                                      height is 7.2 feet

69. 2304 feet

12.4 Section Exercises            3. The conic section is a      5. It gives the angle of rotation
                                      hyperbola.                     of the axes in order to
1. The term causes a                                                 eliminate the term.
    rotation of the graph to
    occur.

7.   parabola                     9.                  hyperbola  11.           ellipse

13.            parabola           15.                 parabola   17.

                                                                      ellipse

19.                               21.

23.                                              25.

27.                                              29.

31.                                    33.                            35.

37.                                         39.
1486

41.                                    43.                                45.

47.                                    49.                                51.

53.                                    55.                                57.

59.

12.5 Section Exercises                 3. The directrix will be parallel  5. One of the foci will be
                                           to the polar axis.                 located at the origin.
1. If eccentricity is less than 1,
    it is an ellipse. If eccentricity
    is equal to 1, it is a parabola.
    If eccentricity is greater than
    1, it is a hyperbola.

7. Parabola with  and                  9. Hyperbola with  and             11. Parabola with   and

     directrix units below the         directrix units above the          directrix units to the

     pole.                             pole.                              right of the pole.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1487

13. Ellipse with  and              15. Hyperbola with  and     17. Hyperbola with       and

     directrix units to the right       directrix units above       directrix units to the
     of the pole.
                                        the pole.                   right of the pole.

19.                                21.                         23.

25.                                27.                         29.

31.                                     33.                         35.

37.                                     39.                         41.

43.                                45.                         47.

49.                                51.                         53.

55.                                57.                         59.

Review Exercises

1.                center:
    vertices:

     foci:
1488

3.

5. center:     vertices:              7. center:         vertices:               9.

     foci:                            foci:

11. Approximately 35.71 feet     13.                     center:                 15.
                                       foci:                                           center:
                                              vertices:
                                                                                  21.
                                                                                                vertices:
                                                                                                 foci:

17.                                   19.

23.                              25.                           vertex: 27.
                                                  focus:
      vertex:  focus:
                                                   directrix:
               directrix:

29.                                   31.                                   33.                 parabola

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1489

35.                               37.                                         39.

     ellipse

41. Hyperbola with     and 43. Ellipse with                   and             45.

     directrix units to the left       directrix              unit above the
     of the pole.                      pole.

47.                                    49.

Practice Test

1.            center:             3. center:                  vertices:            5.

     vertices:
                                                       foci:

     foci:
1490

7.                center:        9. center:        vertices:  11.

     vertices foci: foci:

     asymptotes:                      asymptotes:

13.                              15.                          17. Approximately        feet

      vertex:         focus:
               directrix:

19. parabola;                    21.                          23. Hyperbola with           and

                                                                   directrix units to the

                                                                   right of the pole.

25.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 1491

Chapter 13

Try It

13.1 Sequences and Their Notations

1. The first five terms are   2. The first five terms are           3. The first six terms are

4.                            5.                                    6.

7.                            8.                                    9. The first five terms are

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences

1. The sequence is arithmetic. 2. The sequence is not               3.

    The common difference is      arithmetic because

4.                            5.                                    6.

7. There are 11 terms in the  8. The formula is
    sequence.                                          and it will

                                  take her 42 minutes.

13.3 Geometric Sequences

1. The sequence is not        2. The sequence is geometric. 3.
    geometric because             The common ratio is .
    .

4.                            5.                                    6.

7. 
   The number of hits will

    be about 333.

13.4 Series and Their Notations

1. 38                         2.                                    3.
                                                                    6.
4.                            5. $2,025                             9. The sum is not defined.

7. 9,840                      8. $275,513.31
1492

10. The sum of the infinite       11. The sum of the infinite         12. 3
      series is defined.                series is defined.            15. $32,775.87

13. The series is not geometric. 14.

13.5 Counting Principles

1. 7                              2. There are 60 possible            3. 120
                                      breakfast specials.             6.
                                                                      9. 64 sundaes
4. 60                             5. 12
                                                                                           3.
7.                                8.
                                                                      3.
10. 840

13.6 Binomial Theorem

1.  35  330                       2. 

                                      

13.7 Probability

1.                                2.

      Outcome Probability

       Heads

       Tails

4.                                5.                                  6.

13.1 Section Exercises            3. Yes, both sets go on             5. A factorial is the product of a positive
                                      indefinitely, so they are both      integer and all the positive integers below
1. A sequence is an ordered list      infinite sequences.                 it. An exclamation point is used to indicate
    of numbers that can be                                                the operation. Answers may vary. An
    either finite or infinite in                                          example of the benefit of using factorial
    number. When a finite                                                 notation is when indicating the product It
    sequence is defined by a                                              is much easier to write than it is to write
    formula, its domain is a                                              out
    subset of the non-negative
    integers. When an infinite
    sequence is defined by a
    formula, its domain is all
    positive or all non-negative
    integers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  1493

7. First four terms:                9. First four terms:            11. First four terms:
                                                              .                                            .
13. First four terms:
                            .       15. First four terms:           17.

19.                                                         21.     27. First five terms:
23.                                 25.

29. First five terms:               31.

33.                                        35.                             37.
39.                                 41.                             43. First four terms:
45. First four terms:               47.
                                                                          49.

51.                                      53.                                55.

57. First five terms: , ,           59. First five terms: 2, 3, 5, 17, 61.
                                          65537
     ,  ,

63. First six terms: 0.042, 0.146,  65. First four terms: 5.975,    67. If                is a term in
      0.875, 2.385, 4.708                 2.765, 185.743, 1057.25,
                                          6023.521                          the sequence, then solving

                                                                            the equation

                                                                                           for will

                                                                            yield a non-negative

                                                                            integer. However, if

                                                                                           then

                                                                                 so                           is

                                                                            not a term in the sequence.

69.                                      71.
1494

13.2 Section Exercises           3. We find whether the         5. Both arithmetic sequences
                                     difference between all         and linear functions have a
1. A sequence where each             consecutive terms is the       constant rate of change.
    successive term of the           same. This is the same as      They are different because
    sequence increases (or           saying that the sequence       their domains are not the
    decreases) by a constant         has a common difference.       same; linear functions are
    value.                                                          defined for all real numbers,
                                                                    and arithmetic sequences
7. The common difference is      9. The sequence is not             are defined for natural
                                     arithmetic because             numbers or a subset of the
                                                                    natural numbers.

                                                                11.

13.                              15.                            17.

19.                              21.                            23.

25.                              27.                                 29.

31.                                   33.

35.                                   37.

39.                                   41. First five terms:          43.

45.                              47.                            49.

51.                              53. There are 10 terms in the  55. There are 6 terms in the
                                       sequence.                      sequence.
57. The graph does not
      represent an arithmetic    59.                                  61.
      sequence.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         1495

63.                                 65.                               67. Answers will vary.

                                                                      Examples:                     and

69.                         71. The sequence begins to           73. Answers will vary. Check to

                                    have negative values at the       see that the sequence is

                                    13th term,                        arithmetic. Example:

                                                                      Recursive formula:

                                                                      First 4 terms:

13.3 Section Exercises      3. Divide each term in a             5. Both geometric sequences
                                sequence by the preceding            and exponential functions
1. A sequence in which the      term. If the resulting               have a constant ratio.
    ratio between any two       quotients are equal, then            However, their domains are
    consecutive terms is        the sequence is geometric.           not the same. Exponential
    constant.                                                        functions are defined for all
                                                                     real numbers, and
                                                                     geometric sequences are
                                                                     defined only for positive
                                                                     integers. Another difference
                                                                     is that the base of a
                                                                     geometric sequence (the
                                                                     common ratio) can be
                                                                     negative, but the base of an
                                                                     exponential function must
                                                                     be positive.

7. The common ratio is      9. The sequence is geometric.        11. The sequence is geometric.
                                The common ratio is 2.                 The common ratio is

13. The sequence is geometric. 15.                               17.

     The common ratio is

19.                         21.                                  23.

25.                         27.                                  29.

31.                         33.                                  35.
1496

37.                              39.                                41.

43.                              45. There are terms in the         47. The graph does not

                                      sequence.                          represent a geometric

                                                                         sequence.

49.                                   51. Answers will vary.             53.

                                      Examples:

                                      and

55. The sequence exceeds         57.             is the first non-  59. Answers will vary. Example:
      at the 14th term,                                                   Explicit formula with a decimal
                                      integer value                       common ratio:
                                                                                                     First 4
                                                                          terms:

13.4 Section Exercises           3. A geometric series is the       5. An annuity is a series of
                                     sum of the terms in a              regular equal payments that
1. An partial sum is the             geometric sequence.                earn a constant
    sum of the first terms of a                                         compounded interest.
    sequence.

7.                               9.                                 11.

13.                              15.                                17.

19.                                   21.

23. The series is defined.       25. The series is defined.         27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        1497

29. Sample answer: The graph     31. 49                             33. 254
      of seems to be
      approaching 1. This makes
                            

      sense because

      is a defined infinite
      geometric series with

35.                              37.                                39.
41.                              43.                                45.
47. $3,705.42                    49. $695,823.97                    51.
53. 9 terms                      55.                                57. $400 per month
59. 420 feet                     61. 12 feet

13.5 Section Exercises

1. There are        ways for     3. The addition principle is       5. A combination;
    either event  or event to        applied when determining
    occur.                           the total possible of
                                     outcomes of either event
                                     occurring. The multiplication
                                     principle is applied when
                                     determining the total
                                     possible outcomes of both
                                     events occurring. The word
                                     "or" usually implies an
                                     addition problem. The word
                                     "and" usually implies a
                                     multiplication problem.

7.                               9.                                 11.

13.                              15.                                17.

19.                              21.                                23.

25.                              27.                                29.

31.                              33.                                35. 9
1498

37. Yes, for the trivial cases       39.                            41.

            and       If

      then

                           If

            then

43.                                  45.                            47.

49.                                         51.                               53.

13.6 Section Exercises

1. A binomial coefficient is an      3. The Binomial Theorem is     5. 15
                                         defined as
     alternative way of denoting
                                         and can be used to expand
     the combination             It      any binomial.

     is defined as

7. 35                                9. 10                          11. 12,376

13.                                  15.

17.

19.                                                                 21.

23.                                  25.

27.                                                                      29.

31.                                  33.                            35.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1499

37.                                     39.       41.

43.                                          45.       47.

49. The expression

                             cannot be
      expanded using the
      Binomial Theorem because
      it cannot be rewritten as a
      binomial.
1500

13.7 Section Exercises            3. An experiment is an activity  5. The probability of the union
                                      with an observable result.
1. probability; The probability                                         of two events occurring is a
    of an event is restricted to
    values between and                                                  number that describes the
    inclusive of and
                                                                        likelihood that at least one

                                                                        of the events from a

                                                                        probability model occurs. In

                                                                        both a union of sets

                                                                                and a union of

                                                                        events           the union

                                                                        includes either           or

                                                                        both. The difference is that a

                                                                        union of sets results in

                                                                        another set, while the union

                                                                        of events is a probability, so

                                                                        it is always a numerical

                                                                        value between and

7.                                9.                               11.

13.                               15.                              17.

19.                               21.                              23.

25.                               27.                              29.

31.                               33.                                           35.

                                       123456

                                       1 (1,1) (1,2) (1,3) (1,4) (1,5) (1,6)
                                             234567

                                       2 (2,1) (2,2) (2,3) (2,4) (2,5) (2,6)
                                             345678

                                       3 (3,1) (3,2) (3,3) (3,4) (3,5) (3,6)
                                             456789

                                       4 (4,1) (4,2) (4,3) (4,4) (4,5) (4,6)
                                             5 6 7 8 9 10

                                       5 (5,1) (5,2) (5,3) (5,4) (5,5) (5,6)
                                             6 7 8 9 10 11

                                       6 (6,1) (6,2) (6,3) (6,4) (6,5) (6,6)
                                             7 8 9 10 11 12

37.                               39.                              41.

43.                               45.                              47.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1501

49.               51.                       53.

55.                             57.

59.

Review Exercises

1.                3.                        5. The sequence is arithmetic.
                                                The common difference is

7.                9.                        11.
                                            17.
13.               15. 4, 16, 64, 256, 1024  23.
                                            29. $5,617.61
19.               21.                       35.
                                            41.
25.               27.
                                                 51.
31. 6             33.

37.               39.

43.               45.

47.                             49.

       123456

     1 1,1 1,2 1,3 1,4 1,5 1,6

     2 2,1 2,2 2,3 2,4 2,5 2,6

     3 3,1 3,2 3,3 3,4 3,5 3,6

     4 4,1 4,2 4,3 4,4 4,5 4,6

     5 5,1 5,2 5,3 5,4 5,5 5,6

     6 6,1 6,2 6,3 6,4 6,5 6,6

53.               55.                       57.
1502                             3. The sequence is arithmetic. 5.
                                     The common difference is
Practice Test

1.

7. The sequence is geometric. 9.                         11.

     The common ratio is

13.                              15. Total in account:   17.

                                               Interest

                                      earned:

19.                              21.                     23.

25.                              27.                     29.

Access for free at openstax.org
Index                                Binomial Theorem 1295                                                        Index 1503
                                     break-even point 1040
A                                                                      continuous 440
                                     C                                 continuous function 431
AAS (angle-angle-side) 894                                             convex limaçons 946
absolute maximum 233                 cardioid 944                      coordinate plane 1183
absolute minimum 233                 carrying capacity 638             correlation coefficient 379
absolute value 216, 287              Cartesian coordinate system 84    cosecant 736, 785
absolute value equation 156, 156     Cartesian equation 932            cosecant function 785, 786, 789,
absolute value function 213          Celsius 295                       824
absolute value functions 287, 291    center of a hyperbola 1165        cosine 861, 862
absolute value inequality 166, 167   center of an ellipse 1149         cosine function 718, 761, 763, 765,
addition method 1032, 1034, 1038     central rectangle 1165            768, 772
Addition Principle 1282              change-of-base formula 614, 615   cost function 239, 1039
addition property 163                circle 1062, 1063                 cotangent 736, 791
adjacent side 705                    circular motion 772               cotangent function 791, 824
algebraic expression 17              circumference 686                 coterminal angles 692, 694
altitude 894                         co-vertex 1149                    Cramer's Rule 1124, 1125, 1127,
ambiguous case 897                   co-vertices 1151                  1131
amplitude 764                        coefficient 51, 51, 420, 473      cube root 420
angle 682                            coefficient matrix 1094, 1096,    cubic functions 512
angle of depression 712              1115, 1118                        curvilinear path 970
angle of elevation 712, 894          cofunction 841
angle of rotation 1202               cofunction identities 710, 841    D
angular speed 698, 698               column 1081
annual interest 1276                 column matrix 1082                De Moivre 964
annual percentage rate (APR) 551     combinations 1287, 1293           De Moivre's Theorem 965, 966
annuity 1276                         combining functions 241           decompose a composite function
apoapsis 1212                        common base 619                   248
arc 686                              common difference 1247, 1269      decomposition 1071
arc length 687, 695, 718             common logarithm 579              decreasing function 229, 326
arccosine 801                        common ratio 1259, 1271           decreasing linear function 326
Archimedes' spiral 953               commutative 242                   degenerate conic sections 1198
arcsine 801                          commutative property of addition  degree 51, 51, 425, 683
arctangent 801                       14                                dependent system 1029, 1038,
area 118                             commutative property of           1052
area of a circle 419                 multiplication 14                 dependent variable 182
area of a sector 696                 complement of an event 1304       Descartes 958
argument 962                         completing the square 141, 142    Descartes' Rule of Signs 479
arithmetic sequence 1247, 1248,      complex conjugate 130             determinant 1123, 1126, 1127
1250, 1251, 1269                     Complex Conjugate Theorem 477     difference of squares 56
arithmetic series 1269               complex number 126, 958           dimpled limaçons 946
arrow notation 485                   complex plane 126, 958            direct variation 522, 522
associative property of addition 14  composite function 241            directrix 1183, 1186, 1187, 1188,
associative property of              composition of functions 241      1191, 1212, 1214, 1218, 1219, 1220
multiplication 14                    compound inequality 165           discriminant 144, 144
asymptotes 1165                      compound interest 551             displacement 698
augmented matrix 1094, 1098,         compression 338, 567, 593         distance formula 90, 833, 1166,
1099, 1113                           conditional equation 99           1184
average rate of change 223           conic 1148, 1164, 1219            distributive property 15
axes of symmetry 1165                conic section 1200                diverges 1273
axis of symmetry 400, 403, 1191,     conic sections 977                dividend 462
1192                                 conjugate axis 1165               Division Algorithm 462, 471
                                     consistent system 1029            divisor 462
B                     1293           constant 17                       domain 182, 191, 205, 206, 207,
                      1293, 1296     constant function 213             208, 800, 801
base 12                              constant of variation 522, 522    domain and range 205, 205
binomial 51, 463                                                       domain of a composite function
binomial coefficient                                                   246
binomial expansion
1504 Index

dot product 1007       848, 848      G                                    initial point 995, 998
double-angle formulas                                                     initial side 683
doubling time 636                    Gauss 958, 1047, 1094                inner-loop limaçons 948
Dürer 948                            Gaussian elimination 1047, 1096,     input 182
                                     1098                                 integers 8, 11
E                                    general form 401                     intercepts 89
                                     general form of a quadratic          Intermediate Value Theorem 451,
eccentricity 1213, 1214              function 403                         451
electrostatic force 226              Generalized Pythagorean              interpolation 377
elimination 1063                     Theorem 912                          intersection 1302
ellipse 985, 985, 1063, 1148, 1149,  geometric sequence 1259, 1271        interval 162
1151, 1152, 1157, 1182, 1214, 1218   geometric series 1271                interval notation 162, 205, 229
ellipsis 1232                        global maximum 454, 454              inverse cosine function 801
end behavior 421, 496                global minimum 454, 454              inverse function 296, 512
endpoint 226, 682                    graph in two variables 86            inverse matrix 1113, 1115
entry 1081                           gravity 988                          inverse of a radical function 515
equation 19, 189                     greatest common factor 60, 60,       inverse of a rational function 518
equation in quadratic form 157       135                                  inverse property of addition 16
equation in two variables 86                                              inverse property of multiplication
Euler 958                            H                                    16
even function 269, 823                                                    inverse sine function 801
even-odd identities 823, 825         half-angle formulas 853, 854         inverse tangent function 801
event 1300                           half-life 626, 631                   inverse trigonometric functions
experiment 1300                      Heaviside method 1073                800, 801, 804, 808
explicit formula 1232, 1233, 1234,   Heron of Alexandria 917              inverse variation 524
1251, 1262                           Heron's formula 917                  inverse variations 524
exponent 12                          horizontal asymptote 488, 494,       inversely proportional 524
Exponential decay 542, 549, 562,     496                                  invertible functions 511
631, 634, 637, 650                   horizontal compression 275, 877      invertible matrix 1108, 1123
exponential equation 618             horizontal line 108, 344, 345        irrational numbers 9, 11
exponential function 543             horizontal line test 196
exponential growth 542, 545, 563,    horizontal reflection 265            J
631, 636, 638                        horizontal shift 258, 565, 589, 761
exponential notation 12              horizontal stretch 275               Johnson 1182
extraneous solution 623              hyperbola 1165, 1168, 1169, 1170,    joint variation 526
extraneous solutions 153             1172, 1173, 1175, 1177, 1183, 1214,
extrapolation 377                    1217                                 K
                                     hypotenuse 705
F                                                                         Kovalevskaya 1147
                                     I                                    Kronecker 958
factor by grouping 62
Factor Theorem 472                   identities 742                       L
factorial 1241                       identity equation 99
factoring 135                        identity matrix 1108, 1108, 1113     latus rectum 1183, 1186, 1187,
Fahrenheit 295                       identity property of addition 15     1191
feasible region 1066                 identity property of multiplication  Law of Cosines 912, 914
finite arithmetic sequence 1253      15                                   Law of Sines 895, 913
finite sequence 1233                 imaginary number 126                 leading coefficient 51, 51, 425
foci 1148, 1150, 1151, 1166          inconsistent equation 99             leading term 51, 51, 425
focus 1148, 1183, 1186, 1187, 1188,  inconsistent system 1029, 1037,      least common denominator 71,
1191, 1212, 1218, 1219, 1220         1051                                 101
FOIL 53                              increasing function 229, 326         least squares regression 378
formula 19, 189                      increasing linear function 326       lemniscate 949
function 182, 217                    independent system 1029              linear equation 99
function notation 184                independent variable 182             Linear Factorization Theorem 477,
Fundamental Counting Principle       index 45, 45                         478
1283                                 index of summation 1268              linear function 324, 325
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra       inequality 1065                      linear growth 542
476, 477                             infinite geometric sequence 1273     linear model 361, 374
                                     infinite sequence 1233               linear relationship 374
                                     infinite series 1273                 linear speed 698

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Index 1505

local extrema 228                   one-to-one function 194, 296, 800    power rule for logarithms 610, 614
local maximum 228, 454              opposite side 705                    principal nth root 45, 45
local minimum 228, 454              order of magnitude 632               principal square root 39, 40
logarithm 577                       order of operations 12               probability 1300
logarithmic equation 623            ordered pair 85, 182, 207            probability model 1300
logarithmic model 653               ordered triple 1047                  product of two matrices 1087
logistic growth model 638           origin 84, 288                       product rule for logarithms 607,
long division 461                   outcomes 1300                        609
lower limit of summation 1268       output 182                           product-to-sum formulas 861, 862
                                                                         profit function 1040
M                                   P                                    properties of determinants 1129
                                                                         Proxima Centauri 632
magnitude 216, 257, 959, 995        parabola 400, 407, 983, 1059, 1182,  Pythagoras 958
main diagonal 1096                  1187, 1187, 1188, 1192, 1213, 1215,  Pythagorean identities 822, 825
major and minor axes 1151           1215                                 Pythagorean identity 833
major axis 1149, 1153               parallel 108                         Pythagorean Identity 721, 721, 742
matrix 1081, 1082, 1094             parallel lines 346, 348              Pythagorean Theorem 90, 145,
matrix multiplication 1087, 1110,   parallelograms 999                   849, 878, 912, 986
1114                                parameter 970
matrix operations 1082              parametric equations 970, 982,       Q
maximum value 400                   983
Maxwell 1147                        parametric form 985                  quadrant 84
measure of an angle 683             parent function 589                  quadrantal angle 684
midline 764                         partial fraction 1071                quadratic 1075, 1077
midpoint formula 93                 partial fraction decomposition       quadratic equation 135, 135, 141,
minimum value 400                   1071, 1071                           142, 872
minor axis 1149                     Pascal 948                           quadratic formula 142, 143, 144,
model breakdown 376                 Pascal's Triangle 1295               873
modulus 216, 962                    perfect square trinomial 55          quadratic function 403, 406
monomial 51                         periapsis 1212                       quotient 462
Multiplication Principle 1283       perimeter 118                        quotient identities 824, 825
multiplication property 163         period 745, 761, 779, 781, 868       quotient rule for logarithms 609
multiplicative inverse 1110, 1111   periodic function 761
multiplicative inverse of a matrix  permutation 1284                     R
1108, 1108                          perpendicular 109
multiplicity 444, 445               perpendicular lines 347, 348         radian 687, 688, 689
mutually exclusive events 1302      pH 606                               radian measure 688
                                    phase shift 766                      radical 39, 40
N                                   piecewise function 216               radical equation 154
                                    piecewise functions 1236             radical expression 39, 40
n factorial 1241                    point-slope form 329                 Radical expressions 46
natural logarithm 581, 622          point-slope formula 110, 1170        radical functions 511
natural numbers 8, 11, 182          polar axis 925                       radicand 39, 40, 153
negative angle 683                  polar coordinates 925, 927, 929,     radiocarbon dating 635
Newton's Law of Cooling 637         939                                  range 182, 801
nominal rate 551                    polar equation 933, 940, 941, 1213   rate of change 223, 361
non-right triangles 894             polar form 959                       rational equation 102
nondegenerate conic sections        polar form of a complex number       rational expression 68, 100, 1071,
1198                                961                                  1072, 1077
nonlinear inequality 1065           polar form of a conic 1220           rational function 490, 498, 502
nth partial sum 1267                polar grid 925, 926                  rational number 100
nth root of a complex number 966    pole 925                             rational numbers 8, 11
nth term of the sequence 1232,      polynomial 51, 51, 472               Rational Zero Theorem 473, 473
1233                                polynomial equation 152              ray 682
                                    polynomial function 424, 438, 446,   real number line 10
O                                   452                                  real numbers 10
                                    position vector 995, 997             reciprocal 109, 296, 420
oblique triangle 894                positive angle 683                   reciprocal function 485
odd function 269, 823               power function 419                   reciprocal identities 824, 825
one-loop limaçon 946                                                     reciprocal identity 784, 791
one-to-one 563, 576, 607, 614
1506 Index

rectangular coordinates 925, 927,   solution set 99, 1048               trigonometric identities 912
929                                 solving systems of linear           trinomial 51
rectangular equation 933, 976       equations 1032                      turning point 429, 448
rectangular form 961, 985           special angles 832
recursive formula 1239, 1250,       square matrix 1082, 1123            U
1250, 1261                          square root property 140
reduction formulas 852, 852         SSA (side-side-angle) 894           union of two events 1301
reference angle 693, 729, 739       SSS (side-side-side) triangle 911   unit circle 689, 705, 718, 730, 869
reflection 568, 596                 standard form 107                   unit vector 1003
regression analysis 650, 653, 656   standard form of a quadratic        upper limit of summation 1268
regression line 378                 function 403                        upper triangular form 1047
relation 182                        standard position 683, 684, 995
remainder 462                       stretch 567                         V
Remainder Theorem 471               stretching/compressing factor
removable discontinuity 492, 493    782, 783                            variable 17
Restricting the domain 304          substitution method 1031            varies directly 522, 522
resultant 999                       sum and difference formulas for     varies inversely 524
revenue function 1039               cosine 833                          vector 995
Richter Scale 576                   sum and difference formulas for     vector addition 999
right triangle 705, 800             sine 835                            vertex 400, 682, 1149, 1150, 1183,
roots 400                           sum and difference formulas for     1191
rose curve 951                      tangent 837                         vertex form of a quadratic
row 1081                            sum-to-product formulas 863, 863    function 402
row matrix 1082                     summation notation 1268             vertical asymptote 487, 490, 496,
row operations 1096, 1098, 1101,    surface area 510                    801
1111, 1112, 1113, 1113              symmetry test 940                   vertical compression 271
row-echelon form 1096, 1098,        synthetic division 465, 475         vertical line 107, 344, 345
1099                                system of equations 1094, 1095,     vertical line test 195
row-equivalent 1096                 1098, 1099, 1115                    vertical reflection 265
                                    system of linear equations 366,     vertical shift 256, 338, 565, 591,
S                                   1028, 1030, 1031                    637, 766
                                    system of nonlinear equations       vertical stretch 271, 338, 593
sample space 1300                   1059                                vertices 1149, 1151
SAS (side-angle-side) triangle 911  system of nonlinear inequalities    volume 118
scalar 1000, 1084                   1066                                volume of a sphere 419
scalar multiple 1001, 1084          system of three equations in three
Scalar multiplication 1000, 1084    variables 1127                      W
scatter plot 374
scientific notation 33, 33, 34      T                                   whole numbers 8, 11
secant 736, 784
secant function 784                 tangent 736, 779, 781               X
sector of a circle 696              tangent function 780, 781, 782,
sequence 1232, 1233, 1247           794, 824                            x-axis 84
series 1267                         term 1232, 1247                     x-coordinate 85
set-builder notation 162, 209       term of a polynomial 51, 51         x-intercept 89, 342
sigma 1267                          term of a polynomial function 424
sine 823, 861, 863                  terminal point 995, 998             Y
sine function 718, 760, 762, 765,   terminal side 683
771, 774                            transformation 255, 338             y-axis 84
sinusoidal function 763             translation 1152                    y-coordinate 85
slope 104, 325                      transverse axis 1165                y-intercept 89, 325
slope-intercept form 324, 325, 329  trigonometric equations 977
smooth curve 431                    trigonometric functions 739         Z

                                                                        zero-product property 135
                                                                        zeros 400, 440, 444, 475, 944

Access for free at openstax.org
