Volume 2
Calculus Volume 2

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

GILBERT STRANG, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY
EDWIN "JED" HERMAN, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN AT
STEVENS POINT
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2016 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any
user of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution
as follows:

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
    HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every
    physical page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format
    page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following
    attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-2 in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13        978-1-938168-06-2
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13    978-1-50669-807-6
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13       978-1-947172-14-2
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR     2016
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CJP 24 16
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                         When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                                Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                               Get started at openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-2

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Integration 5

         Introduction 5
         1.1 Approximating Areas 6
         1.2 The Definite Integral 24
         1.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 40
         1.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 56
         1.5 Substitution 74
         1.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 83
         1.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 94
         Chapter Review 101

2 Applications of Integration 107

         Introduction 107
         2.1 Areas between Curves 108
         2.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing 119
         2.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 137
         2.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 150
         2.5 Physical Applications 162
         2.6 Moments and Centers of Mass 177
         2.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 193
         2.8 Exponential Growth and Decay 203
         2.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 213
         Chapter Review 224

3 Techniques of Integration 231

         Introduction 231
         3.1 Integration by Parts 231
         3.2 Trigonometric Integrals 241
         3.3 Trigonometric Substitution 250
         3.4 Partial Fractions 262
         3.5 Other Strategies for Integration 272
         3.6 Numerical Integration 276
         3.7 Improper Integrals 287
         Chapter Review 302

4 Introduction to Differential Equations 307

         Introduction 307
         4.1 Basics of Differential Equations 308
         4.2 Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 317
         4.3 Separable Equations 334
         4.4 The Logistic Equation 344
              4.5 First-order Linear Equations 356
              Chapter Review 369

   5 Sequences and Series 373

              Introduction 373
              5.1 Sequences 374
              5.2 Infinite Series 394
              5.3 The Divergence and Integral Tests 413
              5.4 Comparison Tests 426
              5.5 Alternating Series 437
              5.6 Ratio and Root Tests 449
              Chapter Review 462

   6 Power Series 469

              Introduction 469
              6.1 Power Series and Functions 470
              6.2 Properties of Power Series 481
              6.3 Taylor and Maclaurin Series 497
              6.4 Working with Taylor Series 513
              Chapter Review 531

   7 Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates 535

              Introduction 535
              7.1 Parametric Equations 536
              7.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves 550
              7.3 Polar Coordinates 566
              7.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 583
              7.5 Conic Sections 591
              Chapter Review 612

   A Table of Integrals 617

   B Table of Derivatives 623

   C Review of Pre-Calculus 625

         Answer Key 629

         Index 727

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

Welcome to Calculus Volume 2, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to high-
quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education. Our first
openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 20 books for college and
AP courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. Our adaptive learning technology, designed to improve learning
outcomes through personalized educational paths, is being piloted in college courses throughout the country. Through
our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource organizations,
OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax's Resources

Customization

Calculus Volume 2 is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-
BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide
attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, do not use the content for commercial purposes, and distribute the
content under the same CC-BY-NC-SA license.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
openstax.org for more information.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Calculus Volume 2

Calculus is designed for the typical two- or three-semester general calculus course, incorporating innovative features to
enhance student learning. The book guides students through the core concepts of calculus and helps them understand
how those concepts apply to their lives and the world around them. Due to the comprehensive nature of the material,
we are offering the book in three volumes for flexibility and efficiency. Volume 2 covers integration, differential
equations, sequences and series, and parametric equations and polar coordinates.

Coverage and Scope

Our Calculus Volume 2 textbook adheres to the scope and sequence of most general calculus courses nationwide. We
have worked to make calculus interesting and accessible to students while maintaining the mathematical rigor inherent
in the subject. With this objective in mind, the content of the three volumes of Calculus have been developed and
arranged to provide a logical progression from fundamental to more advanced concepts, building upon what students
have already learned and emphasizing connections between topics and between theory and applications. The goal of
each section is to enable students not just to recognize concepts, but work with them in ways that will be useful in later
courses and future careers. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and vetted with feedback from
mathematics educators dedicated to the project.

Volume 1
  · Chapter 1: Functions and Graphs
  · Chapter 2: Limits
  · Chapter 3: Derivatives
  · Chapter 4: Applications of Derivatives
2 Preface

       · Chapter 5: Integration
       · Chapter 6: Applications of Integration
    Volume 2
       · Chapter 1: Integration
       · Chapter 2: Applications of Integration
       · Chapter 3: Techniques of Integration
       · Chapter 4: Introduction to Differential Equations
       · Chapter 5: Sequences and Series
       · Chapter 6: Power Series
       · Chapter 7: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates
    Volume 3
       · Chapter 1: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates
       · Chapter 2: Vectors in Space
       · Chapter 3: Vector-Valued Functions
       · Chapter 4: Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables
       · Chapter 5: Multiple Integration
       · Chapter 6: Vector Calculus
       · Chapter 7: Second-Order Differential Equations

   Pedagogical Foundation

    Throughout Calculus Volume 2 you will find examples and exercises that present classical ideas and techniques as well as
    modern applications and methods. Derivations and explanations are based on years of classroom experience on the part
    of long-time calculus professors, striving for a balance of clarity and rigor that has proven successful with their students.
    Motivational applications cover important topics in probability, biology, ecology, business, and economics, as well as
    areas of physics, chemistry, engineering, and computer science. Student Projects in each chapter give students
    opportunities to explore interesting sidelights in pure and applied mathematics, from showing that the number e is
    irrational, to calculating the center of mass of the Grand Canyon Skywalk or the terminal speed of a skydiver. Chapter
    Opening Applications pose problems that are solved later in the chapter, using the ideas covered in that chapter.
    Problems include the hydraulic force against the Hoover Dam, and the comparison of the relative intensity of two
    earthquakes. Definitions, Rules, and Theorems are highlighted throughout the text, including over 60 Proofs of
    theorems.

   Assessments That Reinforce Key Concepts

    In-chapter Examples walk students through problems by posing a question, stepping out a solution, and then asking
    students to practice the skill with a "Check Your Learning" component. The book also includes assessments at the end of
    each chapter so students can apply what they've learned through practice problems. Many exercises are marked with a
    [T] to indicate they are suitable for solution by technology, including calculators or Computer Algebra Systems (CAS).
    Answers for selected exercises are available in the Answer Key at the back of the book.

   Early or Late Transcendentals

    Calculus Volume 2 is designed to accommodate both Early and Late Transcendental approaches to calculus. Exponential
    and logarithmic functions are presented in Chapter 2. Integration of these functions is covered in Chapters 1 for
    instructors who want to include them with other types of functions. These discussions, however, are in separate sections
    that can be skipped for instructors who prefer to wait until the integral definitions are given before teaching the calculus
    derivations of exponentials and logarithms.

   Comprehensive Art Program

    Our art program is designed to enhance students' understanding of concepts through clear and effective illustrations,
    diagrams, and photographs.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

Answers to Questions in the Book

Answers to Examples are provided just below the question in the book. All Checkpoint answers are provided in the
Answer Key. Odd-numbered Exercises and Review Exercises questions are provided to students in the Answer Key as well
as the Student Solution Guide on the Student Resources page. Even-numbered answers are provided only to instructors
in the Instructor Answer Guide via the Instructor Resources page.

Additional Resources

Student and Instructor Resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an instructor
solution manual, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which can be
requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Partner Resources

OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to
students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access
the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on openstax.org.

About The Authors

Senior Contributing Authors

Gilbert Strang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Dr. Strang received his PhD from UCLA in 1959 and has been teaching mathematics at MIT ever since. His Calculus online
textbook is one of eleven that he has published and is the basis from which our final product has been derived and
updated for today's student. Strang is a decorated mathematician and past Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University.
Edwin "Jed" Herman, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
Dr. Herman earned a BS in Mathematics from Harvey Mudd College in 1985, an MA in Mathematics from UCLA in 1987,
and a PhD in Mathematics from the University of Oregon in 1997. He is currently a Professor at the University of
Wisconsin-Stevens Point. He has more than 20 years of experience teaching college mathematics, is a student research
mentor, is experienced in course development/design, and is also an avid board game designer and player.
4 Preface

   Contributing Authors

    Catherine Abbott, Keuka College
    Nicoleta Virginia Bila, Fayetteville State University
    Sheri J. Boyd, Rollins College
    Joyati Debnath, Winona State University
    Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College
    Joseph Lakey, New Mexico State University
    Julie Levandosky, Framingham State University
    David McCune, William Jewell College
    Michelle Merriweather, Bronxville High School
    Kirsten R. Messer, Colorado State University - Pueblo
    Alfred K. Mulzet, Florida State College at Jacksonville
    William Radulovich (retired), Florida State College at Jacksonville
    Erica M. Rutter, Arizona State University
    David Smith, University of the Virgin Islands
    Elaine A. Terry, Saint Joseph's University
    David Torain, Hampton University

   Reviewers

    Marwan A. Abu-Sawwa, Florida State College at Jacksonville
    Kenneth J. Bernard, Virginia State University
    John Beyers, University of Maryland
    Charles Buehrle, Franklin & Marshall College
    Matthew Cathey, Wofford College
    Michael Cohen, Hofstra University
    William DeSalazar, Broward County School System
    Murray Eisenberg, University of Massachusetts Amherst
    Kristyanna Erickson, Cecil College
    Tiernan Fogarty, Oregon Institute of Technology
    David French, Tidewater Community College
    Marilyn Gloyer, Virginia Commonwealth University
    Shawna Haider, Salt Lake Community College
    Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College
    Jerry Jared, The Blue Ridge School
    Peter Jipsen, Chapman University
    David Johnson, Lehigh University
    M.R. Khadivi, Jackson State University
    Robert J. Krueger, Concordia University
    Tor A. Kwembe, Jackson State University
    Jean-Marie Magnier, Springfield Technical Community College
    Cheryl Chute Miller, SUNY Potsdam
    Bagisa Mukherjee, Penn State University, Worthington Scranton Campus
    Kasso Okoudjou, University of Maryland College Park
    Peter Olszewski, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
    Steven Purtee, Valencia College
    Alice Ramos, Bethel College
    Doug Shaw, University of Northern Iowa
    Hussain Elalaoui-Talibi, Tuskegee University
    Jeffrey Taub, Maine Maritime Academy
    William Thistleton, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
    A. David Trubatch, Montclair State University
    Carmen Wright, Jackson State University
    Zhenbu Zhang, Jackson State University

     Access for free at openstax.org
                1 · Introduction 5

1  INTEGRATION

Figure 1.1 Iceboating is a popular winter sport in parts of the northern United States and Europe. (credit: modification of
work by Carter Brown, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Approximating Areas
  1.2 The Definite Integral
  1.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
  1.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem
  1.5 Substitution
  1.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
  1.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions

      Introduction

Iceboats are a common sight on the lakes of Wisconsin and Minnesota on winter weekends. Iceboats are similar to
sailboats, but they are fitted with runners, or "skates," and are designed to run over the ice, rather than on water.
Iceboats can move very quickly, and many ice boating enthusiasts are drawn to the sport because of the speed. Top
iceboat racers can attain speeds up to five times the wind speed. If we know how fast an iceboat is moving, we can use
integration to determine how far it travels. We revisit this question later in the chapter (see Example 1.27).

Determining distance from velocity is just one of many applications of integration. In fact, integrals are used in a wide
variety of mechanical and physical applications. In this chapter, we first introduce the theory behind integration and use
6 1 · Integration

integrals to calculate areas. From there, we develop the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, which relates differentiation
and integration. We then study some basic integration techniques and briefly examine some applications.

1.1 Approximating Areas

Learning Objectives

      1.1.1 Use sigma (summation) notation to calculate sums and powers of integers.
      1.1.2 Use the sum of rectangular areas to approximate the area under a curve.
      1.1.3 Use Riemann sums to approximate area.

Archimedes was fascinated with calculating the areas of various shapes--in other words, the amount of space enclosed
by the shape. He used a process that has come to be known as the method of exhaustion, which used smaller and
smaller shapes, the areas of which could be calculated exactly, to fill an irregular region and thereby obtain closer and
closer approximations to the total area. In this process, an area bounded by curves is filled with rectangles, triangles,
and shapes with exact area formulas. These areas are then summed to approximate the area of the curved region.

In this section, we develop techniques to approximate the area between a curve, defined by a function     and the

x-axis on a closed interval      Like Archimedes, we first approximate the area under the curve using shapes of known

area (namely, rectangles). By using smaller and smaller rectangles, we get closer and closer approximations to the area.

Taking a limit allows us to calculate the exact area under the curve.

Let's start by introducing some notation to make the calculations easier. We then consider the case when  is

continuous and nonnegative. Later in the chapter, we relax some of these restrictions and develop techniques that apply

in more general cases.

Sigma (Summation) Notation

As mentioned, we will use shapes of known area to approximate the area of an irregular region bounded by curves. This
process often requires adding up long strings of numbers. To make it easier to write down these lengthy sums, we look
at some new notation here, called sigma notation (also known as summation notation). The Greek capital letter
sigma, is used to express long sums of values in a compact form. For example, if we want to add all the integers from 1
to 20 without sigma notation, we have to write

We could probably skip writing a couple of terms and write

which is better, but still cumbersome. With sigma notation, we write this sum as

which is much more compact.
Typically, sigma notation is presented in the form

where describes the terms to be added, and the i is called the index. Each term is evaluated, then we sum all the

values, beginning with the value when  and ending with the value when             For example, an expression like

is interpreted as                                   Note that the index is used only to keep track of the terms to be

added; it does not factor into the calculation of the sum itself. The index is therefore called a dummy variable. We can
use any letter we like for the index. Typically, mathematicians use i, j, k, m, and n for indices.

Let's try a couple of examples of using sigma notation.

EXAMPLE 1.1

Using Sigma Notation
 a. Write in sigma notation and evaluate the sum of terms for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1.1 · Approximating Areas 7

b. Write the sum in sigma notation:

    Solution
a. Write

b. The denominator of each term is a perfect square. Using sigma notation, this sum can be written as

     1.1 Write in sigma notation and evaluate the sum of terms 2i for

The properties associated with the summation process are given in the following rule.

Rule: Properties of Sigma Notation

Let  and  represent two sequences of terms and let c be a constant. The following properties

hold for all positive integers n and for integers m, with

1.
                                                                                                                                                              (1.1)

2.
                                                                                                                                                              (1.2)

3.
                                                                                                                                                              (1.3)

4.
                                                                                                                                                              (1.4)

5.
                                                                                                                                                              (1.5)

Proof

We prove properties 2. and 3. here, and leave proof of the other properties to the Exercises.

2. We have
8 1 · Integration

3. We have


A few more formulas for frequently found functions simplify the summation process further. These are shown in the next
rule, for sums and powers of integers, and we use them in the next set of examples.

  Rule: Sums and Powers of Integers
   1. The sum of n integers is given by

   2. The sum of consecutive integers squared is given by

   3. The sum of consecutive integers cubed is given by

EXAMPLE 1.2

Evaluation Using Sigma Notation
Write using sigma notation and evaluate:

a. The sum of the terms          for
b. The sum of the terms            for

    Solution                     we can break the expression into three terms.
a. Multiplying out

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.1 · Approximating Areas 9

b. Use sigma notation property iv. and the rules for the sum of squared terms and the sum of cubed terms.

1.2 Find the sum of the values of       for

EXAMPLE 1.3

Finding the Sum of the Function Values

Find the sum of the values of  over the integers

     Solution
Using the formula, we have

1.3 Evaluate the sum indicated by the notation

Approximating Area

Now that we have the necessary notation, we return to the problem at hand: approximating the area under a curve. Let

be a continuous, nonnegative function defined on the closed interval       We want to approximate the area A

bounded by   above, the x-axis below, the line  on the left, and the line  on the right (Figure 1.2).
10 1 · Integration

Figure 1.2 An area (shaded region) bounded by the curve  at top, the x-axis at bottom, the line          to the left, and

the line            at right.

How do we approximate the area under this curve? The approach is a geometric one. By dividing a region into many

small shapes that have known area formulas, we can sum these areas and obtain a reasonable estimate of the true area.

We begin by dividing the interval           into n subintervals of equal width,  We do this by selecting equally spaced

points                         with         and

for

We denote the width of each subinterval with the notation x, so                  and

for                 This notion of dividing an interval  into subintervals by selecting points from within the interval

is used quite often in approximating the area under a curve, so let's define some relevant terminology.

Definition

A set of points                  for        with                                      which divides the interval

into subintervals of the form                            is called a partition of     If the subintervals all

have the same width, the set of points forms a regular partition of the interval

We can use this regular partition as the basis of a method for estimating the area under the curve. We next examine two
methods: the left-endpoint approximation and the right-endpoint approximation.

Rule: Left-Endpoint Approximation

On each subinterval                   (for               construct a rectangle with width x and height equal to

which is the function value at the left endpoint of the subinterval. Then the area of this rectangle is

Adding the areas of all these rectangles, we get an approximate value for A (Figure 1.3). We use the notation Ln to
denote that this is a left-endpoint approximation of A using n subintervals.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1.1 · Approximating Areas 11

                                                                                                                   (1.6)

Figure 1.3 In the left-endpoint approximation of area under a curve, the height of each rectangle is determined by the
function value at the left of each subinterval.

The second method for approximating area under a curve is the right-endpoint approximation. It is almost the same as
the left-endpoint approximation, but now the heights of the rectangles are determined by the function values at the
right of each subinterval.

Rule: Right-Endpoint Approximation

Construct a rectangle on each subinterval     only this time the height of the rectangle is determined by the

function value  at the right endpoint of the subinterval. Then, the area of each rectangle is  and the

approximation for A is given by

                                                                                               (1.7)

The notation indicates this is a right-endpoint approximation for A (Figure 1.4).

Figure 1.4 In the right-endpoint approximation of area under a curve, the height of each rectangle is determined by the
function value at the right of each subinterval. Note that the right-endpoint approximation differs from the left-endpoint
approximation in Figure 1.3.

The graphs in Figure 1.5 represent the curve  In graph (a) we divide the region represented by the interval
12 1 · Integration

into six subintervals, each of width 0.5. Thus,                    We then form six rectangles by drawing vertical lines

perpendicular to         the left endpoint of each subinterval. We determine the height of each rectangle by calculating

           for                   The intervals are                 We find the area of

each rectangle by multiplying the height by the width. Then, the sum of the rectangular areas approximates the area

between             and the x-axis. When the left endpoints are used to calculate height, we have a left-endpoint

approximation. Thus,

Figure 1.5 Methods of approximating the area under a curve by using (a) the left endpoints and (b) the right endpoints.

In Figure 1.5(b), we draw vertical lines perpendicular to  such that is the right endpoint of each subinterval, and
                                                              by x to find the rectangular areas, and then add them. This
calculate           for          We multiply each
                                                           Thus,
is a right-endpoint approximation of the area under

EXAMPLE 1.4

Approximating the Area Under a Curve

Use both left-endpoint and right-endpoint approximations to approximate the area under the curve of                on the

interval            use

     Solution                    into n equal subintervals. Using  This is the width of each
First, divide the interval
rectangle. The intervals                                   are shown in Figure 1.6. Using a left-endpoint approximation,
the heights are                                                         Then,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                1.1 · Approximating Areas 13

             Figure 1.6 The graph shows the left-endpoint approximation of the area under        from 0 to 2.
                                                                                           but now use the right
The right-endpoint approximation is shown in Figure 1.7. The intervals are the same,
endpoint to calculate the height of the rectangles. We have

            Figure 1.7 The graph shows the right-endpoint approximation of the area under       from 0 to 2.
The left-endpoint approximation is 1.75; the right-endpoint approximation is 3.75.

1.4 Sketch left-endpoint and right-endpoint approximations for          on                 use  Approximate
           the area using both methods.

Looking at Figure 1.5 and the graphs in Example 1.4, we can see that when we use a small number of intervals, neither
the left-endpoint approximation nor the right-endpoint approximation is a particularly accurate estimate of the area
under the curve. However, it seems logical that if we increase the number of points in our partition, our estimate of A will
improve. We will have more rectangles, but each rectangle will be thinner, so we will be able to fit the rectangles to the
curve more precisely.

We can demonstrate the improved approximation obtained through smaller intervals with an example. Let's explore the

idea of increasing n, first in a left-endpoint approximation with four rectangles, then eight rectangles, and finally 32

rectangles. Then, let's do the same thing in a right-endpoint approximation, using the same sets of intervals, of the same

curved region. Figure 1.8 shows the area of the region under the curve                     on the interval    using a

left-endpoint approximation where  The width of each rectangle is

The area is approximated by the summed areas of the rectangles, or
14 1 · Integration

Figure 1.8 With a left-endpoint approximation and dividing the region from a to b into four equal intervals, the area
under the curve is approximately equal to the sum of the areas of the rectangles.

Figure 1.9 shows the same curve divided into eight subintervals. Comparing the graph with four rectangles in Figure 1.8

with this graph with eight rectangles, we can see there appears to be less white space under the curve when            This

white space is area under the curve we are unable to include using our approximation. The area of the rectangles is

Figure 1.9 The region under the curve is divided into  rectangular areas of equal width for a left-endpoint
approximation.

The graph in Figure 1.10 shows the same function with 32 rectangles inscribed under the curve. There appears to be
little white space left. The area occupied by the rectangles is

                 Figure 1.10 Here, 32 rectangles are inscribed under the curve for a left-endpoint approximation.
We can carry out a similar process for the right-endpoint approximation method. A right-endpoint approximation of the
same curve, using four rectangles (Figure 1.11), yields an area

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         1.1 · Approximating Areas 15

Figure 1.11 Now we divide the area under the curve into four equal subintervals for a right-endpoint approximation.

Dividing the region over the interval  into eight rectangles results in  The graph is shown in
Figure 1.12. The area is

Figure 1.12 Here we use right-endpoint approximation for a region divided into eight equal subintervals.

Last, the right-endpoint approximation with  is close to the actual area (Figure 1.13). The area is approximately

                  Figure 1.13 The region is divided into 32 equal subintervals for a right-endpoint approximation.

Based on these figures and calculations, it appears we are on the right track; the rectangles appear to approximate the
area under the curve better as n gets larger. Furthermore, as n increases, both the left-endpoint and right-endpoint
approximations appear to approach an area of 8 square units. Table 1.1 shows a numerical comparison of the left- and
right-endpoint methods. The idea that the approximations of the area under the curve get better and better as n gets
larger and larger is very important, and we now explore this idea in more detail.
16 1 · Integration

                                 Values of n Approximate Area Ln Approximate Area Rn

                                           7.5              8.5

                                           7.75             8.25

                                           7.94             8.06

                                 Table 1.1 Converging Values of Left- and Right-Endpoint
                                 Approximations as n Increases

Forming Riemann Sums

So far we have been using rectangles to approximate the area under a curve. The heights of these rectangles have been

determined by evaluating the function at either the right or left endpoints of the subinterval         In reality, there

is no reason to restrict evaluation of the function to one of these two points only. We could evaluate the function at any

point in the subinterval         and use             as the height of our rectangle. This gives us an estimate for the

area of the form

A sum of this form is called a Riemann sum, named for the 19th-century mathematician Bernhard Riemann, who
developed the idea.

Definition

Let  be defined on a closed interval            and let P be a regular partition of       Let x be the width of each

subinterval          and for each i, let   be any point in               A Riemann sum is defined for  as

Recall that with the left- and right-endpoint approximations, the estimates seem to get better and better as n get larger
and larger. The same thing happens with Riemann sums. Riemann sums give better approximations for larger values of
n. We are now ready to define the area under a curve in terms of Riemann sums.

  Definition

Let  be a continuous, nonnegative function on an interval                and let                be a Riemann sum for

     Then, the area under the curve              on         is given by

                                                     

     MEDIA
     See a graphical demonstration (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_riemannsums) of the construction of a Riemann sum.

Some subtleties here are worth discussing. First, note that taking the limit of a sum is a little different from taking the

limit of a function  as x goes to infinity. Limits of sums are discussed in detail in the chapter on Sequences and

Series; however, for now we can assume that the computational techniques we used to compute limits of functions can

also be used to calculate limits of sums.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                1.1 · Approximating Areas 17

Second, we must consider what to do if the expression converges to different limits for different choices of

Fortunately, this does not happen. Although the proof is beyond the scope of this text, it can be shown that if      is

continuous on the closed interval        then                exists and is unique (in other words, it does not depend
on the choice of                                    

We look at some examples shortly. But, before we do, let's take a moment and talk about some specific choices for

      Although any choice for        gives us an estimate of the area under the curve, we don't necessarily know

whether that estimate is too high (overestimate) or too low (underestimate). If it is important to know whether our

estimate is high or low, we can select our value for     to guarantee one result or the other.

If we want an overestimate, for example, we can choose       such that for                                    for all
                                                                            is the maximum function value on
              In other words, we choose     so that for

the interval           If we select      in this way, then the Riemann sum  is called an upper sum.

Similarly, if we want an underestimate, we can choose        so that for                        is the minimum function

value on the interval          In this case, the associated Riemann sum is called a lower sum. Note that if       is

either increasing or decreasing throughout the interval      then the maximum and minimum values of the function

occur at the endpoints of the subintervals, so the upper and lower sums are just the same as the left- and right-endpoint

approximations.

EXAMPLE 1.5

Finding Lower and Upper Sums

Find a lower sum for                 on     let          subintervals.

Solution

With       over the interval                We can list the intervals as

Because the function is decreasing over the interval     Figure 1.14 shows that a lower sum is obtained by using the
right endpoints.

Figure 1.14 The graph of                 is set up for a right-endpoint approximation of the area bounded by the curve

and the x-axis on      and it shows a lower sum.

The Riemann sum is

The area of 7.28 is a lower sum and an underestimate.

      1.5     a. Find an upper sum for                   on  let

              b. Sketch the approximation.
18 1 · Integration

EXAMPLE 1.6

Finding Lower and Upper Sums for

Find a lower sum for              over the interval       let

     Solution
Let's first look at the graph in Figure 1.15 to get a better idea of the area of interest.

                         Figure 1.15 The graph of    is divided into six regions:

The intervals are                                    and       Note that                    is increasing on the

interval            so a left-endpoint approximation gives us the lower sum. A left-endpoint approximation is the Riemann

sum                      We have

     1.6 Using the function       over the interval            find an upper sum; let

        SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES

1. State whether the given
    sums are equal or unequal.

a.                  and

b.                  and

c.                       and

d.                       and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1.1 · Approximating Areas 19

In the following exercises, use the rules for sums of powers of integers to compute the sums.

2.                                      3.

Suppose that         and                    In the following exercises, compute the sums.

4.                                      5.                                 6.

7.

In the following exercises, use summation properties and formulas to rewrite and evaluate the sums.

8.                                      9.                                 10.

11.

Let denote the left-endpoint sum using n subintervals and let denote the corresponding right-endpoint sum. In
the following exercises, compute the indicated left and right sums for the given functions on the indicated interval.

12. L4 for       on                     13. R4 for           on            14. L6 for          on

15. R6 for           on                 16. R4 for   on                    17. L4 for  on

18. R8 for       on                     19. L8 for       on                20. Compute the left and right
                                                                                 Riemann sums--L4 and R4,
21. Compute the left and right          22. Compute the left and right           respectively--for
      Riemann sums--L6 and R6,                Riemann sums--L4 and R4,                                   on
      respectively--for                       respectively--for                              Compute their
                                    on                                           average value and
                Compute their                                          on        compare it with the area
      average value and                       and compare their values.          under the graph of f.
      compare it with the area
      under the graph of f.                                                23. Compute the left and right
                                                                                 Riemann sums--L6 and R6,
                                                                                 respectively--for

                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                         and compare their
                                                                                 values.

Express the following endpoint sums in sigma notation but do not evaluate them.

24. L30 for      on                     25. L10 for          on 26. R20 for                    on

27. R100 for on
20 1 · Integration

In the following exercises, graph the function then use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the following left
and right endpoint sums. If the two agree, say "neither."

28. [T] L100 and R100 for           29. [T] L100 and R100 for              30. [T] L50 and R50 for
                            on the                   on the interval                            on the interval

      interval

31. [T] L100 and R100 for           32. [T] L50 and R50 for                33. [T] L100 and R100 for
                 on the interval                          on the interval                    on the interval

34. Let tj denote the time that     35. Let denote the total               36. Let denote the hours of
      it took Tejay van Garteren          rainfall in Portland on the
      to ride the jth stage of the        jth day of the year in 2009.     daylight and denote the
      Tour de France in 2014. If
      there were a total of 21            Interpret                        increase in the hours of

      stages, interpret                                                    daylight from day                  to

                                                                           day j in Fargo, North

                                                                           Dakota, on the jth day of

                                                                           the year. Interpret

37. To help get in shape, Joe       38. The following table gives          39. The following table gives
      gets a new pair of running          approximate values of the              the approximate increase
      shoes. If Joe runs 1 mi each        average annual                         in sea level in inches over
      day in week 1 and adds              atmospheric rate of                    20 years starting in the
                                          increase in carbon dioxide             given year. Estimate the
      mi to his daily routine each        (CO2) each decade since                net change in mean sea
      week, what is the total             1960, in parts per million             level from 1870 to 2010.
      mileage on Joe's shoes              (ppm). Estimate the total
      after 25 weeks?                     increase in atmospheric
                                          CO2 between 1964 and
                                          2013.                             Starting     20-Year
                                                                              Year      Change

                                                                           1870       0.3

                                      Decade Ppm/y                         1890       1.5
                                    1964-1973 1.07

                                                                           1910       0.2

                                    1974-1983 1.34

                                                                           1930       2.8

                                    1984-1993 1.40

                                                                           1950       0.7

                                    1994-2003 1.87

                                                                           1970       1.1

                                      2004-2013 2.07                       1990       1.5

                                    Table 1.2 Average                      Table 1.3 Approximate
                                    Annual Atmospheric                     20-Year Sea Level
                                    CO2 Increase,                          Increases, 1870-1990
                                    1964-2013 Source:                      Source:
                                    http://www.esrl.noaa.g                 http://link.springer.com/
                                    ov/gmd/ccgg/trends/.                   article/
                                                                           10.1007%2Fs10712-011-9119
                                                                           -1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     1.1 · Approximating Areas 21

40. The following table gives       41. The following table gives
      the approximate increase            the percent growth of the
      in dollars in the average           U.S. population beginning
      price of a gallon of gas per        in July of the year
      decade since 1950. If the           indicated. If the U.S.
      average price of a gallon of        population was
      gas in 2010 was $2.60,              281,421,906 in July 2000,
      what was the average price          estimate the U.S.
      of a gallon of gas in 1950?         population in July 2010.

Starting  10-Year                     Year % Change/Year
  Year    Change
                                      2000 1.12
1950      0.03
                                      2001 0.99
1960      0.05
                                      2002 0.93
1970      0.86
                                      2003 0.86
1980      -0.03
                                      2004 0.93
1990      0.29
                                      2005 0.93
2000      1.12
                                      2006 0.97
Table 1.4 Approximate
10-Year Gas Price                     2007 0.96
Increases, 1950-2000
Source: http://epb.lbl.gov/           2008 0.95
homepages/Rick_Diamond/
docs/lbnl55011-trends.pdf.            2009 0.88

                                    Table 1.5 Annual
                                    Percentage Growth of
                                    U.S. Population,
                                    2000-2009 Source:
                                    http://www.census.gov/
                                    popest/data.

                                    (Hint: To obtain the
                                    population in July 2001,
                                    multiply the population in
                                    July 2000 by 1.0112 to get
                                    284,573,831.)
22 1 · Integration

In the following exercises, estimate the areas under the curves by computing the left Riemann sums, L8.

42.                               43.                              44.

45.                               46. [T] Use a computer algebra 47. [T] Use a computer algebra

                                           system to compute the   system to compute the

                                           Riemann sum,       for  Riemann sum, LN, for
                                                                                        for
                                                         for

                                                          on            on

48. [T] Use a computer algebra
      system to compute the
      Riemann sum, LN, for
                            for
                          on
      Compare these estimates
      with .

In the following exercises, use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the endpoint sums RN and LN for
                     How do these estimates compare with the exact answers, which you can find via geometry?

49. [T]             on the        50. [T]         on the
      interval                          interval

In the following exercises, use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the endpoint sums RN and LN for

51. [T]                    on     52. [T]         on the interval  53. Explain why, if
                                                                         and f is increasing on
     the interval          which           which has an exact                     that the left
                                                                         endpoint estimate is a
     has an exact area of         area of                                lower bound for the area
                                                                         below the graph of f on

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.1 · Approximating Areas 23

54. Explain why, if                55. Show that, in general,           56. Explain why, if f is
      and f is decreasing on
               that the left                                            increasing on             the
      endpoint estimate is an
      upper bound for the area                                          error between either LN or
      below the graph of f on
                                                                        RN and the area A below

                                                                        the graph of f is at most

57. For each of the three graphs:  58. In the previous exercise,        59. A unit circle is made up of n

a. Obtain a lower bound            for explain why             gets no  wedges equivalent to the inner

the area enclosed by the curve by smaller while                gets     wedge in the figure. The base

adding the areas of the squares no larger as the squares                of the inner triangle is 1 unit

enclosed completely by the              are subdivided into four        and its height is              The

curve.                                  boxes of equal area.            base of the outer triangle is

b. Obtain an upper bound           for

the area by adding to              the                                  and the height is
                                                                                                Use this
areas   of the squares
                                                                        information to argue that the
enclosed partially by the curve.                                        area of a unit circle is equal to
                                                                        .
24 1 · Integration

1.2 The Definite Integral

Learning Objectives

      1.2.1 State the definition of the definite integral.
      1.2.2 Explain the terms integrand, limits of integration, and variable of integration.
      1.2.3 Explain when a function is integrable.
      1.2.4 Describe the relationship between the definite integral and net area.
      1.2.5 Use geometry and the properties of definite integrals to evaluate them.
      1.2.6 Calculate the average value of a function.

In the preceding section we defined the area under a curve in terms of Riemann sums:

                                           

However, this definition came with restrictions. We required       to be continuous and nonnegative. Unfortunately, real-

world problems don't always meet these restrictions. In this section, we look at how to apply the concept of the area

under the curve to a broader set of functions through the use of the definite integral.

Definition and Notation

The definite integral generalizes the concept of the area under a curve. We lift the requirements that  be continuous
and nonnegative, and define the definite integral as follows.

Definition

If  is a function defined on an interval   the definite integral of f from a to b is given by

                                                                                                                                             (1.8)
                                                                   

provided the limit exists. If this limit exists, the function      is said to be integrable on  or is an integrable
function.

The integral symbol in the previous definition should look familiar. We have seen similar notation in the chapter on
Applications of Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-introduction), where we used the
indefinite integral symbol (without the a and b above and below) to represent an antiderivative. Although the notation
for indefinite integrals may look similar to the notation for a definite integral, they are not the same. A definite integral is
a number. An indefinite integral is a family of functions. Later in this chapter we examine how these concepts are related.
However, close attention should always be paid to notation so we know whether we're working with a definite integral or
an indefinite integral.

Integral notation goes back to the late seventeenth century and is one of the contributions of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz,
who is often considered to be the codiscoverer of calculus, along with Isaac Newton. The integration symbol  is an

elongated S, suggesting sigma or summation. On a definite integral, above and below the summation symbol are the

boundaries of the interval,      The numbers a and b are x-values and are called the limits of integration; specifically,

a is the lower limit and b is the upper limit. To clarify, we are using the word limit in two different ways in the context of

the definite integral. First, we talk about the limit of a sum as   Second, the boundaries of the region are called the

limits of integration.

We call the function    the integrand, and the dx indicates that   is a function with respect to x, called the

variable of integration. Note that, like the index in a sum, the variable of integration is a dummy variable, and has no

impact on the computation of the integral. We could use any variable we like as the variable of integration:

Previously, we discussed the fact that if  is continuous on        then the limit                       exists and is
                                                                                          

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         1.2 · The Definite Integral 25

unique. This leads to the following theorem, which we state without proof.

Theorem 1.1

Continuous Functions Are Integrable

If   is continuous on  then f is integrable on

Functions that are not continuous on      may still be integrable, depending on the nature of the discontinuities. For

example, functions continuous on a closed interval, apart from a finite number of jump discontinuities, are integrable.

It is also worth noting here that we have retained the use of a regular partition in the Riemann sums. This restriction is
not strictly necessary. Any partition can be used to form a Riemann sum. However, if a nonregular partition is used to
define the definite integral, it is not sufficient to take the limit as the number of subintervals goes to infinity. Instead, we
must take the limit as the width of the largest subinterval goes to zero. This introduces a little more complex notation in
our limits and makes the calculations more difficult without really gaining much additional insight, so we stick with
regular partitions for the Riemann sums.

EXAMPLE 1.7

Evaluating an Integral Using the Definition

Use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate            Use a right-endpoint approximation to generate the

Riemann sum.

     Solution

We first want to set up a Riemann sum. Based on the limits of integration, we have  and  For

let            be a regular partition of  Then

Since we are using a right-endpoint approximation to generate Riemann sums, for each i, we need to calculate the

function value at the right endpoint of the interval     The right endpoint of the interval is and since P is a

regular partition,

Thus, the function value at the right endpoint of the interval is

Then the Riemann sum takes the form

Using the summation formula for           we have
26 1 · Integration

Now, to calculate the definite integral, we need to take the limit as   We get

                                        

                                        

                                                                       

1.7 Use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate                     Use a right-endpoint approximation
           to generate the Riemann sum.

Evaluating Definite Integrals

Evaluating definite integrals this way can be quite tedious because of the complexity of the calculations. Later in this
chapter we develop techniques for evaluating definite integrals without taking limits of Riemann sums. However, for
now, we can rely on the fact that definite integrals represent the area under the curve, and we can evaluate definite
integrals by using geometric formulas to calculate that area. We do this to confirm that definite integrals do, indeed,
represent areas, so we can then discuss what to do in the case of a curve of a function dropping below the x-axis.

  EXAMPLE 1.8

Using Geometric Formulas to Calculate Definite Integrals

Use the formula for the area of a circle to evaluate

     Solution
The function describes a semicircle with radius 3. To find

we want to find the area under the curve over the interval  The formula for the area of a circle is  The area
of a semicircle is just one-half the area of a circle, or
                                                                       The shaded area in Figure 1.16 covers one-half of the

semicircle, or                   Thus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.2 · The Definite Integral 27

Figure 1.16 The value of the integral of the function  over the interval         is the area of the shaded region.

1.8 Use the formula for the area of a trapezoid to evaluate

Area and the Definite Integral

When we defined the definite integral, we lifted the requirement that  be nonnegative. But how do we interpret "the

area under the curve" when  is negative?

Net Signed Area

Let us return to the Riemann sum. Consider, for example, the function            (shown in Figure 1.17) on the

interval  Use          and choose  as the left endpoint of each interval. Construct a rectangle on each

subinterval of height       and width x. When          is positive, the product  represents the area of the

rectangle, as before. When  is negative, however, the product             represents the negative of the area of the

rectangle. The Riemann sum then becomes

Figure 1.17 For a function that is partly negative, the Riemann sum is the area of the rectangles above the x-axis less the
area of the rectangles below the x-axis.
28 1 · Integration

Taking the limit as   the Riemann sum approaches the area between the curve above the x-axis and the x-axis, less

the area between the curve below the x-axis and the x-axis, as shown in Figure 1.18. Then,

                                                                

The quantity         is called the net signed area.

                  Figure 1.18 In the limit, the definite integral equals area A1 less area A2, or the net signed area.

Notice that net signed area can be positive, negative, or zero. If the area above the x-axis is larger, the net signed area is
positive. If the area below the x-axis is larger, the net signed area is negative. If the areas above and below the x-axis are
equal, the net signed area is zero.

EXAMPLE 1.9

Finding the Net Signed Area                                       and the x-axis over the interval
Find the net signed area between the curve of the function

     Solution                                                                   to           and the other from  to
The function produces a straight line that forms two triangles: one from
                                                                                    the area of triangle A1, above the
        (Figure 1.19). Using the geometric formula for the area of a triangle,
axis, is

where 3 is the base and          is the height. The area of triangle A2, below the axis, is

where 3 is the base and 6 is the height. Thus, the net area is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1.2 · The Definite Integral 29

Figure 1.19 The area above the curve and below the x-axis equals the area below the curve and above the x-axis.

     Analysis                                                                                 Since the areas of the

If A1 is the area above the x-axis and A2 is the area below the x-axis, then the net area is
two triangles are equal, the net area is zero.

1.9 Find the net signed area of  over the interval  illustrated in the following image.

Total Area

One application of the definite integral is finding displacement when given a velocity function. If represents the
velocity of an object as a function of time, then the area under the curve tells us how far the object is from its original
position. This is a very important application of the definite integral, and we examine it in more detail later in the chapter.
For now, we're just going to look at some basics to get a feel for how this works by studying constant velocities.

When velocity is a constant, the area under the curve is just velocity times time. This idea is already very familiar. If a car
travels away from its starting position in a straight line at a speed of 70 mph for 2 hours, then it is 140 mi away from its
original position (Figure 1.20). Using integral notation, we have
30 1 · Integration

Figure 1.20 The area under the curve    tells us how far the car is from its starting point at a given time.

In the context of displacement, net signed area allows us to take direction into account. If a car travels straight north at a
speed of 60 mph for 2 hours, it is 120 mi north of its starting position. If the car then turns around and travels south at a
speed of 40 mph for 3 hours, it will be back at it starting position (Figure 1.21). Again, using integral notation, we have

In this case the displacement is zero.

           Figure 1.21 The area above the axis and the area below the axis are equal, so the net signed area is zero.
Suppose we want to know how far the car travels overall, regardless of direction. In this case, we want to know the area
between the curve and the x-axis, regardless of whether that area is above or below the axis. This is called the total
area.
Graphically, it is easiest to think of calculating total area by adding the areas above the axis and the areas below the axis
(rather than subtracting the areas below the axis, as we did with net signed area). To accomplish this mathematically, we
use the absolute value function. Thus, the total distance traveled by the car is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.2 · The Definite Integral 31

Bringing these ideas together formally, we state the following definitions.

Definition

Let      be an integrable function defined on an interval       Let A1 represent the area between  and the

x-axis that lies above the axis and let A2 represent the area between        and the x-axis that lies below the axis. Then,

the net signed area between         and the x-axis is given by

The total area between        and the x-axis is given by

EXAMPLE 1.10

Finding the Total Area              and the x-axis over the interval
Find the total area between

Solution

Calculate the x-intercept as  (set  solve for x). To find the total area, take the area below the x-axis over the

subinterval   and add it to the area above the x-axis on the subinterval     (Figure 1.22).

              Figure 1.22 The total area between the line and the x-axis over  is A2 plus A1.

We have

Then, using the formula for the area of a triangle, we obtain

The total area, then, is                                        and the x-axis over the interval
       1.10 Find the total area between the function
32 1 · Integration

    Properties of the Definite Integral

     The properties of indefinite integrals apply to definite integrals as well. Definite integrals also have properties that relate
     to the limits of integration. These properties, along with the rules of integration that we examine later in this chapter,
     help us manipulate expressions to evaluate definite integrals.

       Rule: Properties of the Definite Integral

         1.
                                                                                                                                                                       (1.9)

     If the limits of integration are the same, the integral is just a line and contains no area.
2.

                                                                                                   (1.10)

     If the limits are reversed, then place a negative sign in front of the integral.
3.

                                                                                                   (1.11)

     The integral of a sum is the sum of the integrals.
4.

                                                                                                   (1.12)

     The integral of a difference is the difference of the integrals.
5.

                                                                                                   (1.13)

     for constant c. The integral of the product of a constant and a function is equal to the constant multiplied by the
     integral of the function.
6.

                                                                                                                                                            (1.14)

Although this formula normally applies when c is between a and b, the formula holds for all values of a, b, and c,

provided      is integrable on the largest interval.

EXAMPLE 1.11

Using the Properties of the Definite Integral                                                      over the interval
Use the properties of the definite integral to express the definite integral of

          as the sum of three definite integrals.

Solution

Using integral notation, we have                         We apply properties 3. and 5. to get

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.2 · The Definite Integral 33

1.11 Use the properties of the definite integral to express the definite integral of

               over the interval  as the sum of four definite integrals.

EXAMPLE 1.12

Using the Properties of the Definite Integral

If it is known that               and                        find the value of

     Solution
By property 6.,

Thus,

1.12 If it is known that                       and                        find the value of

Comparison Properties of Integrals

A picture can sometimes tell us more about a function than the results of computations. Comparing functions by their

graphs as well as by their algebraic expressions can often give new insight into the process of integration. Intuitively, we

might say that if a function      is above another function  then the area between           and the x-axis is greater

than the area between          and the x-axis. This is true depending on the interval over which the comparison is made.

The properties of definite integrals are valid whether       or                 The following properties, however, concern

only the case        and are used when we want to compare the sizes of integrals.

Theorem 1.2

Comparison Theorem

i. If                for          then

ii. If                    for     then

iii. If m and M are constants such that                 for      then
34 1 · Integration

EXAMPLE 1.13

Comparing Two Functions over a Given Interval

Compare                          and             over the interval

Solution

Graphing these functions is necessary to understand how they compare over the interval           Initially, when graphed
                                                                                                        the graphs appear
on a graphing calculator,        appears to be above    everywhere. However, on the interval            The two functions

to be on top of each other. We need to zoom in to see that, on the interval            is above

intersect at        and          (Figure 1.23).

Figure 1.23 (a) The function          appears above the function    except over the interval     (b) Viewing the same

graph with a greater zoom shows this more clearly.

We can see from the graph that over the interval                    Comparing the integrals over the specified interval

we also see that                                      (Figure 1.24). The thin, red-shaded area shows just how much

difference there is between these two integrals over the interval

Figure 1.24 (a) The graph shows that over the interval                       where equality holds only at the endpoints of

the interval. (b) Viewing the same graph with a greater zoom shows this more clearly.

Average Value of a Function

We often need to find the average of a set of numbers, such as an average test grade. Suppose you received the
following test scores in your algebra class: 89, 90, 56, 78, 100, and 69. Your semester grade is your average of test scores
and you want to know what grade to expect. We can find the average by adding all the scores and dividing by the
number of scores. In this case, there are six test scores. Thus,

Therefore, your average test grade is approximately 80.33, which translates to a B- at most schools.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.2 · The Definite Integral 35

Suppose, however, that we have a function that gives us the speed of an object at any time t, and we want to find
the object's average speed. The function takes on an infinite number of values, so we can't use the process just
described. Fortunately, we can use a definite integral to find the average value of a function such as this.

Let  be continuous over the interval       and let  be divided into n subintervals of width

Choose a representative in each subinterval and calculate  for                     In other words, consider each

     as a sampling of the function over each subinterval. The average value of the function may then be approximated

as

which is basically the same expression used to calculate the average of discrete values.

But we know   so           and we get

Following through with the algebra, the numerator is a sum that is represented as         and we are dividing by a

fraction. To divide by a fraction, invert the denominator and multiply. Thus, an approximate value for the average value
of the function is given by

This is a Riemann sum. Then, to get the exact average value, take the limit as n goes to infinity. Thus, the average value
of a function is given by

                                           

Definition

Let       be continuous over the interval    Then, the average value of the function      (or fave) on  is

given by

EXAMPLE 1.14

Finding the Average Value of a Linear Function

Find the average value of  over the interval

     Solution
First, graph the function on the stated interval, as shown in Figure 1.25.
36 1 · Integration

                          Figure 1.25 The graph shows the area under the function             over

The region is a trapezoid lying on its side, so we can use the area formula for a trapezoid         where h
represents height, and a and b represent the two parallel sides. Then,

Thus the average value of the function is

     1.13 Find the average value of          over the interval

        SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, express the limits as integrals.

60.                 over         61.                                              62.
                                                                                            

                                       over                                             over

63.                                                                                as definite integrals, identifying the
          

      over

In the following exercises, given Ln or Rn as indicated, express their limits as
correct intervals.

64.                              65.                            66.

67.                              68.

69.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1.2 · The Definite Integral 37

In the following exercises, evaluate the integrals of the functions graphed using the formulas for areas of triangles and
circles, and subtracting the areas below the x-axis.

70.                                     71.                                  72.

73.                                     74.                                  75.

In the following exercises, evaluate the integral using area formulas.

76.                                77.                                  78.

79.                                80.                                  81.

82.                                83.

In the following exercises, use averages of values at the left (L) and right (R) endpoints to compute the integrals of the
piecewise linear functions with graphs that pass through the given list of points over the indicated intervals.

84.                                          85.
      over                                         over

86.                                          87.
      over                                         over

Suppose that  and                            and                             and  In the following

exercises, compute the integrals.

88.                                89.                                  90.

91.                                92.                                  93.
38 1 · Integration

In the following exercises, use the identity                                                 to compute the integrals.

94.                                   95.

In the following exercises, find the net signed area between         and the x-axis.

96.                  (Hint: Look      97.                  (Hint: Look

      at the graph of f.)                   at the graph of f.)

In the following exercises, given that                                  and                  compute the integrals.

98.                                   99.                               100.

101.                                  102.                              103.

In the following exercises, use the comparison theorem.

104. Show that                        105. Show that                          106. Show that

107. Show that                                  108. Show that                        109. Show that

                                                                        over

In the following exercises, find the average value fave of f between a and b, and find a point c, where

110.                                  111.                              112.

113.                                        114.                              115.

In the following exercises, approximate the average value using Riemann sums L100 and R100. How does your answer
compare with the exact given answer?

116. [T]             over the         117. [T]             over the     118. [T]              over the
        interval       the exact                                                interval          the exact
        solution is                         interval       the exact
                                                                                solution is
                                            solution is

119. [T]             over the

      interval             the exact
      solution is

In the following exercises, compute the average value using the left Riemann sums LN for                     How does the
accuracy compare with the given exact value?

120. [T]             over the         121. [T]             over the     122. [T]              over the
        interval     the exact                interval       the exact          interval       the exact
        solution is                           solution is                       solution is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         1.2 · The Definite Integral 39

123. [T]                  over the 124. Suppose that                       125. Suppose that
        interval         the exact and
                                                                                   and
        solution is                                                                Show that

                                                                 Show

                                       that                and

126. Show that the average             127. Show that the average          128. Explain why the graphs of

value of             over              value of            over            a quadratic function

is equal to 1/2 Without                is equal to Without                 (parabola)             and a

further calculation,                   further calculation,                linear function           can

determine whether the                  determine whether the               intersect in at most two

average value of                       average value of                    points. Suppose that

over                 is also equal to  over          is also equal to                         and

1/2.                                                                                          and that

                                                                           Explain why

                                                                           whenever

129. Suppose that parabola             130. Suppose        can be subdivided into       131. Suppose f and g are
                                                                                                continuous functions
                                       subintervals                                             such that

opens downward                         such that either            over
and has a vertex of                                                   Set

                     For which         or            over

interval             is                                                                       for every subinterval

                                                                                              of         Explain why

                                       a. Explain why                                                     for all values

as large as possible?                                                                         of x.

                                       b. Then, explain why

132. Suppose the average               133. Suppose that         can be    134. Suppose that for each i

value of f over            is 1        partitioned. taking                         such that             one

and the average value of f                                                         has

over                 is 1 where        such that the average value
                                       of f over each subinterval
                     Show that the                                                 Show that

average value of f over                                    is equal to 1

      is also 1.                       for each

                                       Explain why the average

                                       value of f over           is also

                                       equal to 1.
40 1 · Integration

135. Suppose that for each i such  136.  [T] Compute the left and          137. [T] Compute the left and

that                one has              right Riemann sums L10                    right Riemann sums, L10
                                         and R10 and their average                 and R10, and their
                        Show that
                                                  for                      average               for

                                         over          Given that                            over

                                                                   to how      Given that

                                         many decimal places is                                        to
                                                       accurate?
                                                                           how many decimal places

                                                                           is             accurate?

138. If                            139. Estimate       using               140. Estimate     by
        what is
                                         the left and right                comparison with the area
                                         endpoint sums, each with          of a single rectangle with
                                         a single rectangle. How           height equal to the value
                                         does the average of these         of t at the midpoint
                                         left and right endpoint
                                         sums compare with the             How does this midpoint
                                                                           estimate compare with

                                         actual value                      the actual value

141. From the graph of             shown: 142. If f is 1-periodic          143. If f is 1-periodic and
                                                                                                           is it
a. Explain why                                                     odd,
                                         and integrable over                       necessarily true that
                                                                                                              for all
b. Explain why, in general,                       is it always true
                                                                                   A?
                             for any     that

      value of a.

1.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

Learning Objectives

      1.3.1 Describe the meaning of the Mean Value Theorem for Integrals.
      1.3.2 State the meaning of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1.
      1.3.3 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, to evaluate derivatives of integrals.
      1.3.4 State the meaning of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2.
      1.3.5 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, to evaluate definite integrals.
      1.3.6 Explain the relationship between differentiation and integration.

In the previous two sections, we looked at the definite integral and its relationship to the area under the curve of a
function. Unfortunately, so far, the only tools we have available to calculate the value of a definite integral are geometric
area formulas and limits of Riemann sums, and both approaches are extremely cumbersome. In this section we look at
some more powerful and useful techniques for evaluating definite integrals.

These new techniques rely on the relationship between differentiation and integration. This relationship was discovered
and explored by both Sir Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (among others) during the late 1600s and early

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 41

1700s, and it is codified in what we now call the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, which has two parts that we
examine in this section. Its very name indicates how central this theorem is to the entire development of calculus.

       MEDIA

      Isaac Newton's contributions to mathematics and physics changed the way we look at the world. The relationships
      he discovered, codified as Newton's laws and the law of universal gravitation, are still taught as foundational
      material in physics today, and his calculus has spawned entire fields of mathematics. To learn more, read a brief
      biography (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_newtonbio) of Newton with multimedia clips.

Before we get to this crucial theorem, however, let's examine another important theorem, the Mean Value Theorem for
Integrals, which is needed to prove the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals

The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals states that a continuous function on a closed interval takes on its average value

at some point in that interval. The theorem guarantees that if  is continuous, a point c exists in an interval

such that the value of the function at c is equal to the average value of  over  We state this theorem

mathematically with the help of the formula for the average value of a function that we presented at the end of the

preceding section.

Theorem 1.3

The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals

If     is continuous over an interval       then there is at least one point     such that

                                                                                                                (1.15)

This formula can also be stated as

Proof

Since        is continuous on  by the extreme value theorem (see Maxima and Minima (http://openstax.org/books/

calculus-volume-1/pages/4-3-maxima-and-minima)), it assumes minimum and maximum values--m and M,

respectively--on    Then, for all x in      we have                        Therefore, by the comparison theorem (see The

Definite Integral), we have

Dividing by       gives us

Since               is a number between m and M, and since                 is continuous and assumes the values m and M

over         by the Intermediate Value Theorem (see Continuity (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/

2-4-continuity)), there is a number c over  such that

and the proof is complete.

42 1 · Integration

EXAMPLE 1.15

Finding the Average Value of a Function                 over the interval  and find c such that  equals the average
Find the average value of the function
value of the function over

     Solution                            is given by
The formula states the mean value of

We can see in Figure 1.26 that the function represents a straight line and forms a right triangle bounded by the x- and

y-axes. The area of the triangle is                     We have

The average value is found by multiplying the area by            Thus, the average value of the function is

Set the average value equal to       and solve for c.

At

Figure 1.26 By the Mean Value Theorem, the continuous function             takes on its average value at c at least once over
a closed interval.

    1.14 Find the average value of the function         over the interval  and find c such that              equals
                the average value of the function over

EXAMPLE 1.16

Finding the Point Where a Function Takes on Its Average Value

Given               find c such that     equals the average value of       over

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 43

     Solution
We are looking for the value of c such that

Replacing    with c2, we have

Since      is outside the interval, take only the positive value. Thus,  (Figure 1.27).

           Figure 1.27 Over the interval     the function                takes on its average value at

    1.15 Given                               find c such that  equals the average value of              over

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus Part 1: Integrals and Antiderivatives

As mentioned earlier, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is an extremely powerful theorem that establishes the
relationship between differentiation and integration, and gives us a way to evaluate definite integrals without using
Riemann sums or calculating areas. The theorem is comprised of two parts, the first of which, the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, is stated here. Part 1 establishes the relationship between differentiation and integration.

Theorem 1.4

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1

If     is continuous over an interval        and the function            is defined by

                                                                                                        (1.16)

then            over

Before we delve into the proof, a couple of subtleties are worth mentioning here. First, a comment on the notation. Note

that we have defined a function,       as the definite integral of another function,    from the point a to the point x.
44 1 · Integration

At first glance, this is confusing, because we have said several times that a definite integral is a number, and here it looks

like it's a function. The key here is to notice that for any particular value of x, the definite integral is a number. So the

function            returns a number (the value of the definite integral) for each value of x.

Second, it is worth commenting on some of the key implications of this theorem. There is a reason it is called the
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Not only does it establish a relationship between integration and differentiation, but
also it guarantees that any integrable function has an antiderivative.

Proof

Applying the definition of the derivative, we have

Looking carefully at this last expression, we see   is just the average value of the function       over the
                                                                                                   such that
interval            Therefore, by The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals, there is some number c in

In addition, since c is between x and x + h, c approaches x as h approaches zero. Also, since   is continuous, we have
                                         Putting all these pieces together, we have

and the proof is complete.


  EXAMPLE 1.17
Finding a Derivative with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 to find the derivative of

     Solution
According to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, the derivative is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 45

     1.16 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 to find the derivative of

EXAMPLE 1.18

Using the Fundamental Theorem and the Chain Rule to Calculate Derivatives

Let            Find

     Solution  we have                         Thus, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus and the chain rule,
Letting

     1.17 Let           Find

EXAMPLE 1.19

Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus with Two Variable Limits of Integration

Let            Find

     Solution        Both limits of integration are variable, so we need to split this into two integrals. We get
We have

Differentiating the first term, we obtain      Then,
Differentiating the second term, we first let
46 1 · Integration

     Thus,

1.18 Let                              Find

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2: The Evaluation Theorem

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, is perhaps the most important theorem in calculus. After tireless efforts
by mathematicians for approximately 500 years, new techniques emerged that provided scientists with the necessary
tools to explain many phenomena. Using calculus, astronomers could finally determine distances in space and map
planetary orbits. Everyday financial problems such as calculating marginal costs or predicting total profit could now be
handled with simplicity and accuracy. Engineers could calculate the bending strength of materials or the three-
dimensional motion of objects. Our view of the world was forever changed with calculus.

After finding approximate areas by adding the areas of n rectangles, the application of this theorem is straightforward by
comparison. It almost seems too simple that the area of an entire curved region can be calculated by just evaluating an
antiderivative at the first and last endpoints of an interval.

Theorem 1.5

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2

If f is continuous over the interval  and      is any antiderivative of         then

                                                                                      (1.17)

We often see the notation        to denote the expression                We use this vertical bar and associated limits a

and b to indicate that we should evaluate the function      at the upper limit (in this case, b), and subtract the value of

the function        evaluated at the lower limit (in this case, a).

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 (also known as the evaluation theorem) states that if we can find an
antiderivative for the integrand, then we can evaluate the definite integral by evaluating the antiderivative at the
endpoints of the interval and subtracting.

Proof                            be a regular partition of  Then, we can write

Let

Now, we know F is an antiderivative of f over  so by the Mean Value Theorem (see The Mean Value Theorem

(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-4-the-mean-value-theorem)) for   we can find in

       such that

Then, substituting into the previous equation, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 47

Taking the limit of both sides as   we obtain

                                                                                       


  EXAMPLE 1.20

Evaluating an Integral with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
Use The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 to evaluate

     Solution
Recall the power rule for Antiderivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-10-antiderivatives):

Use this rule to find the antiderivative of the function and then apply the theorem. We have

     Analysis
Notice that we did not include the "+ C" term when we wrote the antiderivative. The reason is that, according to the
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, any antiderivative works. So, for convenience, we chose the antiderivative with

          If we had chosen another antiderivative, the constant term would have canceled out. This always happens when
evaluating a definite integral.

The region of the area we just calculated is depicted in Figure 1.28. Note that the region between the curve and the
x-axis is all below the x-axis. Area is always positive, but a definite integral can still produce a negative number (a net
signed area). For example, if this were a profit function, a negative number indicates the company is operating at a loss
over the given interval.
48 1 · Integration

          Figure 1.28 The evaluation of a definite integral can produce a negative value, even though area is always positive.
        EXAMPLE 1.21
     Evaluating a Definite Integral Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2
     Evaluate the following integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2:

           Solution
     First, eliminate the radical by rewriting the integral using rational exponents. Then, separate the numerator terms by
     writing each one over the denominator:
     Use the properties of exponents to simplify:
     Now, integrate using the power rule:

     See Figure 1.29.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 49

Figure 1.29 The area under the curve from              to      can be calculated by evaluating a definite integral.

1.19 Use The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 to evaluate

EXAMPLE 1.22

A Roller-Skating Race

James and Kathy are racing on roller skates. They race along a long, straight track, and whoever has gone the farthest

after 5 sec wins a prize. If James can skate at a velocity of         ft/sec and Kathy can skate at a velocity of

              ft/sec, who is going to win the race?

     Solution                                                  and see which value is bigger. For James, we want to calculate
We need to integrate both functions over the interval

Using the power rule, we have

Thus, James has skated 50 ft after 5 sec. Turning now to Kathy, we want to calculate

We know is an antiderivative of  so it is reasonable to expect that an antiderivative of  would involve

However, when we differentiate             we get                     as a result of the chain rule, so we have to

account for this additional coefficient when we integrate. We obtain

Kathy has skated approximately 50.6 ft after 5 sec. Kathy wins, but not by much!

       1.20 Suppose James and Kathy have a rematch, but this time the official stops the contest after only 3 sec. Does
                    this change the outcome?
50 1 · Integration

        STUDENT PROJECT
        A Parachutist in Free Fall

Figure 1.30 Skydivers can adjust the velocity of their dive by changing the position of their body during the free fall.
(credit: Jeremy T. Lock)

Julie is an avid skydiver. She has more than 300 jumps under her belt and has mastered the art of making
adjustments to her body position in the air to control how fast she falls. If she arches her back and points her belly
toward the ground, she reaches a terminal velocity of approximately 120 mph (176 ft/sec). If, instead, she orients her
body with her head straight down, she falls faster, reaching a terminal velocity of 150 mph (220 ft/sec).

Since Julie will be moving (falling) in a downward direction, we assume the downward direction is positive to simplify

our calculations. Julie executes her jumps from an altitude of 12,500 ft. After she exits the aircraft, she immediately

starts falling at a velocity given by  She continues to accelerate according to this velocity function until she

reaches terminal velocity. After she reaches terminal velocity, her speed remains constant until she pulls her ripcord

and slows down to land.

On her first jump of the day, Julie orients herself in the slower "belly down" position (terminal velocity is 176 ft/sec).
Using this information, answer the following questions.

1. How long after she exits the aircraft does Julie reach terminal velocity?
2. Based on your answer to question 1, set up an expression involving one or more integrals that represents the

     distance Julie falls after 30 sec.
3. If Julie pulls her ripcord at an altitude of 3000 ft, how long does she spend in a free fall?
4. Julie pulls her ripcord at 3000 ft. It takes 5 sec for her parachute to open completely and for her to slow down,

     during which time she falls another 400 ft. After her canopy is fully open, her speed is reduced to 16 ft/sec. Find
     the total time Julie spends in the air, from the time she leaves the airplane until the time her feet touch the
     ground.
     On Julie's second jump of the day, she decides she wants to fall a little faster and orients herself in the "head
     down" position. Her terminal velocity in this position is 220 ft/sec. Answer these questions based on this velocity:
5. How long does it take Julie to reach terminal velocity in this case?
6. Before pulling her ripcord, Julie reorients her body in the "belly down" position so she is not moving quite as fast

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 51

when her parachute opens. If she begins this maneuver at an altitude of 4000 ft, how long does she spend in a
free fall before beginning the reorientation?
Some jumpers wear "wingsuits" (see Figure 1.31). These suits have fabric panels between the arms and legs and
allow the wearer to glide around in a free fall, much like a flying squirrel. (Indeed, the suits are sometimes called
"flying squirrel suits.") When wearing these suits, terminal velocity can be reduced to about 30 mph (44 ft/sec),
allowing the wearers a much longer time in the air. Wingsuit flyers still use parachutes to land; although the
vertical velocities are within the margin of safety, horizontal velocities can exceed 70 mph, much too fast to land
safely.

Figure 1.31 The fabric panels on the arms and legs of a wingsuit work to reduce the vertical velocity of a skydiver's
fall. (credit: Richard Schneider)

Answer the following question based on the velocity in a wingsuit.

 7. If Julie dons a wingsuit before her third jump of the day, and she pulls her ripcord at an altitude of 3000 ft, how
      long does she get to spend gliding around in the air?

SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES

144. Consider two athletes    145. Two mountain climbers            146. To get on a certain toll
                                      start their climb at base             road a driver has to take a
running at variable                   camp, taking two                      card that lists the mile
                                      different routes, one                 entrance point. The card
speeds       and                      steeper than the other,               also has a timestamp.
                                      and arrive at the peak at             When going to pay the
The runners start and                 exactly the same time. Is             toll at the exit, the driver
                                      it necessarily true that, at          is surprised to receive a
finish a race at exactly the          some point, both climbers             speeding ticket along
                                      increased in altitude at              with the toll. Explain how
same time. Explain why                the same rate?                        this can happen.

the two runners must be

going the same speed at

some point.

147. Set

Find      and the

average value of over
52 1 · Integration

In the following exercises, use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, to find each derivative.

148.                             149.                     150.

151.                             152.                     153.

154.                             155.                     156.

157.                             158.                     159.

160. The graph of                where1f61. The graph of        where f

      is a piecewise constant function, is       is a piecewise constant function, is
      shown here.                                shown here.

      a. Over which intervals is f positive?     a. Over which intervals is f positive?
           Over which intervals is it negative?       Over which intervals is it negative?
           Over which intervals, if any, is it        Over which intervals, if any, is it
           equal to zero?                             equal to zero?

      b. What are the maximum and                b. What are the maximum and
           minimum values of f?                       minimum values of f?

      c. What is the average value of f?         c. What is the average value of f?

162. The graph of                where163. The graph of         where 

      is a piecewise linear function, is         is a piecewise linear function, is
      shown here.                                shown here.

      a. Over which intervals is  positive?      a. Over which intervals is  positive?
           Over which intervals is it negative?       Over which intervals is it negative?
           Over which, if any, is it zero?            Over which, if any, is it zero?

      b. Over which intervals is                 b. Over which intervals is 
           increasing? Over which is it               increasing? Over which is it
           decreasing? Over which, if any, is         decreasing? Over which intervals,
           it constant?                               if any, is it constant?

      c. What is the average value of ?          c. What is the average value of ?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 53

In the following exercises, use a calculator to estimate the area under the curve by computing T10, the average of the

left- and right-endpoint Riemann sums using      rectangles. Then, using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,

Part 2, determine the exact area.

164. [T]  over                     165. [T]      166. [T]  over
                                           over

167. [T]        over               168. [T]      169. [T]  over
                                           over

In the following exercises, evaluate each definite integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2.

170.                               171.          172.

173.                               174.          175.

176.                               177.          178.

179.                               180.          181.

182.                               183.          184.

185.                               186.          187.

188.                               189.

In the following exercises, use the evaluation theorem to express the integral as a function

190.                               191.          192.

193.

In the following exercises, identify the roots of the integrand to remove absolute values, then evaluate using the
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2.

194.                               195.          196.
54 1 · Integration               198. Suppose that the number       199. Suppose the rate of
                                         of hours of daylight on a          gasoline consumption over
     197.                                given day in Seattle is            the course of a year in the
                                         modeled by the function            United States can be
                                                                            modeled by a sinusoidal
                                 with t given in months                     function of the form

                                 and  corresponding

                                 to the winter solstice.            gal/mo.

                                 a. What is the average             a. What is the average

                                      number of daylight            monthly consumption,

                                      hours in a year?              and for which values of

                                 b. At which times t1 and           t is the rate at time t

                                      t2, where                     equal to the average

                                                          do        rate?

                                      the number of daylight        b. What is the number of

                                      hours equal the               gallons of gasoline

                                      average number?               consumed in the United

                                 c. Write an integral that          States in a year?

                                      expresses the total           c. Write an integral that

                                      number of daylight            expresses the average

                                      hours in Seattle              monthly U.S. gas

                                      between and                   consumption during

                                 d. Compute the mean                the part of the year

                                      hours of daylight in          between the beginning

                                      Seattle between and           of April  and the

                                      where                         end of September

                                                          and

                                      then between and

                                      and show that the

                                      average of the two is

                                      equal to the average

                                      day length.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1.3 · The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 55

200. Explain why, if f is            201. Explain why, if f is             202. Kepler's first law states that the
        continuous over                                                            planets move in elliptical orbits with
        there is at least one point  continuous over            and                the Sun at one focus. The closest
                      such that                                                    point of a planetary orbit to the Sun
                                     is not equal to a constant,                   is called the perihelion (for Earth, it
                                                                                   currently occurs around January 3)
                                     there is at least one point                   and the farthest point is called the
                                                                                   aphelion (for Earth, it currently occurs
                                     such that                                     around July 4). Kepler's second law
                                                                                   states that planets sweep out equal
                                     and at least one point                        areas of their elliptical orbits in equal
                                                   such that                       times. Thus, the two arcs indicated in
                                                                                   the following figure are swept out in
                                                                                   equal times. At what time of year is
                                                                                   Earth moving fastest in its orbit?
                                                                                   When is it moving slowest?

203. A point on an ellipse with      204. As implied earlier,              205. The force of gravitational
        major axis length 2a and             according to Kepler's                 attraction between the
        minor axis length 2b has             laws, Earth's orbit is an             Sun and a planet is
        the coordinates                      ellipse with the Sun at                                    where m is
                                             one focus. The perihelion
a. Show that the distance                    for Earth's orbit around      the mass of the planet, M
                                             the Sun is 147,098,290 km
from this point to the                       and the aphelion is           is the mass of the Sun, G
                                             152,098,232 km.
focus at  is                                  a. By placing the major      is a universal constant,
                                                   axis along the x-axis,
                                                   find the average        and      is the distance
                                                   distance from Earth to
     where                                         the Sun.                between the Sun and the
b. Use these coordinates                      b. The classic definition
                                                   of an astronomical      planet when the planet is
     to show that the                              unit (AU) is the
     average distance from                         distance from Earth to  at an angle  with the
     a point on the ellipse to                     the Sun, and its value
     the focus at                                  was computed as the     major axis of its orbit.
     with respect to angle ,                       average of the
     is a.                                         perihelion and          Assuming that M, m, and
                                                   aphelion distances. Is
                                                   this definition         the ellipse parameters a
                                                   justified?
                                                                           and b (half-lengths of the

                                                                           major and minor axes)

                                                                           are given, set up--but do

                                                                           not evaluate--an integral

                                                                           that expresses in terms of

                                                                                    the average

                                                                           gravitational force

                                                                           between the Sun and the

                                                                           planet.
56 1 · Integration

     206. The displacement from
              rest of a mass attached to
              a spring satisfies the
              simple harmonic motion
              equation

              where is a phase
             constant,  is the angular
             frequency, and A is the
              amplitude. Find the
              average velocity, the
              average speed
              (magnitude of velocity),
              the average
              displacement, and the
              average distance from
              rest (magnitude of
              displacement) of the
              mass.

   1.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem

    Learning Objectives

            1.4.1 Apply the basic integration formulas.
            1.4.2 Explain the significance of the net change theorem.
            1.4.3 Use the net change theorem to solve applied problems.
            1.4.4 Apply the integrals of odd and even functions.
     In this section, we use some basic integration formulas studied previously to solve some key applied problems. It is
     important to note that these formulas are presented in terms of indefinite integrals. Although definite and indefinite
     integrals are closely related, there are some key differences to keep in mind. A definite integral is either a number (when
     the limits of integration are constants) or a single function (when one or both of the limits of integration are variables).
     An indefinite integral represents a family of functions, all of which differ by a constant. As you become more familiar with
     integration, you will get a feel for when to use definite integrals and when to use indefinite integrals. You will naturally
     select the correct approach for a given problem without thinking too much about it. However, until these concepts are
     cemented in your mind, think carefully about whether you need a definite integral or an indefinite integral and make
     sure you are using the proper notation based on your choice.

    Basic Integration Formulas

     Recall the integration formulas given in the table in Antiderivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/
     4-10-antiderivatives) and the rule on properties of definite integrals. Let's look at a few examples of how to apply these
     rules.

       EXAMPLE 1.23

     Integrating a Function Using the Power Rule

     Use the power rule to integrate the function

           Solution
     The first step is to rewrite the function and simplify it so we can apply the power rule:

     Now apply the power rule:

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                              1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 57

1.21 Find the definite integral of            over the interval

The Net Change Theorem

The net change theorem considers the integral of a rate of change. It says that when a quantity changes, the new value
equals the initial value plus the integral of the rate of change of that quantity. The formula can be expressed in two ways.
The second is more familiar; it is simply the definite integral.

  Theorem 1.6

  Net Change Theorem
  The new value of a changing quantity equals the initial value plus the integral of the rate of change:

                                                                                                                      (1.18)

Subtracting  from both sides of the first equation yields the second equation. Since they are equivalent formulas,

which one we use depends on the application.

The significance of the net change theorem lies in the results. Net change can be applied to area, distance, and volume,
to name only a few applications. Net change accounts for negative quantities automatically without having to write more
than one integral. To illustrate, let's apply the net change theorem to a velocity function in which the result is
displacement.

We looked at a simple example of this in The Definite Integral. Suppose a car is moving due north (the positive direction)
at 40 mph between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m., then the car moves south at 30 mph between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. We can graph this
motion as shown in Figure 1.32.

                               Figure 1.32 The graph shows speed versus time for the given motion of a car.

Just as we did before, we can use definite integrals to calculate the net displacement as well as the total distance
traveled. The net displacement is given by
58 1 · Integration

     Thus, at 5 p.m. the car is 50 mi north of its starting position. The total distance traveled is given by

Therefore, between 2 p.m. and 5 p.m., the car traveled a total of 110 mi.

To summarize, net displacement may include both positive and negative values. In other words, the velocity function
accounts for both forward distance and backward distance. To find net displacement, integrate the velocity function over
the interval. Total distance traveled, on the other hand, is always positive. To find the total distance traveled by an object,
regardless of direction, we need to integrate the absolute value of the velocity function.

EXAMPLE 1.24

Finding Net Displacement

Given a velocity function              (in meters per second) for a particle in motion from time               to time  find

the net displacement of the particle.

     Solution
Applying the net change theorem, we have

The net displacement is m (Figure 1.33).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 59

Figure 1.33 The graph shows velocity versus time for a particle moving with a linear velocity function.

EXAMPLE 1.25

Finding the Total Distance Traveled                                                                      m/sec
Use Example 1.24 to find the total distance traveled by a particle according to the velocity function
over a time interval

     Solution
The total distance traveled includes both the positive and the negative values. Therefore, we must integrate the absolute
value of the velocity function to find the total distance traveled.

To continue with the example, use two integrals to find the total distance. First, find the t-intercept of the function, since
that is where the division of the interval occurs. Set the equation equal to zero and solve for t. Thus,

The two subintervals are      and  To find the total distance traveled, integrate the absolute value of the

function. Since the function is negative over the interval  we have  over that interval. Over

the function is positive, so       Thus, we have
60 1 · Integration

So, the total distance traveled is m.

1.22 Find the net displacement and total distance traveled in meters given the velocity function
            over the interval

Applying the Net Change Theorem

The net change theorem can be applied to the flow and consumption of fluids, as shown in Example 1.26.

EXAMPLE 1.26

How Many Gallons of Gasoline Are Consumed?

If the motor on a motorboat is started at  and the boat consumes gasoline at the rate of             gal/hr, how much

gasoline is used in the first 2 hours?

Solution

Express the problem as a definite integral, integrate, and evaluate using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. The

limits of integration are the endpoints of the interval  We have

Thus, the motorboat uses 9.6 gal of gas in 2 hours.

  EXAMPLE 1.27
Chapter Opener: Iceboats

                                 Figure 1.34 (credit: modification of work by Carter Brown, Flickr)

As we saw at the beginning of the chapter, top iceboat racers (Figure 1.1) can attain speeds of up to five times the wind

speed. Andrew is an intermediate iceboater, though, so he attains speeds equal to only twice the wind speed. Suppose

Andrew takes his iceboat out one morning when a light 5-mph breeze has been blowing all morning. As Andrew gets his

iceboat set up, though, the wind begins to pick up. During his first half hour of iceboating, the wind speed increases

according to the function                  For the second half hour of Andrew's outing, the wind remains steady at 15

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 61

mph. In other words, the wind speed is given by

Recalling that Andrew's iceboat travels at twice the wind speed, and assuming he moves in a straight line away from his
starting point, how far is Andrew from his starting point after 1 hour?

     Solution
To figure out how far Andrew has traveled, we need to integrate his velocity, which is twice the wind speed. Then

Distance

Substituting the expressions we were given for         we get

Andrew is 25 mi from his starting point after 1 hour.

1.23 Suppose that, instead of remaining steady during the second half hour of Andrew's outing, the wind starts

          to die down according to the function                In other words, the wind speed is given by

          Under these conditions, how far from his starting point is Andrew after 1 hour?

Integrating Even and Odd Functions

We saw in Functions and Graphs (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/1-introduction) that an even

function is a function in which            for all x in the domain--that is, the graph of the curve is unchanged when

x is replaced with -x. The graphs of even functions are symmetric about the y-axis. An odd function is one in which

          for all x in the domain, and the graph of the function is symmetric about the origin.

Integrals of even functions, when the limits of integration are from -a to a, involve two equal areas, because they are

symmetric about the y-axis. Integrals of odd functions, when the limits of integration are similarly  evaluate to

zero because the areas above and below the x-axis are equal.

Rule: Integrals of Even and Odd Functions

For continuous even functions such that

For continuous odd functions such that
62 1 · Integration

  EXAMPLE 1.28                and verify that the integration formula for even functions holds.
Integrating an Even Function
Integrate the even function

     Solution
The symmetry appears in the graphs in Figure 1.35. Graph (a) shows the region below the curve and above the x-axis. We
have to zoom in to this graph by a huge amount to see the region. Graph (b) shows the region above the curve and
below the x-axis. The signed area of this region is negative. Both views illustrate the symmetry about the y-axis of an
even function. We have

To verify the integration formula for even functions, we can calculate the integral from 0 to 2 and double it, then check to
make sure we get the same answer.

Since               we have verified the formula for even functions in this particular example.

Figure 1.35 Graph (a) shows the positive area between the curve and the x-axis, whereas graph (b) shows the negative
area between the curve and the x-axis. Both views show the symmetry about the y-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 63

EXAMPLE 1.29

Integrating an Odd Function                         over the interval
Evaluate the definite integral of the odd function

Solution

The graph is shown in Figure 1.36. We can see the symmetry about the origin by the positive area above the x-axis over

      and the negative area below the x-axis over   We have

                      Figure 1.36 The graph shows areas between a curve and the x-axis for an odd function.
      1.24 Integrate the function

        SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES

Use basic integration formulas to compute the following antiderivatives or definite integrals.

207.          208.                                           209.

210.          211.                                           212.
64 1 · Integration

213. Write an integral that         214. Write an integral that           215. A regular N-gon (an
                                                                                  N-sided polygon with
expresses the increase in           quantifies the change in                      sides that have equal
                                                                                  length s, such as a
the perimeter         of a          the area  of a                                pentagon or hexagon)
                                                                                  has perimeter Ns. Write
square when its side                square when the side                          an integral that expresses
                                                                                  the increase in perimeter
length s increases from 2           length doubles from S                         of a regular N-gon when
                                                                                  the length of each side
units to 4 units and                units to 2S units and                         increases from 1 unit to 2
                                                                                  units and evaluate the
evaluate the integral.              evaluate the integral.                        integral.

216. The area of a regular          217. A dodecahedron is a              218. An icosahedron is a
        pentagon with side length           Platonic solid with a                 Platonic solid with a
                is pa2 with                 surface that consists of 12           surface that consists of 20
                                            pentagons, each of equal              equilateral triangles. By
        The Pentagon in                     area. By how much does                how much does the
        Washington, DC, has                 the surface area of a                 surface area of an
        inner sides of length 360           dodecahedron increase as              icosahedron increase as
        ft and outer sides of               the side length of each               the side length of each
        length 920 ft. Write an             pentagon doubles from 1               triangle doubles from a
        integral to express the             unit to 2 units?                      unit to 2a units?
        area of the roof of the
        Pentagon according to       220. Write an integral that           221. Write an integral that
        these dimensions and                quantifies the increase in            quantifies the increase in
        evaluate this area.                 the volume of a cube                  the surface area of a
                                            when the side length                  sphere as its radius
219. Write an integral that                 doubles from s unit to 2s             doubles from R unit to 2R
        quantifies the change in            units and evaluate the                units and evaluate the
        the area of the surface of          integral.                             integral.
        a cube when its side
        length doubles from s       223. Suppose that a particle          224. Suppose that a particle
        unit to 2s units and                moves along a straight
        evaluate the integral.              line with velocity            moves along a straight
                                                                where
222. Write an integral that                               (in meters per  line with velocity defined
        quantifies the increase in          second). Find the
        the volume of a sphere as           displacement at time t        by
        its radius doubles from R           and the total distance
        unit to 2R units and                traveled up to                where           (in
        evaluate the integral.
                                                                          meters per second). Find

                                                                          the displacement at time t

                                                                          and the total distance

                                                                          traveled up to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 65

225. Suppose that a particle        226. Suppose that a particle       227. A ball is thrown upward
                                                                               from a height of 1.5 m at
moves along a straight              moves along a straight                     an initial speed of 40 m/
                                                                               sec. Acceleration resulting
line with velocity defined          line with acceleration                     from gravity is -9.8 m/
                                                                               sec2. Neglecting air
by                 where            defined by                                 resistance, solve for the
                                                                               velocity and the
    (in meters per                  where               (in                    height of the ball t
                                                                               seconds after it is thrown
second). Find the                   meters per second). Find                   and before it returns to
                                                                               the ground.
displacement at time t              the velocity and
                                                                       230. A spherical balloon is
and the total distance              displacement at time t                     being inflated at a
                                                                               constant rate. If the
traveled up to                      and the total distance                     volume of the balloon
                                                                               changes from 36 in.3 to
                                    traveled up to           if                288 in.3 between time
                                                                                        and
                                                   and                         seconds, find the net
                                                                               change in the radius of
228. A ball is thrown upward        229. The area       of a circular          the balloon during that
        from a height of 3 m at an                                             time.
        initial speed of 60 m/sec.  shape is growing at a
        Acceleration resulting
        from gravity is -9.8 m/     constant rate. If the area
        sec2. Neglecting air
        resistance, solve for the   increases from 4 units to
        velocity and the
        height of the ball t        9 units between times
        seconds after it is thrown
        and before it returns to    and                 find the
        the ground.
                                    net change in the radius

                                    during that time.
66 1 · Integration

231. Water flows into a conical    232. A horizontal cylindrical                 233. The following table lists the
                                           tank has cross-sectional                      electrical power in gigawatts--the
        tank with cross-sectional          area                                          rate at which energy is
        area x2 at height x and                                              at          consumed--used in a certain city
                                                                                         for different hours of the day, in a
volume              up to height           height x meters above the                     typical 24-hour period, with hour
                                           bottom when                                   1 corresponding to midnight to 1
x. If water flows into the                  a. The volume V between                      a.m.
tank at a rate of 1
m3/min, find the height of                       heights a and b is
water in the tank after 5
min. Find the change in                   Find the                               Hour Power Hour Power
height between 5 min and
10 min.                            volume at heights

                                   between 2 m and 3 m.                          1   28  13  48

                                   b. Suppose that oil is

                                   being pumped into the                         2   25  14  49

                                   tank at a rate of 50 L/

                                   min. Using the chain                          3   24  15  49

                                   rule,                   at

                                        how many meters per                      4   23  16  50
                                        minute is the height of
                                        oil in the tank                          5   24  17  50
                                        changing, expressed in
                                        terms of x, when the                     6   27  18  50
                                        height is at x meters?
                                   c. How long does it take                      7   29  19  46
                                        to fill the tank to 3 m
                                        starting from a fill level               8   32  20  43
                                        of 2 m?

                                                                                 9   34  21  42

                                                                                 10  39  22  40

                                                                                 11  42  23  37

                                                                                 12  46  24  34

                                                                                 Find the total amount of energy in
                                                                                 gigawatt-hours (gW-h) consumed
                                                                                 by the city in a typical 24-hour
                                                                                 period.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 67

234. The average residential electrical     235. The data in the following table are
        power use (in hundreds of watts)            used to estimate the average power
        per hour is given in the following          output produced by Peter Sagan for
        table.                                      each of the last 18 sec of Stage 1 of
                                                    the 2012 Tour de France.

Hour Power Hour Power

                                            Second Watts Second Watts

1   8   13  12

                                            1  600  10  1200

2   6   14  13

                                            2  500  11  1170

3   5   15  14

                                            3  575  12  1125

4   4   16  15

                                            4  1050 13  1100

5   5   17  17

                                            5  925  14  1075

6   6   18  19

                                            6  950  15  1000

7   7   19  18

                                            7  1050 16  950

8   8   20  17

                                            8  950  17  900

9   9   21  16

                                            9  1100 18  780

10  10  22  16

11  10  23  13                              Table 1.6 Average Power Output
                                            Source: sportsexercisengineering.com

12  11  24  11                              Estimate the net energy used in
                                            kilojoules (kJ), noting that 1W = 1 J/s,
a. Compute the average total                and the average power output by
     energy used in a day in                Sagan during this time interval.
     kilowatt-hours (kWh).

b. If a ton of coal generates 1842
     kWh, how long does it take for
     an average residence to burn a
     ton of coal?

c. Explain why the data might fit
     a plot of the form
68 1 · Integration

236. The data in the following table are used   237. The distribution of incomes as of 2012 in the
        to estimate the average power output
        produced by Peter Sagan for each        United States in $5000 increments is given in the
        15-min interval of Stage 1 of the 2012
        Tour de France.                         following table. The kth row denotes the

          Minutes Watts Minutes Watts           percentage of households with incomes between

                                                and                     The row

                                                contains all households with income between

                                                $200,000 and $250,000.

15                  200          165  170       0 3.5 11 3.5 21 1.5 31 0.6

30                  180          180  220       1 4.1 12 3.7 22 1.4 32 0.5

45                  190          195  140       2 5.9 13 3.2 23 1.3 33 0.5

60                  230          210  225       3 5.7 14 3.0 24 1.3 34 0.4

75                  240          225  170       4 5.9 15 2.8 25 1.1 35 0.3

90                  210          240  210       5 5.4 16 2.5 26 1.0 36 0.3

105                 210          255  200       6 5.5 17 2.2 27 0.75 37 0.3

120                 220          270  220       7 5.1 18 2.2 28 0.8 38 0.2

135                 210          285  250       8 4.8 19 1.8 29 1.0 39 1.8

150                 150          300  400       9 4.1 20 2.1 30 0.6 40 2.3

Table 1.7 Average Power Output                    10 4.3
Source: sportsexercisengineering.com
                                                Table 1.8 Income Distributions Source:
Estimate the net energy used in                 http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/
kilojoules, noting that 1W = 1 J/s.             p60-245.pdf

                                                a. Estimate the percentage of U.S. households in

                                                2012 with incomes less than $55,000.

                                                b. What percentage of households had incomes

                                                exceeding $85,000?

                                                c. Plot the data and try to fit its shape to that of

                                                a graph of the form                       for

                                                suitable

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 69

238. Newton's law of gravity states     239. For a given motor vehicle,        240. John is a 25-year old man
                                                the maximum achievable
that the gravitational force                    deceleration from braking      who weighs 160 lb. He
                                                is approximately 7 m/sec2
exerted by an object of mass M                  on dry concrete. On wet        burns      calories/
                                                asphalt, it is
and one of mass m with                          approximately 2.5 m/sec2.      hr while riding his bike for
                                                Given that 1 mph
centers that are separated by a                 corresponds to 0.447 m/        t hours. If an oatmeal
                                                sec, find the total distance
distance r is           with G                  that a car travels in          cookie has 55 cal and
                                                meters on dry concrete
an empirical constant                           after the brakes are           John eats 4t cookies
                                                applied until it comes to a
                                                complete stop if the initial   during the tth hour, how
                                                velocity is 67 mph (30 m/
The work done by a variable                     sec) or if the initial         many net calories has he
                                                braking velocity is 56 mph
force over an interval              is          (25 m/sec). Find the           lost after 3 hours riding
                                                corresponding distances
                                                if the surface is slippery     his bike?
                                                wet asphalt.
defined as

If Earth has mass
                        and radius

6371 km, compute the amount
of work to elevate a polar
weather satellite of mass 1400
kg to its orbiting altitude of
850 km above Earth.

241. Sandra is a 25-year old            242. A motor vehicle has a             243. Although some engines
        woman who weighs 120                    maximum efficiency of 33               are more efficient at given
        lb. She burns                           mpg at a cruising speed                a horsepower than
        cal/hr while walking on                 of 40 mph. The efficiency              others, on average, fuel
        her treadmill. Her caloric              drops at a rate of 0.1                 efficiency decreases with
        intake from drinking                    mpg/mph between 40                     horsepower at a rate of
        Gatorade is 100t calories               mph and 50 mph, and at                        mpg/horsepower. If
        during the tth hour. What               a rate of 0.4 mpg/mph                  a typical 50-horsepower
        is her net decrease in                  between 50 mph and 80                  engine has an average
        calories after walking for              mph. What is the                       fuel efficiency of 32 mpg,
        3 hours?                                efficiency in miles per                what is the average fuel
                                                gallon if the car is cruising          efficiency of an engine
                                                at 50 mph? What is the                 with the following
                                                efficiency in miles per                horsepower: 150, 300,
                                                gallon if the car is cruising          450?
                                                at 80 mph? If gasoline
                                                costs $3.50/gal, what is
                                                the cost of fuel to drive 50
                                                mi at 40 mph, at 50 mph,
                                                and at 80 mph?
70 1 · Integration

244. [T] The following table lists the 2013 schedule of   245. [T] The following table provides
        federal income tax versus taxable income.                 hypothetical data regarding the level
                                                                  of service for a certain highway.

 Taxable Income                   The Tax Is  ... Of the  Highway  Vehicles   Density
        Range                           ...   Amount        Speed  per Hour    Range
                                                           Range   per Lane  (vehicles/
$0-$8925                         10%            Over        (mph)
                                                                                 mi)
                                              $0

$8925-$36,250                    $892.50 +    $8925       > 60     < 600     < 10
$36,250-$87,850                  15%                      60-57
                                                          57-54
                                                                   600-1000 10-20

                                 $4,991.25 +  $36,250
                                 25%
                                                                   1000-1500 20-30

$87,850-$183,250                 $17,891.25   $87,850     54-46    1500-1900 30-45
                                 + 28%        $183,250    46-30    1900-2100 45-70
                                                          <30      Unstable 70-200
$183,250-$398,350                $44,603.25
                                 + 33%

$398,350-$400,000                $115,586.25  $398,350    Table 1.10
                                 + 35%
                                                           a. Plot vehicles per hour per lane on
> $400,000                       $116,163.75  $400,000          the x-axis and highway speed on
                                 + 39.6%                        the y-axis.

Table 1.9 Federal Income Tax Versus Taxable               b. Compute the average decrease in
Income Source: http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/                speed (in miles per hour) per unit
i1040tt--2013.pdf.                                              increase in congestion (vehicles
                                                                per hour per lane) as the latter
Suppose that Steve just received a $10,000 raise.               increases from 600 to 1000, from
How much of this raise is left after federal taxes              1000 to 1500, and from 1500 to
if Steve's salary before receiving the raise was                2100. Does the decrease in miles
$40,000? If it was $90,000? If it was $385,000?                 per hour depend linearly on the
                                                                increase in vehicles per hour per
                                                                lane?

                                                           c. Plot minutes per mile (60 times the
                                                                reciprocal of miles per hour) as a
                                                                function of vehicles per hour per
                                                                lane. Is this function linear?

For the next two exercises use the data in the following table, which displays bald eagle populations from 1963 to 2000 in
the continental United States.

                                               Year Population of Breeding Pairs of Bald Eagles

                                               1963 487

                                               1974 791

                                               1981 1188

                                             Table 1.11 Population of Breeding Bald Eagle Pairs
                                            Source: http://www.fws.gov/Midwest/eagle/population/
                                             chtofprs.html.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 71

                             Year Population of Breeding Pairs of Bald Eagles

                             1986 1875

                             1992 3749

                             1996 5094

                             2000 6471

                    Table 1.11 Population of Breeding Bald Eagle Pairs
                    Source: http://www.fws.gov/Midwest/eagle/population/
                    chtofprs.html.

246. [T] The graph below plots the    247. [T] The graph below plots the cubic

quadratic

                                        against the data in the preceding table,

against the data in preceding table,    normalized so that  corresponds to

normalized so that  corresponds 1963. Estimate the average number of bald

to 1963. Estimate the average           eagles per year present for the 37 years by

number of bald eagles per year          computing the average value of p over

present for the 37 years by

computing the average value of p

over
72 1 · Integration

248. [T] Suppose you go on a road
        trip and record your speed at
        every half hour, as compiled in
        the following table. The best
        quadratic fit to the data is
                                          shown
        in the accompanying graph.
        Integrate q to estimate the total
        distance driven over the 3
        hours.

Time (hr) Speed (mph)
0 (start) 50

1                   40

2                   50

3                   60

As a car accelerates, it does not accelerate at a constant rate; rather, the acceleration is variable. For the following
exercises, use the following table, which contains the acceleration measured at every second as a driver merges onto a
freeway.

                                                 Time (sec) Acceleration (mph/sec)

                                                 1     11.2

                                                 2     10.6

                                                 3     8.1

                                                 4     5.4

                                                 5  0

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                1.4 · Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 73

249. [T] The accompanying graph plots 250. [T] Using your       251. [T] Using your velocity
                                                                        equation from the
the best quadratic fit,             acceleration equation               previous exercise, find the
                                                                        corresponding distance
                         to         from the previous                   equation, assuming your
                                                                        initial distance is 0 mi.
the data from the preceding table.  exercise, find the                  How far did you travel
                                                                        while you accelerated
Compute the average value of to corresponding velocity                  your car? (Hint: You will
                                                                        need to convert time
estimate the average acceleration   equation. Assuming the              units.)

between  and                        initial velocity is 0 mph,

                                    find the velocity at time
74 1 · Integration

252. [T] The number of hamburgers sold at        253. [T] An athlete runs by a motion
        a restaurant throughout the day is
        given in the following table, with the   detector, which records her speed, as
        accompanying graph plotting the best
        cubic fit to the data,                   displayed in the following table. The

                                                 best linear fit to this data,

                                                                     is shown in

                                                 the accompanying graph. Use the

with                corresponding to 9 a.m. and  average value of between

                    corresponding to 9 p.m.      and            to estimate the runner's

Compute the average value of to                  average speed.

estimate the average number of

hamburgers sold per hour.                        Minutes Speed (m/sec)

    Hours Past                   No. of Burgers  0              5
     Midnight                            Sold
9                                                10             4.8
12                               3
15                               28              20             3.6
18                               20
                                 30              30             3.0

                                                 40             2.5

21                               45

1.5 Substitution

Learning Objectives

      1.5.1 Use substitution to evaluate indefinite integrals.
      1.5.2 Use substitution to evaluate definite integrals.

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus gave us a method to evaluate integrals without using Riemann sums. The
drawback of this method, though, is that we must be able to find an antiderivative, and this is not always easy. In this
section we examine a technique, called integration by substitution, to help us find antiderivatives. Specifically, this
method helps us find antiderivatives when the integrand is the result of a chain-rule derivative.

At first, the approach to the substitution procedure may not appear very obvious. However, it is primarily a visual

task--that is, the integrand shows you what to do; it is a matter of recognizing the form of the function. So, what are we

supposed to see? We are looking for an integrand of the form         For example, in the integral

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.5 · Substitution 75

             we have                                     and  Then,

and we see that our integrand is in the correct form.

The method is called substitution because we substitute part of the integrand with the variable u and part of the
integrand with du. It is also referred to as change of variables because we are changing variables to obtain an
expression that is easier to work with for applying the integration rules.

Theorem 1.7

Substitution with Indefinite Integrals

Let          where    is continuous over an interval, let     be continuous over the corresponding range of g,

and let      be an antiderivative of    Then,

                                                                                                                   (1.19)

Proof

Let f, g, u, and F be as specified in the theorem. Then

Integrating both sides with respect to x, we see that

If we now substitute  and                      we get

                                                              and then      Rewrite the integral in terms of

Returning to the problem we looked at originally, we let
u:

Using the power rule for integrals, we have
Substitute the original expression for x back into the solution:
We can generalize the procedure in the following Problem-Solving Strategy.
76 1 · Integration

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integration by Substitution

1. Look carefully at the integrand and select an expression  within the integrand to set equal to u. Let's select

    such that             is also part of the integrand.

2. Substitute             and            into the integral.

3. We should now be able to evaluate the integral with respect to u. If the integral can't be evaluated we need to go

    back and select a different expression to use as u.

4. Evaluate the integral in terms of u.

5. Write the result in terms of x and the expression

  EXAMPLE 1.30                                               because then  and we already have du

Using Substitution to Find an Antiderivative
Use substitution to find the antiderivative

     Solution
The first step is to choose an expression for u. We choose
in the integrand. Write the integral in terms of u:

Remember that du is the derivative of the expression chosen for u, regardless of what is inside the integrand. Now we
can evaluate the integral with respect to u:

     Analysis
We can check our answer by taking the derivative of the result of integration. We should obtain the integrand. Picking a

value for C of 1, we let                 We have

so

This is exactly the expression we started with inside the integrand.
       1.25 Use substitution to find the antiderivative

Sometimes we need to adjust the constants in our integral if they don't match up exactly with the expressions we are
substituting.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1.5 · Substitution 77

  EXAMPLE 1.31
Using Substitution with Alteration
Use substitution to find

Solution

Rewrite the integral as               Let        and          Now we have a problem because

and the original expression has only  We have to alter our expression for du or the integral in u will be twice as large

as it should be. If we multiply both sides of the du equation by we can solve this problem. Thus,

Write the integral in terms of u, but pull the outside the integration symbol:
Integrate the expression in u:

1.26 Use substitution to find

  EXAMPLE 1.32
Using Substitution with Integrals of Trigonometric Functions
Use substitution to evaluate the integral

Solution

We know the derivative of        is   so we set  Then                           Substituting into the integral, we have

Evaluating the integral, we get

Putting the answer back in terms of t, we get
78 1 · Integration

1.27 Use substitution to evaluate the integral

Sometimes we need to manipulate an integral in ways that are more complicated than just multiplying or dividing by a
constant. We need to eliminate all the expressions within the integrand that are in terms of the original variable. When
we are done, u should be the only variable in the integrand. In some cases, this means solving for the original variable in
terms of u. This technique should become clear in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 1.33

Finding an Antiderivative Using u-Substitution

Use substitution to find the antiderivative

Solution

If we let           then     But this does not account for the x in the numerator of the integrand. We need to

express x in terms of u. If  then  Now we can rewrite the integral in terms of u:

Then we integrate in the usual way, replace u with the original expression, and factor and simplify the result. Thus,

       1.28 Use substitution to evaluate the indefinite integral

Substitution for Definite Integrals

Substitution can be used with definite integrals, too. However, using substitution to evaluate a definite integral requires a
change to the limits of integration. If we change variables in the integrand, the limits of integration change as well.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.5 · Substitution 79

Theorem 1.8

Substitution with Definite Integrals

Let            and let be continuous over an interval  and let f be continuous over the range of

Then,

Although we will not formally prove this theorem, we justify it with some calculations here. From the substitution rule for

indefinite integrals, if     is an antiderivative of   we have

Then

                                                                                                  (1.20)

and we have the desired result.
  EXAMPLE 1.34

Using Substitution to Evaluate a Definite Integral
Use substitution to evaluate

     Solution

Let            so             Since the original function includes one factor of x2 and  multiply both
                             Then,                                                                  Then
sides of the du equation by

To adjust the limits of integration, note that when             and when
Evaluating this expression, we get
80 1 · Integration

     1.29 Use substitution to evaluate the definite integral

  EXAMPLE 1.35
Using Substitution with an Exponential Function
Use substitution to evaluate

     Solution

Let                 Then,        To adjust the limits of integration, we note that when  and when

                    So our substitution gives

     1.30 Use substitution to evaluate

Substitution may be only one of the techniques needed to evaluate a definite integral. All of the properties and rules of
integration apply independently, and trigonometric functions may need to be rewritten using a trigonometric identity
before we can apply substitution. Also, we have the option of replacing the original expression for u after we find the
antiderivative, which means that we do not have to change the limits of integration. These two approaches are shown in
Example 1.36.

  EXAMPLE 1.36

Using Substitution to Evaluate a Trigonometric Integral

Use substitution to evaluate

     Solution                                                                            allows us to rewrite the
Let us first use a trigonometric identity to rewrite the integral. The trig identity
integral as

Then,

We can evaluate the first integral as it is, but we need to make a substitution to evaluate the second integral. Let

Then,               or           Also, when      and when                             Expressing the second integral in terms

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1.5 · Substitution 81

of u, we have

      SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES

254. Why is u-substitution        255. 2. If        when
        referred to as change of
        variable?                       reversing the chain rule,

                                        should you take            or

In the following exercises, verify each identity using differentiation. Then, using the indicated u-substitution, identify f
such that the integral takes the form

256.
257. For

258.

259.                                                     260.

In the following exercises, find the antiderivative using the indicated substitution.

261.                              262.                                 263.

264.                              265.                                 266.

267.                                          268.

269.                              270.

In the following exercises, use a suitable change of variables to determine the indefinite integral.

271.                              272.                                 273.

274.                              275.                                 276.
82 1 · Integration                278.                                     279.

     277.

280.                              281.                                     282.

283.                              284.                                     285.

286.                                        287.

In the following exercises, use a calculator to estimate the area under the curve using left Riemann sums with 50 terms,
then use substitution to solve for the exact answer.

288. [T]                 over     289. [T]                    over         290. [T]
                                                                                   over

291. [T]                 over

In the following exercises, use a change of variables to evaluate the definite integral.

292.                              293.                                     294.

295.                              296.                                     297.

In the following exercises, evaluate the indefinite integral               with constant  using u-substitution. Then,

graph the function and the antiderivative over the indicated interval. If possible, estimate a value of C that would need to

be added to the antiderivative to make it equal to the definite integral                  with a the left endpoint of

the given interval.

298. [T]                          299. [T]                    on 300. [T]
        over

                                                                                 over

301. [T]             over         302. [T]                                 303. [T]
                                                                                   over
                                          over
304. If              in           305. Is the substitution

      what can you say about                              in the definite
      the value of the integral?          integral
                                          okay? If not, why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 83

In the following exercises, use a change of variables to show that each definite integral is equal to zero.

306.                                  307.                               308.

309.                                  310.                                        311.

312.                                  313. Show that the average         314. Find the area under the

                                            value of  over an                     graph of

                                            interval  is the same                 between         and

                                            as the average value of               where         and         is

                                                over the interval                 fixed, and evaluate the

                                                for                                             

                                                                                  limit as

315. Find the area under the          316. The area of a semicircle of   317. The area of the top half of
        graph of                              radius 1 can be expressed
                                                                                  an ellipse with a major

      between       and                     as        Use                         axis that is the x-axis from

      where         and                                                                     to       and with

      is fixed. Evaluate                    the substitution                      a minor axis that is the
                                            to express the area of a
      the limit as                          semicircle as the integral            y-axis from          to
                                            of a trigonometric
                                            function. You do not need              can be written as
                                            to compute the integral.
                                                                                                       Use

                                                                                  the substitution
                                                                                                 to express this

                                                                                  area in terms of an
                                                                                  integral of a
                                                                                  trigonometric function.
                                                                                  You do not need to
                                                                                  compute the integral.

318. [T] The following graph is of a        319. [T] The following graph is of a

      function of the form                      function of the form

                              Estimate

      the coefficients a and b, and the         Estimate the coefficients a and b and

      frequency parameters n and m. Use         the frequency parameters n and m.

      these estimates to approximate            Use these estimates to approximate

1.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Learning Objectives

      1.6.1 Integrate functions involving exponential functions.
      1.6.2 Integrate functions involving logarithmic functions.
84 1 · Integration

Exponential and logarithmic functions are used to model population growth, cell growth, and financial growth, as well as
depreciation, radioactive decay, and resource consumption, to name only a few applications. In this section, we explore
integration involving exponential and logarithmic functions.

Integrals of Exponential Functions

The exponential function is perhaps the most efficient function in terms of the operations of calculus. The exponential

function,           is its own derivative and its own integral.

Rule: Integrals of Exponential Functions

Exponential functions can be integrated using the following formulas.

                                                                                            (1.21)

EXAMPLE 1.37

Finding an Antiderivative of an Exponential Function
Find the antiderivative of the exponential function e-x.

     Solution                    and then  Multiply the du equation by -1, so you now have  Then,
Use substitution, setting

       1.31 Find the antiderivative of the function using substitution:

A common mistake when dealing with exponential expressions is treating the exponent on e the same way we treat
exponents in polynomial expressions. We cannot use the power rule for the exponent on e. This can be especially
confusing when we have both exponentials and polynomials in the same expression, as in the previous checkpoint. In
these cases, we should always double-check to make sure we're using the right rules for the functions we're integrating.

  EXAMPLE 1.38

Square Root of an Exponential Function
Find the antiderivative of the exponential function

     Solution
First rewrite the problem using a rational exponent:

Using substitution, choose       Then,                    We have (Figure 1.37)

Then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 85

Figure 1.37 The graph shows an exponential function times the square root of an exponential function.

1.32 Find the antiderivative of

  EXAMPLE 1.39
Using Substitution with an Exponential Function
Use substitution to evaluate the indefinite integral

Solution

Here we choose to let u equal the expression in the exponent on e. Let  and        Again, du is off by a

constant multiplier; the original function contains a factor of 3x2, not 6x2. Multiply both sides of the equation by so

that the integrand in u equals the integrand in x. Thus,

Integrate the expression in u and then substitute the original expression in x back into the u integral:

1.33 Evaluate the indefinite integral

As mentioned at the beginning of this section, exponential functions are used in many real-life applications. The number
e is often associated with compounded or accelerating growth, as we have seen in earlier sections about the derivative.
Although the derivative represents a rate of change or a growth rate, the integral represents the total change or the total
growth. Let's look at an example in which integration of an exponential function solves a common business application.

A price-demand function tells us the relationship between the quantity of a product demanded and the price of the
product. In general, price decreases as quantity demanded increases. The marginal price-demand function is the
derivative of the price-demand function and it tells us how fast the price changes at a given level of production. These
functions are used in business to determine the price-elasticity of demand, and to help companies determine whether
changing production levels would be profitable.

EXAMPLE 1.40

Finding a Price-Demand Equation

Find the price-demand equation for a particular brand of toothpaste at a supermarket chain when the demand is 50

tubes per week at $2.35 per tube, given that the marginal price--demand function,  for x number of tubes per

week, is given as
86 1 · Integration

     If the supermarket chain sells 100 tubes per week, what price should it set?
           Solution

     To find the price-demand equation, integrate the marginal price-demand function. First find the antiderivative, then
     look at the particulars. Thus,

Using substitution, let          and                  Then, divide both sides of the du equation by -0.01. This gives

The next step is to solve for C. We know that when the price is $2.35 per tube, the demand is 50 tubes per week. This
means

Now, just solve for C:

Thus,
If the supermarket sells 100 tubes of toothpaste per week, the price would be
The supermarket should charge $1.99 per tube if it is selling 100 tubes per week.

  EXAMPLE 1.41
Evaluating a Definite Integral Involving an Exponential Function
Evaluate the definite integral

Solution

Again, substitution is the method to use. Let         so            or             Then  Next,
                                                          we have
change the limits of integration. Using the equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 87

The integral then becomes

See Figure 1.38.

          Figure 1.38 The indicated area can be calculated by evaluating a definite integral using substitution.

1.34 Evaluate

EXAMPLE 1.42

Growth of Bacteria in a Culture

Suppose the rate of growth of bacteria in a Petri dish is given by  where t is given in hours and is given in

thousands of bacteria per hour. If a culture starts with 10,000 bacteria, find a function   that gives the number of

bacteria in the Petri dish at any time t. How many bacteria are in the dish after 2 hours?

     Solution
We have

Then, at       we have           so                    and we get

At time        we have

After 2 hours, there are 17,282 bacteria in the dish.
88 1 · Integration

     1.35 From Example 1.42, suppose the bacteria grow at a rate of              Assume the culture still starts with

                    10,000 bacteria. Find    How many bacteria are in the dish after 3 hours?

EXAMPLE 1.43

Fruit Fly Population Growth                                        in flies per day. If the initial population of fruit flies
Suppose a population of fruit flies increases at a rate of
is 100 flies, how many flies are in the population after 10 days?

     Solution

Let  represent the number of flies in the population at time t. Applying the net change theorem, we have

There are 122 flies in the population after 10 days.

     1.36 Suppose the rate of growth of the fly population is given by           and the initial fly population is
                 100 flies. How many flies are in the population after 15 days?

  EXAMPLE 1.44

Evaluating a Definite Integral Using Substitution
Evaluate the definite integral using substitution:

     Solution
This problem requires some rewriting to simplify applying the properties. First, rewrite the exponent on e as a power of
x, then bring the x2 in the denominator up to the numerator using a negative exponent. We have

Let                 the exponent on e. Then

Bringing the negative sign outside the integral sign, the problem now reads
Next, change the limits of integration:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 89

Notice that now the limits begin with the larger number, meaning we must multiply by -1 and interchange the limits.
Thus,

1.37 Evaluate the definite integral using substitution:

Integrals Involving Logarithmic Functions

Integrating functions of the form  result in the absolute value of the natural log function, as shown in the

following rule. Integral formulas for other logarithmic functions, such as    and          are also included

in the rule.

Rule: Integration Formulas Involving Logarithmic Functions

The following formulas can be used to evaluate integrals involving logarithmic functions.

                                                                                           (1.22)

  EXAMPLE 1.45

Finding an Antiderivative Involving
Find the antiderivative of the function

     Solution
First factor the 3 outside the integral symbol. Then use the u-1 rule. Thus,

See Figure 1.39.
90 1 · Integration

                                 Figure 1.39 The domain of this function is

1.38 Find the antiderivative of

  EXAMPLE 1.46                                    Use substitution. Let      then  Alter

Finding an Antiderivative of a Rational Function
Find the antiderivative of

     Solution
This can be rewritten as
du by factoring out the 2. Thus,

Rewrite the integrand in u:
Then we have

  EXAMPLE 1.47

Finding an Antiderivative of a Logarithmic Function
Find the antiderivative of the log function

     Solution
Follow the format in the formula listed in the rule on integration formulas involving logarithmic functions. Based on this
format, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 91

      1.39 Find the antiderivative of

Example 1.48 is a definite integral of a trigonometric function. With trigonometric functions, we often have to apply a
trigonometric property or an identity before we can move forward. Finding the right form of the integrand is usually the
key to a smooth integration.

  EXAMPLE 1.48

Evaluating a Definite Integral
Find the definite integral of

Solution

We need substitution to evaluate this problem. Let             so        Rewrite the integral in terms of u,

changing the limits of integration as well. Thus,

Then

        SECTION 1.6 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, compute each indefinite integral.

320.      321.                                                     322.

323.      324.                                                     325.

326.      327.

In the following exercises, find each indefinite integral by using appropriate substitutions.

328.      329.                                                     330.

331.      332.                                                     333.

334.      335.                                                     336.

337.      338.                                                     339.
92 1 · Integration

340.                             341.

In the following exercises, verify by differentiation that                          then use appropriate changes of
variables to compute the integral.                                                 344.

342.                                       343.

345.                             346. Write an integral to               347. Write an integral to

                                       express the area under                  express the area under

                                       the graph of          from              the graph of

                                              to ex and evaluate               between       and
                                       the integral.
                                                                                          and evaluate the

                                                                               integral.

In the following exercises, use appropriate substitutions to express the trigonometric integrals in terms of compositions
with logarithms.

348.                             349.                                    350.

351.                             352.                                    353.

354.

In the following exercises, evaluate the definite integral.

355.                             356.                                    357.

358.                             359.

In the following exercises, integrate using the indicated substitution.

360.                             361.                                    362.

363.                                       364.

365.

In the following exercises, does the right-endpoint approximation overestimate or underestimate the exact area?
Calculate the right endpoint estimate R50 and solve for the exact area.

366. [T]            over         367. [T]        over                    368. [T]            over

369. [T]                  over   370. [T]        over                    371. [T]            over

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1.6 · Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 93

In the following exercises,               for         Find the area under the graph of         between the given values a
and b by integrating.
372.                                               373.                         374.
375.
                                          376. Find the area under the          377. Compute the integral of
378. Find the limit, as N tends                   graph of the function
        to infinity, of the area                                       between                       and find
        under the graph of                                 and                  the smallest value of N
                             between                                            such that the area under
                 and
                                                                                the graph         and
381. Use the previous exercise                                                  between    is, at most,
        to find the antiderivative
        of                                                                      0.01.
        and evaluate
                                          379. Show that                        380. Suppose that

                                                             when               for all x and that f and g

                                                                                are differentiable. Use the

                                                                                identity               and

                                                                                the chain rule to find the

                                                                                derivative of

                                          382. Show that if  then

                                               the integral of from ac

                                               to bc         is the

                                               same as the integral of

                                               from a to b.

The following exercises are intended to derive the fundamental properties of the natural log starting from the definition
                        using properties of the definite integral and making no further assumptions.

383. Use the identity                     384. Use a change of variable in      385. Use the identity
                               to derive
                                               the integral  to                                    to show
        the identity
                                               show that                        that               is an increasing

                                                                                function of x on 

                                                                                and use the previous

                                                                                exercises to show that the

                                                                                range of           is

                                                                                          Without any

                                                                                further assumptions,

                                                                                conclude that            has an

                                                                                inverse function defined

                                                                                on  
94 1 · Integration

386. Pretend, for the moment,             387. Pretend, for the moment,
                                                  that we do not know that
    that we do not know that                          is the inverse function
                                                  of but keep in mind
        is the inverse function                   that has an inverse
                                                  function defined on
    of              but keep in mind
                                                     Call it E. Show
    that            has an inverse
                                                  that
    function defined on

          Call it E. Use

    the identity
                             to

    deduce that
                                     for

    any real numbers a, b.

388. The sine integral, defined as                             389. [T] The normal distribution
                                     is an important quantity          in probability is given by

    in engineering. Although it does not have a                where  is the standard
    simple closed formula, it is possible to
    estimate its behavior for large x. Show that               deviation and  is the
    for
                                                               average. The standard

                                                               normal distribution in

                                                               probability,

                                                               corresponds to

                                                                               Compute

                                                               the right endpoint

                                                               estimates               of

390. [T] Compute the right
        endpoint estimates
                            of

1.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions

Learning Objectives

      1.7.1 Integrate functions resulting in inverse trigonometric functions

In this section we focus on integrals that result in inverse trigonometric functions. We have worked with these functions
before. Recall from Functions and Graphs (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/1-introduction) that
trigonometric functions are not one-to-one unless the domains are restricted. When working with inverses of
trigonometric functions, we always need to be careful to take these restrictions into account. Also in Derivatives
(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-introduction), we developed formulas for derivatives of inverse
trigonometric functions. The formulas developed there give rise directly to integration formulas involving inverse
trigonometric functions.

Integrals that Result in Inverse Sine Functions

Let us begin this last section of the chapter with the three formulas. Along with these formulas, we use substitution to
evaluate the integrals. We prove the formula for the inverse sine integral.

Rule: Integration Formulas Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions

The following integration formulas yield inverse trigonometric functions. Assume                   :

1.

Access for free at openstax.org
2.                                                                             1.7 · Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 95
3.
                                                                                                                               (1.23)
Proof     Then                                                                                                                 (1.24)
                                                                                                                               (1.25)
Let
                Now let's use implicit differentiation. We obtain

For             Thus, applying the Pythagorean identity  we have                                                   This
gives

Then for        and generalizing to u, we have


  EXAMPLE 1.49

Evaluating a Definite Integral Using Inverse Trigonometric Functions

Evaluate the definite integral

     Solution
We can go directly to the formula for the antiderivative in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse
trigonometric functions, and then evaluate the definite integral. We have
96 1 · Integration

1.40 Evaluate the integral

  EXAMPLE 1.50
Finding an Antiderivative Involving an Inverse Trigonometric Function
Evaluate the integral

     Solution       Then   and we have
Substitute

Applying the formula with  we obtain

       1.41 Find the indefinite integral using an inverse trigonometric function and substitution for
  EXAMPLE 1.51
Evaluating a Definite Integral
Evaluate the definite integral

     Solution
The format of the problem matches the inverse sine formula. Thus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           1.7 · Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 97

Integrals Resulting in Other Inverse Trigonometric Functions

There are six inverse trigonometric functions. However, only three integration formulas are noted in the rule on
integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric functions because the remaining three are negative versions of
the ones we use. The only difference is whether the integrand is positive or negative. Rather than memorizing three
more formulas, if the integrand is negative, simply factor out -1 and evaluate the integral using one of the formulas
already provided. To close this section, we examine one more formula: the integral resulting in the inverse tangent
function.

  EXAMPLE 1.52

Finding an Antiderivative Involving the Inverse Tangent Function

Evaluate the integral

Solution

Comparing this problem with the formulas stated in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric

functions, the integrand looks similar to the formula for  So we use substitution, letting  then

and                     Then, we have

1.42 Use substitution to find the antiderivative

  EXAMPLE 1.53
Applying the Integration Formulas
Evaluate the integral

     Solution           Then,
Apply the formula with

1.43 Evaluate the integral
98 1 · Integration

       EXAMPLE 1.54
     Evaluating a Definite Integral
     Evaluate the definite integral

           Solution
     Use the formula for the inverse tangent. We have

      1.44 Evaluate the definite integral

        SECTION 1.7 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, evaluate each integral in terms of an inverse trigonometric function.

391.                                392.                        393.

394.                                395.                        396.

In the following exercises, find each indefinite integral, using appropriate substitutions.

397.                                398.                        399.

400.                                401.                                           402.
                                                       404. Explain the relationship
403. Explain the relationship

      Is it true, in general, that                     Is it true, in general, that

405. Explain what is wrong          406. Explain what is wrong
        with the following                  with the following

        integral:                           integral:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          1.7 · Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 99

In the following exercises, solve for the antiderivative     of f with    then use a calculator to graph f and the

antiderivative over the given interval  Identify a value of C such that adding C to the antiderivative recovers the

definite integral

407. [T]           over  408. [T]                            over         409. [T]       over

410. [T]           over

In the following exercises, compute the antiderivative using appropriate substitutions.

411.                     412.                                             413.

414.                     415.                                             416.

In the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the antiderivative  with           over the given interval

Approximate a value of C, if possible, such that adding C to the antiderivative gives the same value as the definite

integral

417. [T]           over  418. [T]                                  over   419. [T]
420. [T]                                                                          over

                   over 421. [T]                             over         422. [T]       over

In the following exercises, compute each integral using appropriate substitutions.

423.                     424.                                             425.

426.                     427.                                             428.

In the following exercises, compute each definite integral.

429.                     430.                                             431.
100 1 · Integration

432.                                   433. For  compute                 434. For   compute

                                                                    and              and

                                       evaluate                     the

                                                                         evaluate    the

                                       area under the graph of                     

                                             on                          area under the graph of

                                                                                 over 

435. Use the substitution              436. [T] Approximate the          437. 47. [T] Approximate the
                           and the             points at which the               points at which the
                                               graphs of                         graphs of
        identity                               and
                                   to                                            and
                                                                                 intersect to four decimal
      evaluate                         intersect to four decimal                 places, and approximate
                                       places, and approximate                   the area between their
      (Hint: Multiply the top and      the area between their                    graphs to three decimal
      bottom of the integrand          graphs to three decimal                   places.
      by                               places.

438. Use the following graph to prove that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1 · Chapter Review 101

Chapter Review

Key Terms

average value of a function (or fave) the average value of a function on an interval can be found by calculating the

definite integral of the function and dividing that value by the length of the interval

change of variables the substitution of a variable, such as u, for an expression in the integrand

definite integral a primary operation of calculus; the area between the curve and the x-axis over a given interval is a

definite integral

fundamental theorem of calculus the theorem, central to the entire development of calculus, that establishes the

relationship between differentiation and integration

fundamental theorem of calculus, part 1 uses a definite integral to define an antiderivative of a function

fundamental theorem of calculus, part 2 (also, evaluation theorem) we can evaluate a definite integral by

evaluating the antiderivative of the integrand at the endpoints of the interval and subtracting

integrable function a function is integrable if the limit defining the integral exists; in other words, if the limit of the

Riemann sums as n goes to infinity exists

integrand the function to the right of the integration symbol; the integrand includes the function being integrated

integration by substitution a technique for integration that allows integration of functions that are the result of a

chain-rule derivative

left-endpoint approximation an approximation of the area under a curve computed by using the left endpoint of each

subinterval to calculate the height of the vertical sides of each rectangle

limits of integration these values appear near the top and bottom of the integral sign and define the interval over

which the function should be integrated

lower sum a sum obtained by using the minimum value of                on each subinterval

mean value theorem for integrals guarantees that a point c exists such that            is equal to the average value of the

function

net change theorem if we know the rate of change of a quantity, the net change theorem says the future quantity is

equal to the initial quantity plus the integral of the rate of change of the quantity

net signed area the area between a function and the x-axis such that the area below the x-axis is subtracted from the

area above the x-axis; the result is the same as the definite integral of the function

partition a set of points that divides an interval into subintervals

regular partition a partition in which the subintervals all have the same width

riemann sum an estimate of the area under the curve of the form

right-endpoint approximation the right-endpoint approximation is an approximation of the area of the rectangles

under a curve using the right endpoint of each subinterval to construct the vertical sides of each rectangle

sigma notation (also, summation notation) the Greek letter sigma () indicates addition of the values; the values of

the index above and below the sigma indicate where to begin the summation and where to end it

total area total area between a function and the x-axis is calculated by adding the area above the x-axis and the area

below the x-axis; the result is the same as the definite integral of the absolute value of the function

upper sum a sum obtained by using the maximum value of                on each subinterval

variable of integration indicates which variable you are integrating with respect to; if it is x, then the function in the

integrand is followed by dx
102 1 · Chapter Review

Key Equations

  Properties of Sigma Notation

Sums and Powers of Integers

Left-Endpoint Approximation
Right-Endpoint Approximation
Definite Integral 

Properties of the Definite Integral

                                     for constant c

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1 · Chapter Review 103

Mean Value Theorem for            If    is continuous over an interval       then there is at least one point
Integrals
                                        such that

Fundamental Theorem of If is continuous over an interval                     and the function  is defined by

Calculus Part 1                                       then

Fundamental Theorem of            If f is continuous over the interval  and  is any antiderivative of            then

Calculus Part 2

Net Change Theorem                                    or

Substitution with Indefinite Integrals
Substitution with Definite Integrals

Integrals of Exponential Functions

Integration Formulas Involving Logarithmic Functions

Integrals That Produce Inverse Trigonometric Functions

Key Concepts

1.1 Approximating Areas

· The use of sigma (summation) notation of the form         is useful for expressing long sums of values in compact

form.

· For a continuous function defined over an interval        the process of dividing the interval into n equal parts,

extending a rectangle to the graph of the function, calculating the areas of the series of rectangles, and then

summing the areas yields an approximation of the area of that region.

· The width of each rectangle is

· Riemann sums are expressions of the form                  and can be used to estimate the area under the curve
104 1 · Chapter Review

           Left- and right-endpoint approximations are special kinds of Riemann sums where the values of      are

chosen to be the left or right endpoints of the subintervals, respectively.

· Riemann sums allow for much flexibility in choosing the set of points      at which the function is evaluated, often

with an eye to obtaining a lower sum or an upper sum.

1.2 The Definite Integral

· The definite integral can be used to calculate net signed area, which is the area above the x-axis less the area below
   the x-axis. Net signed area can be positive, negative, or zero.

· The component parts of the definite integral are the integrand, the variable of integration, and the limits of
    integration.

· Continuous functions on a closed interval are integrable. Functions that are not continuous may still be integrable,
    depending on the nature of the discontinuities.

· The properties of definite integrals can be used to evaluate integrals.
· The area under the curve of many functions can be calculated using geometric formulas.
· The average value of a function can be calculated using definite integrals.

1.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

· The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals states that for a continuous function over a closed interval, there is a value c

such that         equals the average value of the function. See The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals.

· The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 shows the relationship between the derivative and the integral. See

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1.

· The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 is a formula for evaluating a definite integral in terms of an

antiderivative of its integrand. The total area under a curve can be found using this formula. See The Fundamental

Theorem of Calculus, Part 2.

1.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem

· The net change theorem states that when a quantity changes, the final value equals the initial value plus the
    integral of the rate of change. Net change can be a positive number, a negative number, or zero.

· The area under an even function over a symmetric interval can be calculated by doubling the area over the positive
   x-axis. For an odd function, the integral over a symmetric interval equals zero, because half the area is negative.

1.5 Substitution

· Substitution is a technique that simplifies the integration of functions that are the result of a chain-rule derivative.
   The term `substitution' refers to changing variables or substituting the variable u and du for appropriate expressions
    in the integrand.

· When using substitution for a definite integral, we also have to change the limits of integration.

1.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

· Exponential and logarithmic functions arise in many real-world applications, especially those involving growth and
    decay.

· Substitution is often used to evaluate integrals involving exponential functions or logarithms.

1.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions

· Formulas for derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions developed in Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic
    Functions (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-7-derivatives-of-inverse-functions) lead directly to
    integration formulas involving inverse trigonometric functions.

· Use the formulas listed in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric functions to match up
    the correct format and make alterations as necessary to solve the problem.

· Substitution is often required to put the integrand in the correct form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1 · Chapter Review 105

Review Exercises

True or False. Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. Assume all functions and are continuous over
their domains.

439. If                      for 440.                                          441. If             for all
                                                                                              then
      all then the right-hand

      rule underestimates the

      integral            Use a

      graph to justify your
      answer.

442. All continuous functions
        have an antiderivative.

Evaluate the Riemann sums          for the following functions over the specified interval. Compare your answer with

the exact answer, when possible, or use a calculator to determine the answer.

443.                      over     444.  over  445.                            over

446.            over

Evaluate the following integrals.

447.                               448.        449.

450.

Find the antiderivative.

451.                               452.        453.

454.

Find the derivative.

455.                               456.        457.

458.

The following problems consider the historic average cost per gigabyte of RAM on a computer.
                                                                   Year 5-Year Change ($)
                                                                   1980 0
                                                                   1985 -5,468,750
                                                                   1990 -755,495
106 1 · Chapter Review

                                            Year 5-Year Change ($)
                                            1995 -73,005
                                            2000 -29,768
                                            2005 -918
                                            2010 -177

459. If the average cost per      460. The average cost per                     461. Find the average cost of
        gigabyte of RAM in 2010           gigabyte of RAM can be                        1GB RAM for 2005 to
        is $12, find the average          approximated by the                           2010.
        cost per gigabyte of RAM          function
        in 1980.
                                          where is measured in
                                          years since 1980, and is
                                          cost in US$. Find the
                                          average cost per gigabyte
                                          of RAM for 1980 to 2010.

462. The velocity of a bullet from a        463. What is the average
        rifle can be approximated by                velocity of the bullet for
                                                    the first half-second?
        where is seconds after the
        shot and is the velocity
        measured in feet per second.
        This equation only models the
        velocity for the first half-
        second after the shot:

                         What is the total
        distance the bullet travels in
        0.5 sec?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                2 · Introduction 107

2  APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATION

Figure 2.1 Hoover Dam is one of the United States' iconic landmarks, and provides irrigation and hydroelectric power for
millions of people in the southwest United States. (credit: modification of work by Lynn Betts, Wikimedia)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Areas between Curves
  2.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing
  2.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells
  2.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area
  2.5 Physical Applications
  2.6 Moments and Centers of Mass
  2.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms
  2.8 Exponential Growth and Decay
  2.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions

      Introduction

The Hoover Dam is an engineering marvel. When Lake Mead, the reservoir behind the dam, is full, the dam withstands a
great deal of force. However, water levels in the lake vary considerably as a result of droughts and varying water
demands. Later in this chapter, we use definite integrals to calculate the force exerted on the dam when the reservoir is
full and we examine how changing water levels affect that force (see Example 2.28).

Hydrostatic force is only one of the many applications of definite integrals we explore in this chapter. From geometric
applications such as surface area and volume, to physical applications such as mass and work, to growth and decay
models, definite integrals are a powerful tool to help us understand and model the world around us.
108 2 · Applications of Integration

2.1 Areas between Curves

Learning Objectives

      2.1.1 Determine the area of a region between two curves by integrating with respect to the independent
               variable.

      2.1.2 Find the area of a compound region.
      2.1.3 Determine the area of a region between two curves by integrating with respect to the dependent

               variable.

In Introduction to Integration, we developed the concept of the definite integral to calculate the area below a curve on a
given interval. In this section, we expand that idea to calculate the area of more complex regions. We start by finding the
area between two curves that are functions of beginning with the simple case in which one function value is always
greater than the other. We then look at cases when the graphs of the functions cross. Last, we consider how to calculate
the area between two curves that are functions of

Area of a Region between Two Curves

Let  and        be continuous functions over an interval         such that        on                We want to find the

area between the graphs of the functions, as shown in the following figure.

            Figure 2.2 The area between the graphs of two functions,         and  on the interval

As we did before, we are going to partition the interval on the  and approximate the area between the graphs of

the functions with rectangles. So, for                     let   be a regular partition of          Then, for

choose a point                       and on each interval        construct a rectangle that extends vertically from

to   Figure 2.3(a) shows the rectangles when is selected to be the left endpoint of the interval and                 Figure

2.3(b) shows a representative rectangle in detail.

     MEDIA

     Use this calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_CurveCalc) to learn more about the areas between two curves.

Figure 2.3 (a)We can approximate the area between the graphs of two functions,    and                with rectangles. (b) The
                                                                                                    Adding the areas of all
area of a typical rectangle goes from one curve to the other.

The height of each individual rectangle is                      and the width of each rectangle is

the rectangles, we see that the area between the curves is approximated by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 2.1 · Areas between Curves 109

This is a Riemann sum, so we take the limit as    and we get

                                                      
These findings are summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.1

Finding the Area between Two Curves

Let      and  be continuous functions such that                over an interval  Let denote the region

bounded above by the graph of   below by the graph of          and on the left and right by the lines       and

     respectively. Then, the area of is given by

                                                                                                            (2.1)

We apply this theorem in the following example.

EXAMPLE 2.1

Finding the Area of a Region between Two Curves 1

If R is the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the function

             over the interval  find the area of region

     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.

         Figure 2.4 A region between two curves is shown where one curve is always greater than the other.

We have
110 2 · Applications of Integration

The area of the region is

2.1 If is the region bounded by the graphs of the functions                    and                     over the interval

             find the area of region

In Example 2.1, we defined the interval of interest as part of the problem statement. Quite often, though, we want to
define our interval of interest based on where the graphs of the two functions intersect. This is illustrated in the
following example.

EXAMPLE 2.2

Finding the Area of a Region between Two Curves 2                              and below by the graph of the function
If is the region bounded above by the graph of the function

                   find the area of region

     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.

Figure 2.5 This graph shows the region below the graph of                      and above the graph of

We first need to compute where the graphs of the functions intersect. Setting       we get

The graphs of the functions intersect when  or  so we want to integrate from to Since                                  for

we obtain

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         2.1 · Areas between Curves 111

The area of the region is  units2.

     2.2 If R is the region bounded above by the graph of the function   and below by the graph of the

           function        find the area of region

Areas of Compound Regions

So far, we have required            over the entire interval of interest, but what if we want to look at regions bounded

by the graphs of functions that cross one another? In that case, we modify the process we just developed by using the

absolute value function.

Theorem 2.2

Finding the Area of a Region between Curves That Cross

Let        and  be continuous functions over an interval      Let denote the region between the graphs of

and        and be bounded on the left and right by the lines  and        respectively. Then, the area of is given

by

In practice, applying this theorem requires us to break up the interval  and evaluate several integrals, depending on

which of the function values is greater over a given part of the interval. We study this process in the following example.

EXAMPLE 2.3

Finding the Area of a Region Bounded by Functions That Cross

If R is the region between the graphs of the functions        and        over the interval  find the area

of region

     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.
112 2 · Applications of Integration

      Figure 2.6 The region between two curves can be broken into two sub-regions.

The graphs of the functions intersect at         For              so

On the other hand, for                           so

Then

The area of the region is            units2.

      2.3 If R is the region between the graphs of the functions  and                                          over the interval

                        find the area of region

  EXAMPLE 2.4

Finding the Area of a Complex Region
Consider the region depicted in Figure 2.7. Find the area of

                                  Figure 2.7 Two integrals are required to calculate the area of this region.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    2.1 · Areas between Curves 113

Solution

As with Example 2.3, we need to divide the interval into two pieces. The graphs of the functions intersect at        (set

and solve for x), so we evaluate two separate integrals: one over the interval                      and one over the interval

Over the interval          the region is bounded above by      and below by the x-axis, so we have

Over the interval          the region is bounded above by      and below by the                     so we have

Adding these areas together, we obtain
The area of the region is units2.

       2.4 Consider the region depicted in the following figure. Find the area of

Regions Defined with Respect to y

In Example 2.4, we had to evaluate two separate integrals to calculate the area of the region. However, there is another

approach that requires only one integral. What if we treat the curves as functions of instead of as functions of

Review Figure 2.7. Note that the left graph, shown in red, is represented by the function           We could just as

easily solve this for and represent the curve by the function             (Note that                is also a valid

representation of the function  as a function of However, based on the graph, it is clear we are

interested in the positive square root.) Similarly, the right graph is represented by the function                   but

could just as easily be represented by the function            When the graphs are represented as functions of

we see the region is bounded on the left by the graph of one function and on the right by the graph of the other

function. Therefore, if we integrate with respect to we need to evaluate one integral only. Let's develop a formula for

this type of integration.

Let and be continuous functions over an interval               such that           for all          We want to find

the area between the graphs of the functions, as shown in the following figure.
114 2 · Applications of Integration

                Figure 2.8 We can find the area between the graphs of two functions, and

This time, we are going to partition the interval on the          and use horizontal rectangles to approximate the area

between the functions. So, for                  let               be a regular partition of  Then, for

choose a point                       then over each interval      construct a rectangle that extends horizontally from

to              Figure 2.9(a) shows the rectangles when is selected to be the lower endpoint of the interval and

Figure 2.9(b) shows a representative rectangle in detail.

Figure 2.9 (a) Approximating the area between the graphs of two functions, and               with rectangles. (b) The area
of a typical rectangle.                                                                              Therefore, the area

The height of each individual rectangle is   and the width of each rectangle is
between the curves is approximately

This is a Riemann sum, so we take the limit as        obtaining

                                                     
These findings are summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.3

Finding the Area between Two Curves, Integrating along the y-axis

Let and be continuous functions such that                         for all        Let denote the region bounded on

the right by the graph of            on the left by the graph of  and above and below by the lines      and

respectively. Then, the area of is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       2.1 · Areas between Curves 115

                                                                                                                                                                 (2.2)

  EXAMPLE 2.5
Integrating with Respect to y
Let's revisit Example 2.4, only this time let's integrate with respect to Let be the region depicted in Figure 2.10. Find
the area of by integrating with respect to

Figure 2.10 The area of region can be calculated using one integral only when the curves are treated as functions of

Solution

We must first express the graphs as functions of As we saw at the beginning of this section, the curve on the left can

be represented by the function              and the curve on the right can be represented by the function

Now we have to determine the limits of integration. The region is bounded below by the x-axis, so the lower limit of

integration is  The upper limit of integration is determined by the point where the two graphs intersect, which is

the point       so the upper limit of integration is  Thus, we have

Calculating the area of the region, we get

The area of the region is units2.

       2.5 Let's revisit the checkpoint associated with Example 2.4, only this time, let's integrate with respect to Let
                      be the region depicted in the following figure. Find the area of by integrating with respect to
116 2 · Applications of Integration

        SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the area of the region between the two curves in the given figure by integrating
over the

1.                                       2.

For the following exercises, split the region between the two curves into two smaller regions, then determine the area by

integrating over the                 Note that you will have two integrals to solve.

3.   and                                 4.  and  for

For the following exercises, determine the area of the region between the two curves by integrating over the

5.                                   6.

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its
area by integrating over the

7.                                   8.                9.                                  and  on

10.                                  11.                                              12.

13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2.1 · Areas between Curves 117

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. If necessary,
break the region into sub-regions to determine its entire area.

14.              15.                             16.             and

                                                      over

17.         18.                         19.                 and
      over        over

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its
area by integrating over the

20.         21.                         22.

23.         24.

25.

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its
area by integrating over the x-axis or y-axis, whichever seems more convenient.

26.         27.                              28.

29.              30.                         31.

32.                       33.

34.                       35.

36.         37.

For the following exercises, find the exact area of the region bounded by the given equations if possible. If you are
unable to determine the intersection points analytically, use a calculator to approximate the intersection points with
three decimal places and determine the approximate area of the region.

38. [T]     39. [T]                     40. [T]

41. [T]     42. [T]

43. [T]                        44. [T]

45. [T]          46. [T]
118 2 · Applications of Integration              48. The largest triangle with a base     49. A factory selling cell
                                                                                                phones has a marginal cost
      47. [T]                                                                                   function

                                                 on the             that fits inside the        where represents the
                                                                                                number of cell phones, and
                                                 upper half of the unit circle                  a marginal revenue
                                                                                                function given by
                                                                    is given by
                                                                                                                          Find the
                                                                and              See            area between the graphs
                                                                                                of these curves and
                                                 the following figure. What is the              What does this area
                                                                                                represent?
                                                 area inside the semicircle but

                                                 outside the triangle?

50. An amusement park has a                51. The tortoise versus the        52. The tortoise versus the hare:
      marginal cost function                     hare: The speed of the hare        The speed of the hare is
                                                 is given by the sinusoidal         given by the sinusoidal
      where represents the                       function                           function
      number of tickets sold, and
      a marginal revenue                   whereas the speed of the              whereas the speed of the
      function given by                    tortoise is
                                                                                 tortoise is   where
                                 Find the
      total profit generated                                                     is time measured in hours
      when selling tickets.
      Use a calculator to                  where is time measured                and speed is measured in
      determine intersection
      points, if necessary, to two         in hours and the speed is             kilometers per hour. If the
      decimal places.
                                           measured in miles per                 race is over in hour, who

                                           hour. Find the area                   won the race and by how

                                           between the curves from               much? Use a calculator to

                                           time       to the first time          determine the intersection

                                           after one hour when the               points, if necessary, accurate

                                           tortoise and hare are                 to three decimal places.

                                           traveling at the same

                                           speed. What does it

                                           represent? Use a calculator

                                           to determine the

                                           intersection points, if

                                           necessary, accurate to

                                           three decimal places.

For the following exercises, find the area between the curves by integrating with respect to and then with respect to
Is one method easier than the other? Do you obtain the same answer?

53.                                              54.                                      55.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 119

For the following exercises, solve using calculus, then check your answer with geometry.

56. Determine the equations for the       57. Find the area between the
      sides of the square that touches          perimeter of the unit circle and
      the unit circle on all four sides,        the triangle created from
      as seen in the following figure.                                           and
      Find the area between the                              as seen in the following
      perimeter of this square and the
      unit circle. Is there another way         figure. Is there a way to solve
      to solve this without using               this without using calculus?
      calculus?

2.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing

Learning Objectives

      2.2.1 Determine the volume of a solid by integrating a cross-section (the slicing method).
      2.2.2 Find the volume of a solid of revolution using the disk method.
      2.2.3 Find the volume of a solid of revolution with a cavity using the washer method.

In the preceding section, we used definite integrals to find the area between two curves. In this section, we use definite
integrals to find volumes of three-dimensional solids. We consider three approaches--slicing, disks, and washers--for
finding these volumes, depending on the characteristics of the solid.

Volume and the Slicing Method

Just as area is the numerical measure of a two-dimensional region, volume is the numerical measure of a three-

dimensional solid. Most of us have computed volumes of solids by using basic geometric formulas. The volume of a

rectangular solid, for example, can be computed by multiplying length, width, and height:         The formulas for the

volume of a sphere  a cone                        and a pyramid                        have also been introduced.

Although some of these formulas were derived using geometry alone, all these formulas can be obtained by using
integration.

We can also calculate the volume of a cylinder. Although most of us think of a cylinder as having a circular base, such as a
soup can or a metal rod, in mathematics the word cylinder has a more general meaning. To discuss cylinders in this
more general context, we first need to define some vocabulary.

We define the cross-section of a solid to be the intersection of a plane with the solid. A cylinder is defined as any solid

that can be generated by translating a plane region along a line perpendicular to the region, called the axis of the

cylinder. Thus, all cross-sections perpendicular to the axis of a cylinder are identical. The solid shown in Figure 2.11 is an

example of a cylinder with a noncircular base. To calculate the volume of a cylinder, then, we simply multiply the area of

the cross-section by the height of the cylinder:  In the case of a right circular cylinder (soup can), this becomes
120 2 · Applications of Integration

                              Figure 2.11 Each cross-section of a particular cylinder is identical to the others.

If a solid does not have a constant cross-section (and it is not one of the other basic solids), we may not have a formula
for its volume. In this case, we can use a definite integral to calculate the volume of the solid. We do this by slicing the
solid into pieces, estimating the volume of each slice, and then adding those estimated volumes together. The slices
should all be parallel to one another, and when we put all the slices together, we should get the whole solid. Consider, for
example, the solid S shown in Figure 2.12, extending along the

                                     Figure 2.12 A solid with a varying cross-section.

We want to divide into slices perpendicular to the           As we see later in the chapter, there may be times when we

want to slice the solid in some other direction--say, with slices perpendicular to the y-axis. The decision of which way to

slice the solid is very important. If we make the wrong choice, the computations can get quite messy. Later in the

chapter, we examine some of these situations in detail and look at how to decide which way to slice the solid. For the

purposes of this section, however, we use slices perpendicular to the

Because the cross-sectional area is not constant, we let     represent the area of the cross-section at point Now let
                                                                            let represent the slice of stretching from
be a regular partition of                           and for

The following figure shows the sliced solid with

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 121

                 Figure 2.13 The solid has been divided into three slices perpendicular to the

Finally, for          let be an arbitrary point in  Then the volume of slice can be estimated by
approximated by
                      Adding these approximations together, we see the volume of the entire solid can be

By now, we can recognize this as a Riemann sum, and our next step is to take the limit as   Then we have

                                                                      

The technique we have just described is called the slicing method. To apply it, we use the following strategy.

  Problem-Solving Strategy

  Finding Volumes by the Slicing Method
   1. Examine the solid and determine the shape of a cross-section of the solid. It is often helpful to draw a picture if

        one is not provided.
   2. Determine a formula for the area of the cross-section.
   3. Integrate the area formula over the appropriate interval to get the volume.

Recall that in this section, we assume the slices are perpendicular to the  Therefore, the area formula is in terms of

x and the limits of integration lie on the  However, the problem-solving strategy shown here is valid regardless of

how we choose to slice the solid.

EXAMPLE 2.6

Deriving the Formula for the Volume of a Pyramid                            If the pyramid has a square base,
We know from geometry that the formula for the volume of a pyramid is

this becomes          where denotes the length of one side of the base. We are going to use the slicing method to

derive this formula.

     Solution
We want to apply the slicing method to a pyramid with a square base. To set up the integral, consider the pyramid shown
in Figure 2.14, oriented along the
122 2 · Applications of Integration

Figure 2.14 (a) A pyramid with a square base is oriented along the x-axis. (b) A two-dimensional view of the pyramid is
seen from the side.
We first want to determine the shape of a cross-section of the pyramid. We know the base is a square, so the cross-
sections are squares as well (step 1). Now we want to determine a formula for the area of one of these cross-sectional
squares. Looking at Figure 2.14(b), and using a proportion, since these are similar triangles, we have

Therefore, the area of one of the cross-sectional squares is

Then we find the volume of the pyramid by integrating from  (step

This is the formula we were looking for.

2.6 Use the slicing method to derive the formula            for the volume of a circular cone.

Solids of Revolution

If a region in a plane is revolved around a line in that plane, the resulting solid is called a solid of revolution, as shown in
the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 123

Figure 2.15 (a) This is the region that is revolved around the x-axis. (b) As the region begins to revolve around the axis, it
sweeps out a solid of revolution. (c) This is the solid that results when the revolution is complete.
Solids of revolution are common in mechanical applications, such as machine parts produced by a lathe. We spend the
rest of this section looking at solids of this type. The next example uses the slicing method to calculate the volume of a
solid of revolution.

       MEDIA
      Use an online integral calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_IntCalc2) to learn more.
124 2 · Applications of Integration

  EXAMPLE 2.7                                                                                              as shown

Using the Slicing Method to find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution
Use the slicing method to find the volume of the solid of revolution bounded by the graphs of

                                                       and rotated about the

     Solution
Using the problem-solving strategy, we first sketch the graph of the quadratic function over the interval
in the following figure.

                                            Figure 2.16 A region used to produce a solid of revolution.
Next, revolve the region around the x-axis, as shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.17 Two views, (a) and (b), of the solid of revolution produced by revolving the region in Figure 2.16 about the

Since the solid was formed by revolving the region around the  the cross-sections are circles (step 1). The area of

the cross-section, then, is the area of a circle, and the radius of the circle is given by               Use the formula for the area

of the circle:

The volume, then, is (step 3)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 125

The volume is

2.7 Use the method of slicing to find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving the region

              between the graph of the function  and the  over the interval                     around the             See

              the following figure.

The Disk Method

When we use the slicing method with solids of revolution, it is often called the disk method because, for solids of

revolution, the slices used to over approximate the volume of the solid are disks. To see this, consider the solid of

revolution generated by revolving the region between the graph of the function                  and the                over

the interval   around the            The graph of the function and a representative disk are shown in Figure 2.18(a)

and (b). The region of revolution and the resulting solid are shown in Figure 2.18(c) and (d).
126 2 · Applications of Integration

Figure 2.18 (a) A thin rectangle for approximating the area under a curve. (b) A representative disk formed by revolving

the rectangle about the              (c) The region under the curve is revolved about the  resulting in (d) the solid of

revolution.

We already used the formal Riemann sum development of the volume formula when we developed the slicing method.
We know that

The only difference with the disk method is that we know the formula for the cross-sectional area ahead of time; it is the
area of a circle. This gives the following rule.

Rule: The Disk Method

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define as the region bounded above by the graph of     below by the

     on the left by the line         and on the right by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution

Access for free at openstax.org
formed by revolving around the  is given by                                                2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 127

                                                                                                                            (2.3)

The volume of the solid we have been studying (Figure 2.18) is given by

Let's look at some examples.

EXAMPLE 2.8

Using the Disk Method to Find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution 1

Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between the graph of

and the        over the interval  around the

     Solution
The graphs of the function and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.19 (a) The function             over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution obtained by revolving the
region under the graph of     about the

We have

The volume is  units3.

2.8 Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between

the graph of                    and the                     over the interval  around the
128 2 · Applications of Integration

So far, our examples have all concerned regions revolved around the          but we can generate a solid of revolution by

revolving a plane region around any horizontal or vertical line. In the next example, we look at a solid of revolution that

has been generated by revolving a region around the      The mechanics of the disk method are nearly the same as

when the     is the axis of revolution, but we express the function in terms of and we integrate with respect to y as

well. This is summarized in the following rule.

Rule: The Disk Method for Solids of Revolution around the y-axis

Let       be continuous and nonnegative. Define as the region bounded on the right by the graph of    on the

left by the  below by the line         and above by the line         Then, the volume of the solid of revolution

formed by revolving around the         is given by

                                                                                                               (2.4)

The next example shows how this rule works in practice.

EXAMPLE 2.9

Using the Disk Method to Find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution 2

Let be the region bounded by the graph of                and the             over the       interval  Use the disk
                                                                              around the
method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating

Solution

Figure 2.20 shows the function and a representative disk that can be used to estimate the volume. Notice that since we

are revolving the function around the      the disks are horizontal, rather than vertical.

Figure 2.20 (a) Shown is a thin rectangle between the curve of the function                 and the   (b) The
rectangle forms a representative disk after revolution around the

The region to be revolved and the full solid of revolution are depicted in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 129

Figure 2.21 (a) The region to the left of the function        over the           interval  (b) The solid of
revolution formed by revolving the region about the

To find the volume, we integrate with respect to We obtain

The volume is units3.

2.9 Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between

            the graph of          and the  over the interval      around the

The Washer Method

Some solids of revolution have cavities in the middle; they are not solid all the way to the axis of revolution. Sometimes,

this is just a result of the way the region of revolution is shaped with respect to the axis of revolution. In other cases,

cavities arise when the region of revolution is defined as the region between the graphs of two functions. A third way

this can happen is when an axis of revolution other than the  or        is selected.

When the solid of revolution has a cavity in the middle, the slices used to approximate the volume are not disks, but

washers (disks with holes in the center). For example, consider the region bounded above by the graph of the function

            and below by the graph of the function            over the interval  When this region is revolved

around the  the result is a solid with a cavity in the middle, and the slices are washers. The graph of the function

and a representative washer are shown in Figure 2.22(a) and (b). The region of revolution and the resulting solid are

shown in Figure 2.22(c) and (d).
130 2 · Applications of Integration

Figure 2.22 (a) A thin rectangle in the region between two curves. (b) A representative washer formed by revolving the

rectangle about the                  (c) The region between the curves over the given interval. (d) The resulting solid of revolution.

The cross-sectional area, then, is the area of the outer circle less the area of the inner circle. In this case,

Then the volume of the solid is

Generalizing this process gives the washer method.

Rule: The Washer Method

Suppose  and                         are continuous, nonnegative functions such that  over                     Let   denote the
                                                                                                                    and on the
region bounded above by the graph of  below by the graph of                           on the left by the line
                                                                                                                          is given
right by the line    Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 131

                                                                                                                             (2.5)

EXAMPLE 2.10

Using the Washer Method

Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by the graph of          and

below by the graph of           over the interval  around the

     Solution
The graphs of the functions and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.23 (a) The region between the graphs of the functions  and                         over the interval  (b)

Revolving the region about the  generates a solid of revolution with a cavity in the middle.

We have

    2.10 Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded by the graphs of

                       and      over the interval               around the

As with the disk method, we can also apply the washer method to solids of revolution that result from revolving a region
around the y-axis. In this case, the following rule applies.

  Rule: The Washer Method for Solids of Revolution around the y-axis

Suppose  and           are continuous, nonnegative functions such that          for           Let              denote the
                                                                                                                 and
region bounded on the right by the graph of        on the left by the graph of  below by the line                  is given

above by the line      Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

by
132 2 · Applications of Integration

Rather than looking at an example of the washer method with the           as the axis of revolution, we now consider an

example in which the axis of revolution is a line other than one of the two coordinate axes. The same general method

applies, but you may have to visualize just how to describe the cross-sectional area of the volume.

EXAMPLE 2.11

The Washer Method with a Different Axis of Revolution

Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by             and below by

the  over the interval               around the line

     Solution
The graph of the region and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.24 (a) The region between the graph of the function              and the          over the interval  (b)

Revolving the region about the line  generates a solid of revolution with a cylindrical hole through its middle.

We can't apply the volume formula to this problem directly because the axis of revolution is not one of the coordinate

axes. However, we still know that the area of the cross-section is the area of the outer circle less the area of the inner

circle. Looking at the graph of the function, we see the radius of the outer circle is given by      which simplifies to

The radius of the inner circle is    Therefore, we have

     2.11 Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by the graph of

                                     and below by the  over the interval  around the line

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 133

SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES

58. Derive the formula for the    59. Use the slicing method to     60. Use the slicing method to
      volume of a sphere using          derive the formula for the        derive the formula for the
      the slicing method.               volume of a cone.                 volume of a tetrahedron
                                                                          with side length

61. Use the disk method to        62. Explain when you would
      derive the formula for the        use the disk method versus
      volume of a trapezoidal           the washer method. When
      cylinder.                         are they interchangeable?

For the following exercises, draw a typical slice and find the volume using the slicing method for the given volume.

63. A pyramid with height 6       64. A pyramid with height 4       65. A tetrahedron with a base
      units and square base of          units and a rectangular           side of 4 units, as seen
      side 2 units, as pictured         base with length 2 units          here.
      here.                             and width 3 units, as
                                        pictured here.

66. A pyramid with height 5 units, and 67. A cone of radius and height has

an isosceles triangular base with   a smaller cone of radius and

lengths of 6 units and 8 units, as  height removed from the top, as

seen here.                          seen here. The resulting solid is

                                    called a frustum.
134 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, draw an outline of the solid and find the volume using the slicing method.

68. The base is a circle of          69. The base is a triangle with    70. The base is the region
      radius The slices                                                       under the parabola
      perpendicular to the base           vertices                 and                        in the first
      are squares.                                                            quadrant. Slices
                                               Slices perpendicular           perpendicular to the
                                                                              xy-plane and parallel to the
                                          to the x-axis are                   y-axis are squares.

                                          semicircles.

71. The base is the region           72. The base is the region         73. The base is the area

      under the parabola                  enclosed by           and     between         and

              and above the                    Slices perpendicular     Slices perpendicular to the

              Slices perpendicular        to the x-axis are right       x-axis are semicircles.

      to the  are squares.                isosceles triangles. The

                                          intersection of one of these

                                          slices and the base is the

                                          leg of the triangle.

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, use the disk method to find the volume when
the region is rotated around the x-axis.

74.                                  75.                                76.

77.                                       78.                                 79.

80.                                  81.

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, find the volume when the region is rotated
around the y-axis.

82.                                  83.                                84.

85.                                       86.

87.                                            88.

89.

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, find the volume when the region is rotated
around the x-axis.

90.                                            91.                            92.

93.                                  94. [T]                                       95.

96.                                            97.

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, use the washer method to find the volume
when the region is revolved around the y-axis.

98.                                  99.                                100.

101.                                           102.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         2.2 · Determining Volumes by Slicing 135

103. Yogurt containers can be shaped like frustums.

Rotate the line          around the y-axis to find the

volume between

104. Rotate the ellipse  around the

x-axis to approximate the volume of a football, as seen

here.
136 2 · Applications of Integration

105. Rotate the ellipse              around                  106. A better approximation of the volume of a football

the y-axis to approximate the volume of a                    is given by the solid that comes from rotating

football.                                                    around the x-axis from  to

                                                             What is the volume of this football approximation,

                                                             as seen here?

107. What is the volume of the Bundt cake that comes

from rotating                        around the y-axis from

to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 137

For the following exercises, find the volume of the solid described.

108. The base is the region         109. The base is the region          110. Bore a hole of radius down
                                            enclosed by the generic              the axis of a right cone of
between               and                   ellipse                              height and radius through
                                                                                 the base of the cone as seen
          Slices                            Slices perpendicular to              here.
                                            the x-axis are semicircles.
perpendicular to the

x-axis are semicircles.

111. Find the volume common         112. Find the volume of a spherical cap o1f13. Find the volume of a sphere of radius
        to two spheres of radius
        with centers that are       height and radius where                 as  with a cap of height removed
        apart, as shown here.
                                    seen here.                                  from the top, as seen here.

2.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells

Learning Objectives

      2.3.1 Calculate the volume of a solid of revolution by using the method of cylindrical shells.
      2.3.2 Compare the different methods for calculating a volume of revolution.

In this section, we examine the method of cylindrical shells, the final method for finding the volume of a solid of
revolution. We can use this method on the same kinds of solids as the disk method or the washer method; however, with
the disk and washer methods, we integrate along the coordinate axis parallel to the axis of revolution. With the method
of cylindrical shells, we integrate along the coordinate axis perpendicular to the axis of revolution. The ability to choose
which variable of integration we want to use can be a significant advantage with more complicated functions. Also, the
specific geometry of the solid sometimes makes the method of using cylindrical shells more appealing than using the
washer method. In the last part of this section, we review all the methods for finding volume that we have studied and
lay out some guidelines to help you determine which method to use in a given situation.

The Method of Cylindrical Shells

Again, we are working with a solid of revolution. As before, we define a region bounded above by the graph of a

function              below by the  and on the left and right by the lines      and  respectively, as shown in

Figure 2.25(a). We then revolve this region around the y-axis, as shown in Figure 2.25(b). Note that this is different from

what we have done before. Previously, regions defined in terms of functions of were revolved around the        or a

line parallel to it.
138 2 · Applications of Integration

Figure 2.25 (a) A region bounded by the graph of a function of  (b) The solid of revolution formed when the region is
revolved around the

As we have done many times before, partition the interval       using a regular partition,                 and, for

choose a point                       Then, construct a rectangle over the interval              of height

and width A representative rectangle is shown in Figure 2.26(a). When that rectangle is revolved around the y-axis,

instead of a disk or a washer, we get a cylindrical shell, as shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.26 (a) A representative rectangle. (b) When this rectangle is revolved around the      the result is a cylindrical
shell. (c) When we put all the shells together, we get an approximation of the original solid.

To calculate the volume of this shell, consider Figure 2.27.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 139

                                   Figure 2.27 Calculating the volume of the shell.

The shell is a cylinder, so its volume is the cross-sectional area multiplied by the height of the cylinder. The cross-sections

are annuli (ring-shaped regions--essentially, circles with a hole in the center), with outer radius and inner radius

Thus, the cross-sectional area is  The height of the cylinder is  Then the volume of the shell is

Note that            so we have

Furthermore,         is both the midpoint of the interval  and the average radius of the shell, and we can
approximate this by   We then have

Another way to think of this is to think of making a vertical cut in the shell and then opening it up to form a flat plate
(Figure 2.28).

           Figure 2.28 (a) Make a vertical cut in a representative shell. (b) Open the shell up to form a flat plate.
140 2 · Applications of Integration

In reality, the outer radius of the shell is greater than the inner radius, and hence the back edge of the plate would be

slightly longer than the front edge of the plate. However, we can approximate the flattened shell by a flat plate of height

     width    and thickness (Figure 2.28). The volume of the shell, then, is approximately the volume of the flat

plate. Multiplying the height, width, and depth of the plate, we get

which is the same formula we had before.
To calculate the volume of the entire solid, we then add the volumes of all the shells and obtain

Here we have another Riemann sum, this time for the function            Taking the limit as         gives us

                                                          
This leads to the following rule for the method of cylindrical shells.

Rule: The Method of Cylindrical Shells

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define as the region bounded above by the graph of             below by the

     on the left by the line         and on the right by the line       Then the volume of the solid of revolution

formed by revolving around the y-axis is given by

                                                                                                                (2.6)

Now let's consider an example.

EXAMPLE 2.12

The Method of Cylindrical Shells 1                                  and below by the         over the interval      Find
Define as the region bounded above by the graph of         around the
the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving

     Solution                        and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure.
First we must graph the region

Figure 2.29 (a) The region           under the graph of    over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution generated
by revolving about the

Then the volume of the solid is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 141

2.12 Define R as the region bounded above by the graph of       and below by the x-axis over the interval

                     Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

EXAMPLE 2.13

The Method of Cylindrical Shells 2                                      and below by the  over the interval
Define R as the region bounded above by the graph of            around the
Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving

     Solution           and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure.
First graph the region

Figure 2.30 (a) The region under the graph of                   over the interval         (b) The volume of revolution
obtained by revolving about the

Then the volume of the solid is given by

2.13 Define as the region bounded above by the graph of                            and below by the  over the

             interval   Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

As with the disk method and the washer method, we can use the method of cylindrical shells with solids of revolution,

revolved around the     when we want to integrate with respect to The analogous rule for this type of solid is

given here.
142 2 · Applications of Integration

Rule: The Method of Cylindrical Shells for Solids of Revolution around the x-axis

Let be continuous and nonnegative. Define as the region bounded on the right by the graph of                         on the left

by the  below by the line            and above by the line        Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed

by revolving around the              is given by

EXAMPLE 2.14

The Method of Cylindrical Shells for a Solid Revolved around the x-axis

Define as the region bounded on the right by the graph of         and on the left by the                        for

Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the x-axis.

     Solution                        and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure.
First, we need to graph the region

Figure 2.31 (a) The region           to the left of the function  over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution generated
by revolving around the

Label the shaded region Then the volume of the solid is given by

2.14 Define as the region bounded on the right by the graph of                       and on the left by the          for

                                     Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

For the next example, we look at a solid of revolution for which the graph of a function is revolved around a line other
than one of the two coordinate axes. To set this up, we need to revisit the development of the method of cylindrical
shells. Recall that we found the volume of one of the shells to be given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 143

This was based on a shell with an outer radius of and an inner radius of       If, however, we rotate the region around

a line other than the       we have a different outer and inner radius. Suppose, for example, that we rotate the region

around the line          where is some positive constant. Then, the outer radius of the shell is      and the inner

radius of the shell is      Substituting these terms into the expression for volume, we see that when a plane region

is rotated around the line          the volume of a shell is given by

As before, we notice that   is the midpoint of the interval               and can be approximated by Then, the

approximate volume of the shell is

The remainder of the development proceeds as before, and we see that

We could also rotate the region around other horizontal or vertical lines, such as a vertical line in the right half plane. In

each case, the volume formula must be adjusted accordingly. Specifically, the       in the integral must be replaced

with an expression representing the radius of a shell. To see how this works, consider the following example.

EXAMPLE 2.15

A Region of Revolution Revolved around a Line                     and below by the        over the interval    Find
Define as the region bounded above by the graph of         around the line
the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving

     Solution              and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure.
First, graph the region

Figure 2.32 (a) The region between the graph of  and the               over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution
144 2 · Applications of Integration

generated by revolving around the line       Then the volume of the solid is given by
Note that the radius of a shell is given by

2.15 Define as the region bounded above by the graph of            and below by the                             over the interval

               Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the line

For our final example in this section, let's look at the volume of a solid of revolution for which the region of revolution is
bounded by the graphs of two functions.

EXAMPLE 2.16

A Region of Revolution Bounded by the Graphs of Two Functions

Define as the region bounded above by the graph of the function    and below by the graph of the function

over the interval                    Find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by revolving around the

     Solution                        and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure.
First, graph the region

Figure 2.33 (a) The region between the graph of  and the graph of  over the interval                            (b) The solid of
revolution generated by revolving around the

Note that the axis of revolution is the      so the radius of a shell is given simply by  We don't need to make any
                                                                                                       so in this case we need
adjustments to the x-term of our integrand. The height of a shell, though, is given by

to adjust the  term of the integrand. Then the volume of the solid is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 145

2.16 Define as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the graph of                                   over

the interval           Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving around the

Which Method Should We Use?

We have studied several methods for finding the volume of a solid of revolution, but how do we know which method to

use? It often comes down to a choice of which integral is easiest to evaluate. Figure 2.34 describes the different

approaches for solids of revolution around the  It's up to you to develop the analogous table for solids of

revolution around the

                                                                             Figure 2.34
Let's take a look at a couple of additional problems and decide on the best approach to take for solving them.

  EXAMPLE 2.17

Selecting the Best Method
For each of the following problems, select the best method to find the volume of a solid of revolution generated by
146 2 · Applications of Integration

revolving the given region around the   and set up the integral to find the volume (do not evaluate the integral).

a. The region bounded by the graphs of        and the
b. The region bounded by the graphs of  and the

    Solution
a. First, sketch the region and the solid of revolution as shown.

Figure 2.35 (a) The region           bounded by two lines and the  (b) The solid of revolution generated by revolving
   about the

Looking at the region, if we want to integrate with respect to we would have to break the integral into two pieces,

because we have different functions bounding the region over       and  In this case, using the disk method,

we would have

If we used the shell method instead, we would use functions of to represent the curves, producing

     Neither of these integrals is particularly onerous, but since the shell method requires only one integral, and the
     integrand requires less simplification, we should probably go with the shell method in this case.
b. First, sketch the region and the solid of revolution as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 147

Figure 2.36 (a) The region        between the curve and the       (b) The solid of revolution generated by revolving
about the

Looking at the region, it would be problematic to define a horizontal rectangle; the region is bounded on the left
and right by the same function. Therefore, we can dismiss the method of shells. The solid has no cavity in the
middle, so we can use the method of disks. Then

2.17 Select the best method to find the volume of a solid of revolution generated by revolving the given region

around the                        and set up the integral to find the volume (do not evaluate the integral): the region

bounded by the graphs of          and

        SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the volume generated when the region between the two curves is rotated around the
given axis. Use both the shell method and the washer method. Use technology to graph the functions and draw a typical
slice by hand.

114. [T] Bounded by the curves    115. [T] Bounded by the curves  116. [T] Bounded by the curves
                             and          rotated around the              rotated around the

        rotated around the

117. [T] Bounded by the curves 118. [T] Bounded by the curves 119. [T] Bounded by the curves

rotated around the                rotated around the              rotated around the
148 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, use shells to find the volumes of the given solids. Note that the rotated regions lie between

the curve and the           and are rotated around the

120.                                 121.                                122.

123.                                       124.                          125.

126.                                 127.                                128.

129.

For the following exercises, use shells to find the volume generated by rotating the regions between the given curve and
        around the

130.                                 131.                        and 132.
        and the x-axis                       the x-axis                             and the x-axis

133.                                 134.                                135.
                                                                                 and the y-axis
      and the x-axis
                                                                         138.
136.                                 137.                                        and the x-axis

139.

For the following exercises, find the volume generated when the region between the curves is rotated around the given
axis.

140.                                       141.                                142.                   rotated
        rotated around the                         rotated around the                  around the

143.                                 144.                                145.
        rotated around the line              rotated around the line             rotated around the

146.                                 147.                                148.                         rotated
        rotated around the line              rotated around the
                                                                                     around the line

149. [T] Left of        around the
        right of

For the following exercises, use technology to graph the region. Determine which method you think would be easiest to
use to calculate the volume generated when the function is rotated around the specified axis. Then, use your chosen
method to find the volume.

150. [T]          and                151. [T]

      rotated around the

                                           rotated around the         This exercise

                                           requires advanced technique. You may use

                                           technology to perform the integration.

152. [T]                             153. [T]                                  154. [T]

        rotated around the                       rotated around the                    rotated around the
155. [T]                                                                 157. [T]
                                     156. [T]                       and
        rotated around the                   the         rotated around          rotated around the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         2.3 · Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 149

For the following exercises, use the method of shells to approximate the volumes of some common objects, which are
pictured in accompanying figures.

158. Use the method of shells to find the volume of a    159. Use the method of shells to find the volume of a
        sphere of radius                                         cone with radius and height

160. Use the method of shells to find the volume of an   161. Use the method of shells to find the volume of a
                                                                 cylinder with radius and height
ellipsoid                      rotated around the

162. Use the method of shells to find the volume of the

donut created when the circle               is rotated

around the line

163. Consider he region enclosed by the graphs of        164. Consider the function

                               and                              which

           What is the volume of the solid               decreases from

generated when this region is rotated around             to            Set up the

the        Assume that the function is defined           integrals for determining

over the interval                                        the volume, using both

                                                         the shell method and the

                                                         disk method, of the solid

                                                         generated when this

                                                         region, with    and

                                                                is rotated around

                                                         the    Prove that

                                                         both methods

                                                         approximate the same

                                                         volume. Which method is

                                                         easier to apply? (Hint:

                                                         Since  is one-to-one,

                                                         there exists an inverse
150 2 · Applications of Integration

2.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area

Learning Objectives

     2.4.1 Determine the length of a curve,        between two points.

     2.4.2 Determine the length of a curve,        between two points.

     2.4.3 Find the surface area of a solid of revolution.

In this section, we use definite integrals to find the arc length of a curve. We can think of arc length as the distance you
would travel if you were walking along the path of the curve. Many real-world applications involve arc length. If a rocket
is launched along a parabolic path, we might want to know how far the rocket travels. Or, if a curve on a map represents
a road, we might want to know how far we have to drive to reach our destination.

We begin by calculating the arc length of curves defined as functions of then we examine the same process for curves
defined as functions of (The process is identical, with the roles of and reversed.) The techniques we use to find arc
length can be extended to find the surface area of a surface of revolution, and we close the section with an examination
of this concept.

Arc Length of the Curve y = f(x)

In previous applications of integration, we required the function    to be integrable, or at most continuous. However,

for calculating arc length we have a more stringent requirement for  Here, we require  to be differentiable, and

furthermore we require its derivative,       to be continuous. Functions like this, which have continuous derivatives, are

called smooth. (This property comes up again in later chapters.)

Let  be a smooth function defined over             We want to calculate the length of the curve from the point

to the point  We start by using line segments to approximate the length of the curve. For                             let

     be a regular partition of          Then, for                  construct a line segment from the point

to the point  Although it might seem logical to use either horizontal or vertical line segments, we want our

line segments to approximate the curve as closely as possible. Figure 2.37 depicts this construct for

              Figure 2.37 We can approximate the length of a curve by adding line segments.

To help us find the length of each line segment, we look at the change in vertical distance as well as the change in

horizontal distance over each interval. Because we have used a regular partition, the change in horizontal distance over

each interval is given by The change in vertical distance varies from interval to interval, though, so we use

              to represent the change in vertical distance over the interval           as shown in Figure 2.38.

Note that some (or all) may be negative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 151

               Figure 2.38 A representative line segment approximates the curve over the interval

By the Pythagorean theorem, the length of the line segment is                         We can also write this as
                                    Now, by the Mean Value Theorem, there is a point               such that

                                 Then the length of the line segment is given by                   Adding up the lengths of all
the line segments, we get

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as   we have

                                                           
We summarize these findings in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.4

Arc Length for y = f(x)

Let      be a smooth function over the interval              Then the arc length of the portion of the graph of  from
                                                                                                                    (2.7)
the point        to the point  is given by

Note that we are integrating an expression involving         so we need to be sure    is integrable. This is why we

require        to be smooth. The following example shows how to apply the theorem.

EXAMPLE 2.18

Calculating the Arc Length of a Function of x

Let              Calculate the arc length of the graph of    over the interval        Round the answer to three

decimal places.

     Solution

We have                  so                 Then, the arc length is
152 2 · Applications of Integration

Substitute     Then,                  When      then                 and when   then              Thus,

     2.18 Let                        Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval                 Round the

               answer to three decimal places.

Although it is nice to have a formula for calculating arc length, this particular theorem can generate expressions that are
difficult to integrate. We study some techniques for integration in Introduction to Techniques of Integration. In some
cases, we may have to use a computer or calculator to approximate the value of the integral.

EXAMPLE 2.19

Using a Computer or Calculator to Determine the Arc Length of a Function of x

Let            Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval

     Solution

We have        so                     Then the arc length is given by

Using a computer to approximate the value of this integral, we get

     2.19 Let                        Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval  Use a computer or

               calculator to approximate the value of the integral.

Arc Length of the Curve x = g(y)

We have just seen how to approximate the length of a curve with line segments. If we want to find the arc length of the

graph of a function of we can repeat the same process, except we partition the                   instead of the  Figure 2.39

shows a representative line segment.

                                    Figure 2.39 A representative line segment over the interval

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 153

Then the length of the line segment is                   which can also be written as                            If we

now follow the same development we did earlier, we get a formula for arc length of a function

Theorem 2.5

Arc Length for x = g(y)

Let be a smooth function over a interval                 Then, the arc length of the graph of from the point
                                                                                                                                            (2.8)
         to the point    is given by

EXAMPLE 2.20

Calculating the Arc Length of a Function of y

Let            Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval

     Solution

We have        so                       Then the arc length is

Using a computer to approximate the value of this integral, we obtain

     2.20 Let            Calculate the arc length of the graph of over the interval            Use a computer or

               calculator to approximate the value of the integral.

Area of a Surface of Revolution

The concepts we used to find the arc length of a curve can be extended to find the surface area of a surface of

revolution. Surface area is the total area of the outer layer of an object. For objects such as cubes or bricks, the surface

area of the object is the sum of the areas of all of its faces. For curved surfaces, the situation is a little more complex. Let

     be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval  We wish to find the surface area of the surface of

revolution created by revolving the graph of       around the          as shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.40 (a) A curve representing the function        (b) The surface of revolution formed by revolving the graph of
       around the

As we have done many times before, we are going to partition the interval   and approximate the surface area by
154 2 · Applications of Integration

calculating the surface area of simpler shapes. We start by using line segments to approximate the curve, as we did

earlier in this section. For         let  be a regular partition of  Then, for                               construct a

line segment from the point               to the point  Now, revolve these line segments around the

to generate an approximation of the surface of revolution as shown in the following figure.

Figure 2.41 (a) Approximating        with line segments. (b) The surface of revolution formed by revolving the line
segments around the

Notice that when each line segment is revolved around the axis, it produces a band. These bands are actually pieces of
cones (think of an ice cream cone with the pointy end cut off). A piece of a cone like this is called a frustum of a cone.

To find the surface area of the band, we need to find the lateral surface area, of the frustum (the area of just the
slanted outside surface of the frustum, not including the areas of the top or bottom faces). Let and be the radii of
the wide end and the narrow end of the frustum, respectively, and let be the slant height of the frustum as shown in
the following figure.

                              Figure 2.42 A frustum of a cone can approximate a small part of surface area.
We know the lateral surface area of a cone is given by
where is the radius of the base of the cone and is the slant height (see the following figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 155

                                         Figure 2.43 The lateral surface area of the cone is given by
Since a frustum can be thought of as a piece of a cone, the lateral surface area of the frustum is given by the lateral
surface area of the whole cone less the lateral surface area of the smaller cone (the pointy tip) that was cut off (see the
following figure).

                                    Figure 2.44 Calculating the lateral surface area of a frustum of a cone.
The cross-sections of the small cone and the large cone are similar triangles, so we see that
Solving for we get

Then the lateral surface area (SA) of the frustum is
156 2 · Applications of Integration

Let's now use this formula to calculate the surface area of each of the bands formed by revolving the line segments

around the  A representative band is shown in the following figure.

                                    Figure 2.45 A representative band used for determining surface area.

Note that the slant height of this frustum is just the length of the line segment used to generate it. So, applying the
surface area formula, we have

Now, as we did in the development of the arc length formula, we apply the Mean Value Theorem to select

            such that                      This gives us

Furthermore, since  is continuous, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there is a point                  such that
                                 so we get

Then the approximate surface area of the whole surface of revolution is given by

This almost looks like a Riemann sum, except we have functions evaluated at two different points, and over the

interval            Although we do not examine the details here, it turns out that because  is smooth, if we let

 the limit works the same as a Riemann sum even with the two different evaluation points. This makes sense

intuitively. Both and are in the interval  so it makes sense that as               both and approach

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 157

Those of you who are interested in the details should consult an advanced calculus text.

Taking the limit as   we get

                                  

As with arc length, we can conduct a similar development for functions of to get a formula for the surface area of

surfaces of revolution about the    These findings are summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.6

Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution

Let      be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval        Then, the surface area of the surface of revolution

formed by revolving the graph of    around the x-axis is given by

                                                                                                              (2.9)

Similarly, let be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval  Then, the surface area of the surface of

revolution formed by revolving the graph of around the             is given by

EXAMPLE 2.21

Calculating the Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution 1

Let            over the interval    Find the surface area of the surface generated by revolving the graph of

around the           Round the answer to three decimal places.

     Solution        and the surface of rotation are shown in the following figure.
The graph of

                            Figure 2.46 (a) The graph of        (b) The surface of revolution.
                                                                           Then,
We have              Then,               and
158 2 · Applications of Integration

Let           Then,                  When               and when         This gives us

     2.21 Let                        over the interval             Find the surface area of the surface generated by revolving
                 the graph of
                                     around the         Round the answer to three decimal places.

EXAMPLE 2.22

Calculating the Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution 2

Let           Consider the portion of the curve where                    Find the surface area of the surface generated

by revolving the graph of            around the

     Solution                                              and the interval is in terms of so we want to rewrite the
Notice that we are revolving the curve around the       The graph of and the surface of rotation are shown in the
function as a function of y. We get
following figure.

                                     Figure 2.47 (a) The graph of  (b) The surface of revolution.

We have                    so              and                     Then

Access for free at openstax.org
Let                  Then          When                 and when                 2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 159

                                                                         Then

      2.22 Let                     over the interval          Find the surface area of the surface generated by

                     revolving the graph of around the

        SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the length of the functions over the given interval.

165.                               166.                                  167.

168. Pick an arbitrary linear      169. Find the surface area of the volume170. Find the surface area of the

      function             over          generated when the curve                       volume generated when

      any interval of your               revolves around the       from                 the curve   revolves

      choice                             to  as seen here.                              around the        from

      Determine the length of                                                           to

      the function and then

      prove the length is correct

      by using geometry.

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the functions of over the given interval. If you cannot evaluate the
integral exactly, use technology to approximate it.

171.                 from          172.      from                  173.                             from

174.                       from    175. [T]           on  to       176.                 from
                 to                                                                              from

177.                       from    178.                   from     179.

180. [T]             on
160 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the functions of over the given interval. If you cannot evaluate the
integral exactly, use technology to approximate it.

181.            from                 to      182.                         from  183.      from        to

184. [T]        from                 to      185.             from              186.                  from
                                                                                189. [T]
187. [T]          from                            188. [T]           from                 to
        to        on                     to                   to                                from

190. [T]

For the following exercises, find the surface area of the volume generated when the following curves revolve around the
          If you cannot evaluate the integral exactly, use your calculator to approximate it.

191.            from                 to      192.             from         to   193.      from

194. [T]        from                         195.                   from        196.            from

197.        from                             198. [T]               from

For the following exercises, find the surface area of the volume generated when the following curves revolve around the
          If you cannot evaluate the integral exactly, use your calculator to approximate it.

199.        from                             200.                   from        201.      from

202. [T]        from                     to  203.             from              204. [T]  from              to

205. [T]        from                     to 206. [T]                from
                                                          to

207. The base of a lamp is constructed by revolving a

      quarter circle                         around the       from

            to        as seen here. Create an integral for

      the surface area of this curve and compute it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   2.4 · Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 161

208. A light bulb is a sphere with radius in. with
        the bottom sliced off to fit exactly onto a cylinder
        of radius in. and length in., as seen here.
        The sphere is cut off at the bottom to fit exactly
        onto the cylinder, so the radius of the cut is
        in. Find the surface area (not including the top or
        bottom of the cylinder).

209. [T] A lampshade is constructed by rotating

      around the          from     to         as seen here.

      Determine how much material you would need to

      construct this lampshade--that is, the surface

      area--accurate to four decimal places.

210. [T] An anchor drags behind a boat according to           211. [T] You are building a
                                                                      bridge that will span ft.
      the function                 where                              You intend to add
                                                                      decorative rope in the
      represents the depth beneath the boat and is                    shape of

      the horizontal distance of the anchor from the                  where is the distance in
                                                                      feet from one end of the
      back of the boat. If the anchor is ft below the                 bridge. Find out how
                                                                      much rope you need to
      boat, how much rope do you have to pull to                      buy, rounded to the
                                                                      nearest foot.
      reach the anchor? Round your answer to three

      decimal places.

For the following exercises, find the exact arc length for the following problems over the given interval.

212.                from           213. Draw graphs of             214. Compare the lengths of

      to                                          and         For  the parabola                        and

      (Hint: Recall trigonometric                 as increases,    the line                      from

      identities.)                     formulate a prediction on                                 as

                                       the arc length from         increases. What do you

                                       to         Now, compute     notice?

                                       the lengths of these three

                                       functions and determine

                                       whether your prediction

                                       is correct.
162 2 · Applications of Integration

215. Solve for the length of             216. [T] Which is longer   217. Explain why the surface

          from                           between        and                  area is infinite when

                Show that                          the hyperbola                           is rotated around

                from                 to            or the graph of           the           for         

          is twice as long.                                                  but the volume is finite.

     Graph both functions and

     explain why this is so.

2.5 Physical Applications

Learning Objectives

      2.5.1 Determine the mass of a one-dimensional object from its linear density function.
      2.5.2 Determine the mass of a two-dimensional circular object from its radial density function.
      2.5.3 Calculate the work done by a variable force acting along a line.
      2.5.4 Calculate the work done in pumping a liquid from one height to another.
      2.5.5 Find the hydrostatic force against a submerged vertical plate.

In this section, we examine some physical applications of integration. Let's begin with a look at calculating mass from a
density function. We then turn our attention to work, and close the section with a study of hydrostatic force.

Mass and Density

We can use integration to develop a formula for calculating mass based on a density function. First we consider a thin

rod or wire. Orient the rod so it aligns with the  with the left end of the rod at         and the right end of the rod at

     (Figure 2.48). Note that although we depict the rod with some thickness in the figures, for mathematical purposes

we assume the rod is thin enough to be treated as a one-dimensional object.

     Figure 2.48 We can calculate the mass of a thin rod oriented along the       by integrating its density function.

If the rod has constant density given in terms of mass per unit length, then the mass of the rod is just the product of

the density and the length of the rod:             If the density of the rod is not constant, however, the problem becomes a

little more challenging. When the density of the rod varies from point to point, we use a linear density function,      to

denote the density of the rod at any point, Let    be an integrable linear density function. Now, for

let       be a regular partition of the interval        and for              choose an arbitrary point

Figure 2.49 shows a representative segment of the rod.

                                         Figure 2.49 A representative segment of the rod.

The mass  of the segment of the rod from           to is approximated by

Adding the masses of all the segments gives us an approximation for the mass of the entire rod:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.5 · Physical Applications 163

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as   we get an expression for the exact mass of the rod:

                                                                    
We state this result in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.7

Mass-Density Formula of a One-Dimensional Object

Given a thin rod oriented along the         over the interval                  let  denote a linear density function giving the

density of the rod at a point x in the interval. Then the mass of the rod is given by

                                                                                                                      (2.10)

We apply this theorem in the next example.                                     If the density of the rod is given by

  EXAMPLE 2.23

Calculating Mass from Linear Density
Consider a thin rod oriented on the x-axis over the interval
what is the mass of the rod?

     Solution
Applying Equation 2.10 directly, we have

     2.23 Consider a thin rod oriented on the x-axis over the interval              If the density of the rod is given by
                                         what is the mass of the rod?

We now extend this concept to find the mass of a two-dimensional disk of radius As with the rod we looked at in the

one-dimensional case, here we assume the disk is thin enough that, for mathematical purposes, we can treat it as a two-

dimensional object. We assume the density is given in terms of mass per unit area (called area density), and further

assume the density varies only along the disk's radius (called radial density). We orient the disk in the             with the

center at the origin. Then, the density of the disk can be treated as a function of denoted    We assume              is

integrable. Because density is a function of we partition the interval from         along the  For

let  be a regular partition of the interval                           and for       choose an arbitrary point

Now, use the partition to break up the disk into thin (two-dimensional) washers. A disk and a representative washer are

depicted in the following figure.
164 2 · Applications of Integration

                                     Figure 2.50 (a) A thin disk in the xy-plane. (b) A representative washer.

We now approximate the density and area of the washer to calculate an approximate mass,                         Note that the area of the
washer is given by

You may recall that we had an expression similar to this when we were computing volumes by shells. As we did there, we

use           to approximate the average radius of the washer. We obtain

Using     to approximate the density of the washer, we approximate the mass of the washer by

Adding up the masses of the washers, we see the mass of the entire disk is approximated by

We again recognize this as a Riemann sum, and take the limit as   This gives us

                                                             
We summarize these findings in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.8

Mass-Density Formula of a Circular Object

Let       be an integrable function representing the radial density of a disk of radius  Then the mass of the disk is
                                                                                                                            (2.11)
given by

EXAMPLE 2.24

Calculating Mass from Radial Density

Let          represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate the mass of a disk of radius 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.5 · Physical Applications 165

     Solution
Applying the formula, we find

2.24 Let                       represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate the mass of a disk of radius 2.

Work Done by a Force

We now consider work. In physics, work is related to force, which is often intuitively defined as a push or pull on an
object. When a force moves an object, we say the force does work on the object. In other words, work can be thought of
as the amount of energy it takes to move an object. According to physics, when we have a constant force, work can be
expressed as the product of force and distance.

In the English system, the unit of force is the pound and the unit of distance is the foot, so work is given in foot-pounds.

In the metric system, kilograms and meters are used. One newton is the force needed to accelerate kilogram of mass
at the rate of m/sec2. Thus, the most common unit of work is the newton-meter. This same unit is also called the joule.

Both are defined as kilograms times meters squared over seconds squared

When we have a constant force, things are pretty easy. It is rare, however, for a force to be constant. The work done to
compress (or elongate) a spring, for example, varies depending on how far the spring has already been compressed (or
stretched). We look at springs in more detail later in this section.

Suppose we have a variable force        that moves an object in a positive direction along the x-axis from point to point

To calculate the work done, we partition the interval                 and estimate the work done over each subinterval. So, for

            let        be a regular partition of the interval         and for  choose an arbitrary point

                   To calculate the work done to move an object from point   to point we assume the force is

roughly constant over the interval, and use            to approximate the force. The work done over the interval

then, is given by

Therefore, the work done over the interval   is approximately

Taking the limit of this expression as   gives us the exact value for work:

                                                                    
Thus, we can define work as follows.

Definition

If a variable force    moves an object in a positive direction along the x-axis from point a to point b, then the work

done on the object is

                                                                                                                  (2.12)

Note that if F is constant, the integral evaluates to                 which is the formula we stated at the beginning of
166 2 · Applications of Integration

this section.

Now let's look at the specific example of the work done to compress or elongate a spring. Consider a block attached to a

horizontal spring. The block moves back and forth as the spring stretches and compresses. Although in the real world we

would have to account for the force of friction between the block and the surface on which it is resting, we ignore friction

here and assume the block is resting on a frictionless surface. When the spring is at its natural length (at rest), the

system is said to be at equilibrium. In this state, the spring is neither elongated nor compressed, and in this equilibrium

position the block does not move until some force is introduced. We orient the system such that  corresponds to

the equilibrium position (see the following figure).

                  Figure 2.51 A block attached to a horizontal spring at equilibrium, compressed, and elongated.

According to Hooke's law, the force required to compress or stretch a spring from an equilibrium position is given by
                for some constant The value of depends on the physical characteristics of the spring. The constant is

called the spring constant and is always positive. We can use this information to calculate the work done to compress or
elongate a spring, as shown in the following example.

EXAMPLE 2.25

The Work Required to Stretch or Compress a Spring
Suppose it takes a force of N (in the negative direction) to compress a spring m from the equilibrium position.
How much work is done to stretch the spring m from the equilibrium position?

Solution

First find the spring constant, When        we know   so

and            Then, to calculate work, we integrate the force function, obtaining

The work done to stretch the spring is  J.

     2.25 Suppose it takes a force of lb to stretch a spring in. from the equilibrium position. How much work is
                  done to stretch the spring ft from the equilibrium position?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.5 · Physical Applications 167

Work Done in Pumping

Consider the work done to pump water (or some other liquid) out of a tank. Pumping problems are a little more
complicated than spring problems because many of the calculations depend on the shape and size of the tank. In
addition, instead of being concerned about the work done to move a single mass, we are looking at the work done to
move a volume of water, and it takes more work to move the water from the bottom of the tank than it does to move the
water from the top of the tank.

We examine the process in the context of a cylindrical tank, then look at a couple of examples using tanks of different
shapes. Assume a cylindrical tank of radius m and height m is filled to a depth of 8 m. How much work does it take
to pump all the water over the top edge of the tank?

The first thing we need to do is define a frame of reference. We let represent the vertical distance below the top of the

tank. That is, we orient the          vertically, with the origin at the top of the tank and the downward direction being

positive (see the following figure).

                 Figure 2.52 How much work is needed to empty a tank partially filled with water?

Using this coordinate system, the water extends from  to                     Therefore, we partition the interval  and

look at the work required to lift each individual "layer" of water. So, for           let       be a regular partition

of the interval        and for        choose an arbitrary point                       Figure 2.53 shows a

representative layer.

                                      Figure 2.53 A representative layer of water.

In pumping problems, the force required to lift the water to the top of the tank is the force required to overcome gravity,

so it is equal to the weight of the water. Given that the weight-density of water is  N/m3, or  lb/ft3, calculating

the volume of each layer gives us the weight. In this case, we have

Then, the force needed to lift each layer is

Note that this step becomes a little more difficult if we have a noncylindrical tank. We look at a noncylindrical tank in the
next example.
168 2 · Applications of Integration

      We also need to know the distance the water must be lifted. Based on our choice of coordinate systems, we can use
      as an approximation of the distance the layer must be lifted. Then the work to lift the layer of water is
      approximately

      Adding the work for each layer, we see the approximate work to empty the tank is given by

This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit as   we get

                                 

The work required to empty the tank is approximately 23,650,000 J.

For pumping problems, the calculations vary depending on the shape of the tank or container. The following problem-
solving strategy lays out a step-by-step process for solving pumping problems.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Solving Pumping Problems

1. Sketch a picture of the tank and select an appropriate frame of reference.

2. Calculate the volume of a representative layer of water.

3. Multiply the volume by the weight-density of water to get the force.

4. Calculate the distance the layer of water must be lifted.

5. Multiply the force and distance to get an estimate of the work needed to lift the layer of water.

6. Sum the work required to lift all the layers. This expression is an estimate of the work required to pump out the

desired amount of water, and it is in the form of a Riemann sum.

7. Take the limit as              and evaluate the resulting integral to get the exact work required to pump out the

desired amount of water.

We now apply this problem-solving strategy in an example with a noncylindrical tank.

EXAMPLE 2.26

A Pumping Problem with a Noncylindrical Tank
Assume a tank in the shape of an inverted cone, with height ft and base radius ft. The tank is full to start with, and
water is pumped over the upper edge of the tank until the height of the water remaining in the tank is ft. How much
work is required to pump out that amount of water?

     Solution                                                                                           vertically, with
The tank is depicted in Figure 2.54. As we did in the example with the cylindrical tank, we orient the
the origin at the top of the tank and the downward direction being positive (step 1).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                2.5 · Physical Applications 169

                         Figure 2.54 A water tank in the shape of an inverted cone.

The tank starts out full and ends with ft of water left, so, based on our chosen frame of reference, we need to partition

the interval  Then, for                  let  be a regular partition of the interval                            and for

              choose an arbitrary point       We can approximate the volume of a layer by using a disk, then

use similar triangles to find the radius of the disk (see the following figure).

                                 Figure 2.55 Using similar triangles to express the radius of a disk of water.
From properties of similar triangles, we have
170 2 · Applications of Integration

Then the volume of the disk is

The weight-density of water is         lb/ft3, so the force needed to lift each layer is approximately

Based on the diagram, the distance the water must be lifted is approximately  feet (step 4), so the approximate work
needed to lift the layer is

Summing the work required to lift all the layers, we get an approximate value of the total work:

Taking the limit as      we obtain

                                     

It takes approximately               ft-lb of work to empty the tank to the desired level.

2.26 A tank is in the shape of an inverted cone, with height ft and base radius 6 ft. The tank is filled to a
             depth of 8 ft to start with, and water is pumped over the upper edge of the tank until 3 ft of water remain
             in the tank. How much work is required to pump out that amount of water?

Hydrostatic Force and Pressure

In this last section, we look at the force and pressure exerted on an object submerged in a liquid. In the English system,
force is measured in pounds. In the metric system, it is measured in newtons. Pressure is force per unit area, so in the
English system we have pounds per square foot (or, perhaps more commonly, pounds per square inch, denoted psi). In
the metric system we have newtons per square meter, also called pascals.

Let's begin with the simple case of a plate of area submerged horizontally in water at a depth s (Figure 2.56). Then, the

force exerted on the plate is simply the weight of the water above it, which is given by                where is the weight

density of water (weight per unit volume). To find the hydrostatic pressure--that is, the pressure exerted by water on a

submerged object--we divide the force by the area. So the pressure is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2.5 · Physical Applications 171

                      Figure 2.56 A plate submerged horizontally in water.

By Pascal's principle, the pressure at a given depth is the same in all directions, so it does not matter if the plate is
submerged horizontally or vertically. So, as long as we know the depth, we know the pressure. We can apply Pascal's
principle to find the force exerted on surfaces, such as dams, that are oriented vertically. We cannot apply the formula

             directly, because the depth varies from point to point on a vertically oriented surface. So, as we have done
many times before, we form a partition, a Riemann sum, and, ultimately, a definite integral to calculate the force.

Suppose a thin plate is submerged in water. We choose our frame of reference such that the x-axis is oriented vertically,

with the downward direction being positive, and point  corresponding to a logical reference point. Let denote

the depth at point x. Note we often let       correspond to the surface of the water. In this case, depth at any point is

simply given by       However, in some cases we may want to select a different reference point for                  so we

proceed with the development in the more general case. Last, let   denote the width of the plate at the point

Assume the top edge of the plate is at point  and the bottom edge of the plate is at point  Then, for

                 let  be a regular partition of the interval       and for      choose an arbitrary point

                 The partition divides the plate into several thin, rectangular strips (see the following figure).

                      Figure 2.57 A thin plate submerged vertically in water.

Let's now estimate the force on a representative strip. If the strip is thin enough, we can treat it as if it is at a constant

depth,  We then have

Adding the forces, we get an estimate for the force on the plate:

This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit gives us the exact force. We obtain
172 2 · Applications of Integration

                                                                                                                                                                        (2.13)
                                                               

      Evaluating this integral gives us the force on the plate. We summarize this in the following problem-solving strategy.

         Problem-Solving Strategy

         Finding Hydrostatic Force
          1. Sketch a picture and select an appropriate frame of reference. (Note that if we select a frame of reference other

               than the one used earlier, we may have to adjust Equation 2.13 accordingly.)
          2. Determine the depth and width functions, and
          3. Determine the weight-density of whatever liquid with which you are working. The weight-density of water is

               lb/ft3, or 9800 N/m3.
          4. Use the equation to calculate the total force.

         EXAMPLE 2.27

      Finding Hydrostatic Force
      A water trough 15 ft long has ends shaped like inverted isosceles triangles, with base 8 ft and height 3 ft. Find the force
      on one end of the trough if the trough is full of water.

            Solution
      Figure 2.58 shows the trough and a more detailed view of one end.

Figure 2.58 (a) A water trough with a triangular cross-section. (b) Dimensions of one end of the water trough.

Select a frame of reference with the  oriented vertically and the downward direction being positive. Select the top

of the trough as the point corresponding to  (step 1). The depth function, then, is  Using similar triangles,

we see that                      (step 2). Now, the weight density of water is  lb/ft3 (step 3), so applying Equation 2.13,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.5 · Physical Applications 173

we obtain

The water exerts a force of 748.8 lb on the end of the trough (step 4).

2.27 A water trough 12 m long has ends shaped like inverted isosceles triangles, with base 6 m and height 4 m.
             Find the force on one end of the trough if the trough is full of water.

EXAMPLE 2.28

Chapter Opener: Finding Hydrostatic Force

We now return our attention to the Hoover Dam, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. The actual dam is arched,

rather than flat, but we are going to make some simplifying assumptions to help us with the calculations. Assume the

face of the Hoover Dam is shaped like an isosceles trapezoid with lower base ft, upper base  ft, and height

ft (see the following figure).

When the reservoir is full, Lake Mead's maximum depth is about 530 ft, and the surface of the lake is about 10 ft below
the top of the dam (see the following figure).

              Figure 2.59 A simplified model of the Hoover Dam with assumed dimensions.

a. Find the force on the face of the dam when the reservoir is full.
b. The southwest United States has been experiencing a drought, and the surface of Lake Mead is about 125 ft below

     where it would be if the reservoir were full. What is the force on the face of the dam under these circumstances?

Solution

a. We begin by establishing a frame of reference. As usual, we choose to orient the  vertically, with the

downward direction being positive. This time, however, we are going to let           represent the top of the dam,

rather than the surface of the water. When the reservoir is full, the surface of the water is ft below the top of the

dam, so                         (see the following figure).
174 2 · Applications of Integration

                                                             Figure 2.60 We first choose a frame of reference.
             To find the width function, we again turn to similar triangles as shown in the figure below.

Figure 2.61 We use similar triangles to determine a function for the width of the dam. (a) Assumed dimensions of
the dam; (b) highlighting the similar triangles.

From the figure, we see that         Using properties of similar triangles, we get                              Thus,

Using a weight-density of        lb/ft3 (step 3) and applying Equation 2.13, we get

Note the change from pounds to tons  lb = ton) (step 4).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  2.5 · Physical Applications 175

b. Notice that the drought changes our depth function,  and our limits of integration. We have

The lower limit of integration is  The upper limit remains          Evaluating the integral, we get

2.28 When the reservoir is at its average level, the surface of the water is about 50 ft below where it would be if
             the reservoir were full. What is the force on the face of the dam under these circumstances?

MEDIA
To learn more about Hoover Dam, see this article (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_HooverDam) published by the
History Channel.

        SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the work done.

218. Find the work done when      219. How much work is done        220. What is the work done
                                          when a person lifts a lb          lifting a kg child from
a constant force                          box of comics onto a              the floor to a height of
                                          truck that is ft off the          m? (Note that a mass of
lb moves a chair from                     ground?                           kg weighs N near the
                                                                            surface of the Earth.)
to                    ft.

221. Find the work done when      222. Compute the work done        223. What is the work done
        you push a box along the
        floor m, when you apply    for a force          N                  moving a particle from
        a constant force of
                                   from           to    m.                 to      m if the

                                                                           force acting on it is

                                                                               N?

For the following exercises, find the mass of the one-dimensional object.

224. A wire that is ft long       225. A car antenna that is ft     226. A metal rod that is in.
                                          long (starting at                 long (starting at
(starting at          and                 and has a density                 and has a density
                                          function of                       function of
has a density function of                 lb/ft                             lb/in.

                  lb/ft

227. A pencil that is in. long    228. A ruler that is in. long

(starting at          and          (starting at         and

has a density function of          has a density function of

              oz/in.

                                   oz/in.
176 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, find the mass of the two-dimensional object that is centered at the origin.

229. An oversized hockey puck        230. A frisbee of radius in.        231. A plate of radius in.
        of radius in. with density           with density function               with density function
        function

232. A jar lid of radius in.         233. A disk of radius cm with       234. A -in. spring is
        with density function                density function                    stretched to in. by a
                                                                                 force of lb. What is the
235. A spring has a natural                                                      spring constant?
        length of cm. It takes
        J to stretch the spring to   236. A -m spring requires J         237. A spring requires J to
            cm. How much work                to stretch the spring to            stretch the spring from
        would it take to stretch                  m. How much work               cm to cm, and an
        the spring from cm to                would it take to stretch            additional J to stretch
            cm?                              the spring from m to                the spring from cm to
                                             m?                                      cm. What is the natural
238. A shock absorber is                                                         length of the spring?
        compressed 1 in. by a
        weight of 1 t. What is the   239. A force of                     240. Find the work done by
        spring constant?                                                         winding up a hanging
                                     N stretches a nonlinear                     cable of length ft and
241. For the cable in the                                                        weight-density lb/ft.
        preceding exercise, how      spring by meters. What
        much work is done to lift
        the cable ft?                work is required to

244. [T] For the pyramid in the      stretch the spring from
        preceding exercise,
        assume there were                    to       m?
        workers each working
        hours a day, days a          242. For the cable in the           243. [T] A pyramid of height
        week, weeks a year. If               preceding exercise, how                   ft has a square base
        the workers, on average,             much additional work is                   ft by ft. Find the
        lifted 10 100 lb rocks ft/           done by hanging a lb
        hr, how long did it take to          weight at the end of the            area at height If the
        build the pyramid?                   cable?                              rock used to build the
                                                                                 pyramid weighs
                                                                                 approximately

                                                                                                       how much
                                                                                 work did it take to lift all
                                                                                 the rock?

                                     245. [T] The force of gravity on a  246. [T] For the rocket in the
                                             mass is
                                                                         preceding exercise, find

                                                                         the work to lift the rocket

                                     newtons. For a rocket of            from  to 

                                     mass                 compute

                                     the work to lift the rocket

                                     from             to

                                     km. State your answers with

                                     three significant figures.

                                     (Note:

                                     and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 177

247. [T] A rectangular dam is         248. [T] Find the work required     249. [T] Find the work required
            ft high and ft wide.              to pump all the water out           to pump all the water out
                                              of a cylinder that has a            of the cylinder in the
        Assume the weight                     circular base of radius ft          preceding exercise if the
        density of water is 62.5              and height ft. Use the              cylinder is only half full.
        lbs/ft3. Compute the total            fact that the density of
        force on the dam when                 water is lb/ft3.
         a. the surface of the

              water is at the top of
              the dam and
         b. the surface of the
              water is halfway down
              the dam.

250. [T] How much work is             251. A cylinder of depth and        252. For the cylinder in the
        required to pump out a                cross-sectional area                preceding exercise,
        swimming pool if the area             stands full of water at             compute the work to
        of the base is ft2, the               density Compute the                 pump all the water to the
        water is ft deep, and the             work to pump all the                top if the cylinder is only
        top is ft above the water             water to the top.                   half full.
        level? Assume that the
        density of water is lb/
        ft3.

253. A cone-shaped tank has a
        cross-sectional area that
        increases with its depth:
                                   Show

        that the work to empty it
        is half the work for a
        cylinder with the same
        height and base.

2.6 Moments and Centers of Mass

Learning Objectives

      2.6.1 Find the center of mass of objects distributed along a line.
      2.6.2 Locate the center of mass of a thin plate.
      2.6.3 Use symmetry to help locate the centroid of a thin plate.
      2.6.4 Apply the theorem of Pappus for volume.

In this section, we consider centers of mass (also called centroids, under certain conditions) and moments. The basic
idea of the center of mass is the notion of a balancing point. Many of us have seen performers who spin plates on the
ends of sticks. The performers try to keep several of them spinning without allowing any of them to drop. If we look at a
single plate (without spinning it), there is a sweet spot on the plate where it balances perfectly on the stick. If we put the
stick anywhere other than that sweet spot, the plate does not balance and it falls to the ground. (That is why performers
spin the plates; the spin helps keep the plates from falling even if the stick is not exactly in the right place.)
Mathematically, that sweet spot is called the center of mass of the plate.

In this section, we first examine these concepts in a one-dimensional context, then expand our development to consider
centers of mass of two-dimensional regions and symmetry. Last, we use centroids to find the volume of certain solids by
applying the theorem of Pappus.

Center of Mass and Moments

Let's begin by looking at the center of mass in a one-dimensional context. Consider a long, thin wire or rod of negligible
mass resting on a fulcrum, as shown in Figure 2.62(a). Now suppose we place objects having masses and at
distances and from the fulcrum, respectively, as shown in Figure 2.62(b).
178 2 · Applications of Integration

                              Figure 2.62 (a) A thin rod rests on a fulcrum. (b) Masses are placed on the rod.

The most common real-life example of a system like this is a playground seesaw, or teeter-totter, with children of
different weights sitting at different distances from the center. On a seesaw, if one child sits at each end, the heavier
child sinks down and the lighter child is lifted into the air. If the heavier child slides in toward the center, though, the
seesaw balances. Applying this concept to the masses on the rod, we note that the masses balance each other if and
only if

In the seesaw example, we balanced the system by moving the masses (children) with respect to the fulcrum. However,
we are really interested in systems in which the masses are not allowed to move, and instead we balance the system by
moving the fulcrum. Suppose we have two point masses, and located on a number line at points and
respectively (Figure 2.63). The center of mass, is the point where the fulcrum should be placed to make the system
balance.

                                     Figure 2.63 The center of mass is the balance point of the system.

Thus, we have

The expression in the numerator,     is called the first moment of the system with respect to the origin. If the

context is clear, we often drop the word first and just refer to this expression as the moment of the system. The

expression in the denominator,       is the total mass of the system. Thus, the center of mass of the system is the

point at which the total mass of the system could be concentrated without changing the moment.

This idea is not limited just to two point masses. In general, if n masses,     are placed on a number line at

points         respectively, then the center of mass of the system is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 179

Theorem 2.9

Center of Mass of Objects on a Line

Let               be point masses placed on a number line at points            respectively, and let

denote the total mass of the system. Then, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is given by

                                                                                                            (2.14)

and the center of mass of the system is given by

                                                                                                            (2.15)

We apply this theorem in the following example.

  EXAMPLE 2.29

Finding the Center of Mass of Objects along a Line
Suppose four point masses are placed on a number line as follows:

Find the moment of the system with respect to the origin and find the center of mass of the system.

     Solution
First, we need to calculate the moment of the system:

Now, to find the center of mass, we need the total mass of the system:

Then we have
The center of mass is located 1/2 m to the left of the origin.

       2.29 Suppose four point masses are placed on a number line as follows:

             Find the moment of the system with respect to the origin and find the center of mass of the system.

We can generalize this concept to find the center of mass of a system of point masses in a plane. Let be a point mass

located at point  in the plane. Then the moment of the mass with respect to the x-axis is given by

     Similarly, the moment with respect to the y-axis is given by              Notice that the x-coordinate

of the point is used to calculate the moment with respect to the y-axis, and vice versa. The reason is that the x-coordinate
180 2 · Applications of Integration

      gives the distance from the point mass to the y-axis, and the y-coordinate gives the distance to the x-axis (see the
       following figure).

                                 Figure 2.64 Point mass is located at point  in the plane.

If we have several point masses in the xy-plane, we can use the moments with respect to the x- and y-axes to calculate
the x- and y-coordinates of the center of mass of the system.

Theorem 2.10

Center of Mass of Objects in a Plane

Let           be point masses located in the xy-plane at points                             respectively, and

let           denote the total mass of the system. Then the moments and of the system with respect to the

x- and y-axes, respectively, are given by

                                                                                                            (2.16)

Also, the coordinates of the center of mass  of the system are

                                                                                                            (2.17)

The next example demonstrates how to apply this theorem.

  EXAMPLE 2.30

Finding the Center of Mass of Objects in a Plane
Suppose three point masses are placed in the xy-plane as follows (assume coordinates are given in meters):

Find the center of mass of the system.
     Solution

First we calculate the total mass of the system:

Next we find the moments with respect to the x- and y-axes:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 181

Then we have

The center of mass of the system is  in meters.

2.30 Suppose three point masses are placed on a number line as follows (assume coordinates are given in
             meters):

                    Find the center of mass of the system.

Center of Mass of Thin Plates

So far we have looked at systems of point masses on a line and in a plane. Now, instead of having the mass of a system
concentrated at discrete points, we want to look at systems in which the mass of the system is distributed continuously
across a thin sheet of material. For our purposes, we assume the sheet is thin enough that it can be treated as if it is two-
dimensional. Such a sheet is called a lamina. Next we develop techniques to find the center of mass of a lamina. In this
section, we also assume the density of the lamina is constant.

Laminas are often represented by a two-dimensional region in a plane. The geometric center of such a region is called its
centroid. Since we have assumed the density of the lamina is constant, the center of mass of the lamina depends only
on the shape of the corresponding region in the plane; it does not depend on the density. In this case, the center of
mass of the lamina corresponds to the centroid of the delineated region in the plane. As with systems of point masses,
we need to find the total mass of the lamina, as well as the moments of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes.

We first consider a lamina in the shape of a rectangle. Recall that the center of mass of a lamina is the point where the
lamina balances. For a rectangle, that point is both the horizontal and vertical center of the rectangle. Based on this
understanding, it is clear that the center of mass of a rectangular lamina is the point where the diagonals intersect,
which is a result of the symmetry principle, and it is stated here without proof.

  Theorem 2.11

  The Symmetry Principle
  If a region R is symmetric about a line l, then the centroid of R lies on l.

Let's turn to more general laminas. Suppose we have a lamina bounded above by the graph of a continuous function

below by the x-axis, and on the left and right by the lines  and  respectively, as shown in the following

figure.
182 2 · Applications of Integration

                                     Figure 2.65 A region in the plane representing a lamina.

As with systems of point masses, to find the center of mass of the lamina, we need to find the total mass of the lamina,

as well as the moments of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes. As we have done many times before, we

approximate these quantities by partitioning the interval       and constructing rectangles.

For                    let           be a regular partition of  Recall that we can choose any point within the interval

     as our In this case, we want to be the x-coordinate of the centroid of our rectangles. Thus, for

     we select                       such that is the midpoint of the interval. That is,                           Now, for

     construct a rectangle of height                   on       The center of mass of this rectangle is

                   as shown in the following figure.

                                                Figure 2.66 A representative rectangle of the lamina.

Next, we need to find the total mass of the rectangle. Let represent the density of the lamina (note that is a constant).
In this case, is expressed in terms of mass per unit area. Thus, to find the total mass of the rectangle, we multiply the
area of the rectangle by Then, the mass of the rectangle is given by

To get the approximate mass of the lamina, we add the masses of all the rectangles to get

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as   gives the exact mass of the lamina:

                                            

Next, we calculate the moment of the lamina with respect to the x-axis. Returning to the representative rectangle, recall

its center of mass is                Recall also that treating the rectangle as if it is a point mass located at the center

of mass does not change the moment. Thus, the moment of the rectangle with respect to the x-axis is given by the mass

of the rectangle,                    multiplied by the distance from the center of mass to the x-axis:  Therefore, the

moment with respect to the x-axis of the rectangle is           Adding the moments of the rectangles and

taking the limit of the resulting Riemann sum, we see that the moment of the lamina with respect to the x-axis is

                                                              
We derive the moment with respect to the y-axis similarly, noting that the distance from the center of mass of the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 183

rectangle to the y-axis is Then the moment of the lamina with respect to the y-axis is given by

                                            

We find the coordinates of the center of mass by dividing the moments by the total mass to give

                        If we look closely at the expressions for                 we notice that the constant

cancels out when and are calculated.

We summarize these findings in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.12

Center of Mass of a Thin Plate in the xy-Plane

Let R denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function         below by the x-axis, and on the left

and right by the lines  and     respectively. Let denote the density of the associated lamina. Then we can

make the following statements:

i. The mass of the lamina is

                                                                                                               (2.18)

ii. The moments and of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are

iii. The coordinates of the center of mass      are                                                            (2.19)
                                                                                                               (2.20)

In the next example, we use this theorem to find the center of mass of a lamina.

EXAMPLE 2.31

Finding the Center of Mass of a Lamina                             and below by the x-axis over the interval
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function

         Find the centroid of the region.

     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.

                                                 Figure 2.67 Finding the center of mass of a lamina.

Since we are only asked for the centroid of the region, rather than the mass or moments of the associated lamina, we
know the density constant cancels out of the calculations eventually. Therefore, for the sake of convenience, let's
assume
184 2 · Applications of Integration

       First, we need to calculate the total mass:
       Next, we compute the moments:
       and

Thus, we have

The centroid of the region is

2.31 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the x-axis over

the interval                      Find the centroid of the region.

We can adapt this approach to find centroids of more complex regions as well. Suppose our region is bounded above by

the graph of a continuous function  as before, but now, instead of having the lower bound for the region be the

x-axis, suppose the region is bounded below by the graph of a second continuous function,  as shown in the

following figure.

Again, we partition the interval     Figure 2.68 A region between two functions.
figure.                             and construct rectangles. A representative rectangle is shown in the following

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 185

                     Figure 2.69 A representative rectangle of the region between two functions.

Note that the centroid of this rectangle is                     We won't go through all the details of the Riemann

sum development, but let's look at some of the key steps. In the development of the formulas for the mass of the lamina

and the moment with respect to the y-axis, the height of each rectangle is given by     which leads to the

expression           in the integrands.

In the development of the formula for the moment with respect to the x-axis, the moment of each rectangle is found by

multiplying the area of the rectangle,               by the distance of the centroid from the x-axis,

                    which gives                                 Summarizing these findings, we arrive at the

following theorem.

Theorem 2.13

Center of Mass of a Lamina Bounded by Two Functions

Let R denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function    below by the graph of the
                                                                           respectively. Let denote the density
continuous function  and on the left and right by the lines     and
                                                                                                                      (2.21)
of the associated lamina. Then we can make the following statements:

i. The mass of the lamina is

ii. The moments and of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are

iii. The coordinates of the center of mass   are                                                       (2.22)
                                                                                                       (2.23)

We illustrate this theorem in the following example.                       and below by the graph of the function

  EXAMPLE 2.32

Finding the Centroid of a Region Bounded by Two Functions
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function

                   Find the centroid of the region.
     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.
186 2 · Applications of Integration

                                     Figure 2.70 Finding the centroid of a region between two curves.

The graphs of the functions intersect at     and  so we integrate from -2 to 1. Once again, for the sake of
convenience, assume

First, we need to calculate the total mass:

Next, we compute the moments:

and

Therefore, we have

The centroid of the region is

     2.32 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function                               and below by the graph of

     the function                            Find the centroid of the region.

The Symmetry Principle

We stated the symmetry principle earlier, when we were looking at the centroid of a rectangle. The symmetry principle
can be a great help when finding centroids of regions that are symmetric. Consider the following example.

Access for free at openstax.org
  EXAMPLE 2.33                                                                                   2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 187

Finding the Centroid of a Symmetric Region                                  and below by the x-axis. Find the centroid
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function
of the region.

     Solution
The region is depicted in the following figure.

                  Figure 2.71 We can use the symmetry principle to help find the centroid of a symmetric region.

The region is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. Therefore, the x-coordinate of the centroid is zero. We need only
calculate Once again, for the sake of convenience, assume

First, we calculate the total mass:

Next, we calculate the moments. We only need

Then we have                                                                and below by x-axis. Find

The centroid of the region is
       2.33 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function
                    the centroid of the region.
188 2 · Applications of Integration

         STUDENT PROJECT
         The Grand Canyon Skywalk
         The Grand Canyon Skywalk opened to the public on March 28, 2007. This engineering marvel is a horseshoe-shaped
         observation platform suspended 4000 ft above the Colorado River on the West Rim of the Grand Canyon. Its crystal-
         clear glass floor allows stunning views of the canyon below (see the following figure).

         Figure 2.72 The Grand Canyon Skywalk offers magnificent views of the canyon. (credit: 10da_ralta, Wikimedia
         Commons)
         The Skywalk is a cantilever design, meaning that the observation platform extends over the rim of the canyon, with
         no visible means of support below it. Despite the lack of visible support posts or struts, cantilever structures are
         engineered to be very stable and the Skywalk is no exception. The observation platform is attached firmly to support
         posts that extend 46 ft down into bedrock. The structure was built to withstand 100-mph winds and an 8.0-magnitude
         earthquake within 50 mi, and is capable of supporting more than 70,000,000 lb.
         One factor affecting the stability of the Skywalk is the center of gravity of the structure. We are going to calculate the
         center of gravity of the Skywalk, and examine how the center of gravity changes when tourists walk out onto the
         observation platform.
         The observation platform is U-shaped. The legs of the U are 10 ft wide and begin on land, under the visitors' center,
         48 ft from the edge of the canyon. The platform extends 70 ft over the edge of the canyon.
         To calculate the center of mass of the structure, we treat it as a lamina and use a two-dimensional region in the
         xy-plane to represent the platform. We begin by dividing the region into three subregions so we can consider each
         subregion separately. The first region, denoted consists of the curved part of the U. We model as a
         semicircular annulus, with inner radius 25 ft and outer radius 35 ft, centered at the origin (see the following figure).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 189

                                            Figure 2.73 We model the Skywalk with three sub-regions.
  The legs of the platform, extending 35 ft between and the canyon wall, comprise the second sub-region, Last,
  the ends of the legs, which extend 48 ft under the visitor center, comprise the third sub-region, Assume the
  density of the lamina is constant and assume the total weight of the platform is 1,200,000 lb (not including the weight
  of the visitor center; we will consider that later). Use
   1. Compute the area of each of the three sub-regions. Note that the areas of regions and should include the

         areas of the legs only, not the open space between them. Round answers to the nearest square foot.
   2. Determine the mass associated with each of the three sub-regions.
   3. Calculate the center of mass of each of the three sub-regions.
   4. Now, treat each of the three sub-regions as a point mass located at the center of mass of the corresponding sub-

         region. Using this representation, calculate the center of mass of the entire platform.
   5. Assume the visitor center weighs 2,200,000 lb, with a center of mass corresponding to the center of mass of

         Treating the visitor center as a point mass, recalculate the center of mass of the system. How does the center of
         mass change?
   6. Although the Skywalk was built to limit the number of people on the observation platform to 120, the platform is
         capable of supporting up to 800 people weighing 200 lb each. If all 800 people were allowed on the platform,
         and all of them went to the farthest end of the platform, how would the center of gravity of the system be
         affected? (Include the visitor center in the calculations and represent the people by a point mass located at the
         farthest edge of the platform, 70 ft from the canyon wall.)

Theorem of Pappus

This section ends with a discussion of the theorem of Pappus for volume, which allows us to find the volume of
particular kinds of solids by using the centroid. (There is also a theorem of Pappus for surface area, but it is much less
useful than the theorem for volume.)
190 2 · Applications of Integration

Theorem 2.14

Theorem of Pappus for Volume
Let R be a region in the plane and let l be a line in the plane that does not intersect R. Then the volume of the solid of
revolution formed by revolving R around l is equal to the area of R multiplied by the distance d traveled by the
centroid of R.

Proof

We can prove the case when the region is bounded above by the graph of a function  and below by the graph of a

function  over an interval           and for which the axis of revolution is the y-axis. In this case, the area of the region

is                                   Since the axis of rotation is the y-axis, the distance traveled by the centroid of the region

depends only on the x-coordinate of the centroid, which is

where

Then,

and thus

However, using the method of cylindrical shells, we have

So,

and the proof is complete.


EXAMPLE 2.34

Using the Theorem of Pappus for Volume       Use the theorem of Pappus for volume to find the volume of the torus
Let R be a circle of radius 2 centered at
generated by revolving R around the y-axis.

     Solution
The region and torus are depicted in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.6 · Moments and Centers of Mass 191

Figure 2.74 Determining the volume of a torus by using the theorem of Pappus. (a) A circular region R in the plane; (b)
the torus generated by revolving R about the y-axis.

The region R is a circle of radius 2, so the area of R is       units2. By the symmetry principle, the centroid of R is the

center of the circle. The centroid travels around the y-axis in a circular path of radius 4, so the centroid travels

units. Then, the volume of the torus is                units3.

      2.34 Let R be a circle of radius 1 centered at            Use the theorem of Pappus for volume to find the volume of

      the torus generated by revolving R around the y-axis.

        SECTION 2.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, calculate the center of mass for the collection of masses given.

254.  at             and  255.                     at           and       256.       at

      at                                           at

257. Unit masses at       258.                     at           and       259.       at        and

                                                   at                                at

For the following exercises, compute the center of mass

260.  for                 261.           for                              262.       for       and

                                                                                     for

263.       for            264.                         for                265.       for

266.                 for  267.                             for            268.       for

269.  for

For the following exercises, compute the center of mass              Use symmetry to help locate the center of mass
whenever possible.

270.  in the square       271.           in the triangle with             272.       for the region

                                         vertices                    and        bounded by

                                                                                and
192 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, use a calculator to draw the region, then compute the center of mass               Use symmetry
to help locate the center of mass whenever possible.

273. [T] The region bounded                274. [T] The region between          275. [T] The region between
        by                                         and                                               and
        and

276. [T] Region between                    277. [T] The region bounded          278. [T] The region bounded
        and                                        by
                                                                                by                    and

279. [T] The region bounded

by              and                  in

the first quadrant

For the following exercises, use the theorem of Pappus to determine the volume of the shape.

280. Rotating        around                281. Rotating               around   282. A general cone created by

the -axis between                          the -axis between                    rotating a triangle with

and                                        and                                  vertices                   and

                                                                                     around the -axis.

                                                                                Does your answer agree

                                                                                with the volume of a

                                                                                cone?

283. A general cylinder created            284. A sphere created by
        by rotating a rectangle                    rotating a semicircle with
        with vertices                              radius around the
                         and                        -axis. Does your answer
        around the -axis. Does                     agree with the volume of
        your answer agree with                     a sphere?
        the volume of a cylinder?

For the following exercises, use a calculator to draw the region enclosed by the curve. Find the area           and the centroid
        for the given shapes. Use symmetry to help locate the center of mass whenever possible.

285. [T] Quarter-circle:                   286. [T] Triangle:                   287. [T] Lens:        and
                                      and                         and

288. [T] Ring:                       and 289. [T] Half-ring:                    290. Find the generalized
                                                                           and
                                                                                center of mass in the

                                                                                sliver between

                                                                                and             with

                                                                                Then, use the Pappus

                                                                                theorem to find the

                                                                                volume of the solid

                                                                                generated when revolving

                                                                                around the y-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.7 · Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 193

291. Find the generalized                292. Find the generalized                  293. Use the theorem of Pappus to find
        center of mass between                   center of mass between
                                    and                                        and  the volume of a torus (pictured
                 Then, use the                              Then, use the
        Pappus theorem to find                                                      here). Assume that a disk of radius
        the volume of the solid                  Pappus theorem to find
        generated when revolving                 the volume of the solid            is positioned with the left end of the
        around the y-axis.                       generated when revolving
                                                 around the y-axis.                 circle at           and is rotated

                                                                                    around the y-axis.

294. Find the center of mass
                for a thin wire

        along the semicircle
                           with unit

        mass. (Hint: Use the
        theorem of Pappus.)

2.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms

Learning Objectives

      2.7.1 Write the definition of the natural logarithm as an integral.
      2.7.2 Recognize the derivative of the natural logarithm.
      2.7.3 Integrate functions involving the natural logarithmic function.
      2.7.4 Define the number through an integral.
      2.7.5 Recognize the derivative and integral of the exponential function.
      2.7.6 Prove properties of logarithms and exponential functions using integrals.
      2.7.7 Express general logarithmic and exponential functions in terms of natural logarithms and

               exponentials.

We already examined exponential functions and logarithms in earlier chapters. However, we glossed over some key
details in the previous discussions. For example, we did not study how to treat exponential functions with exponents that
are irrational. The definition of the number e is another area where the previous development was somewhat
incomplete. We now have the tools to deal with these concepts in a more mathematically rigorous way, and we do so in
this section.

For purposes of this section, assume we have not yet defined the natural logarithm, the number e, or any of the
integration and differentiation formulas associated with these functions. By the end of the section, we will have studied
these concepts in a mathematically rigorous way (and we will see they are consistent with the concepts we learned
earlier).

We begin the section by defining the natural logarithm in terms of an integral. This definition forms the foundation for
the section. From this definition, we derive differentiation formulas, define the number and expand these concepts to
logarithms and exponential functions of any base.

The Natural Logarithm as an Integral

Recall the power rule for integrals:

Clearly, this does not work when         as it would force us to divide by zero. So, what do we do with                     Recall

from the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus that  is an antiderivative of Therefore, we can make the
following definition.
194 2 · Applications of Integration

Definition

For          define the natural logarithm function by

For  this is just the area under the curve             from to For     we have                             (2.24)
                                                                                                        so in this

case it is the negative of the area under the curve from  (see the following figure).

Figure 2.75 (a) When                 the natural logarithm is the area under the curve  from  (b) When  the

natural logarithm is the negative of the area under the curve from to

Notice that   Furthermore, the function                   for     Therefore, by the properties of integrals, it is clear

that is increasing for

Properties of the Natural Logarithm

Because of the way we defined the natural logarithm, the following differentiation formula falls out immediately as a
result of to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

Theorem 2.15

Derivative of the Natural Logarithm

For          the derivative of the natural logarithm is given by

  Theorem 2.16
  Corollary to the Derivative of the Natural Logarithm
  The function is differentiable; therefore, it is continuous.

A graph of is shown in Figure 2.76. Notice that it is continuous throughout its domain of 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.7 · Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 195

                                Figure 2.76 The graph of     shows that it is a continuous function.

  EXAMPLE 2.35

Calculating Derivatives of Natural Logarithms
Calculate the following derivatives:
 a.
b.

     Solution
We need to apply the chain rule in both cases.

 a.
b.

2.35 Calculate the following derivatives:
              a.
              b.

Note that if we use the absolute value function and create a new function  we can extend the domain of the

natural logarithm to include  Then                           This gives rise to the familiar integration formula.

Theorem 2.17

Integral of (1/u) du
The natural logarithm is the antiderivative of the function

  EXAMPLE 2.36
Calculating Integrals Involving Natural Logarithms
Calculate the integral

     Solution                 Then                        and we have
Using -substitution, let
196 2 · Applications of Integration

      2.36 Calculate the integral

Although we have called our function a "logarithm," we have not actually proved that any of the properties of logarithms
hold for this function. We do so here.

Theorem 2.18

Properties of the Natural Logarithm

If        and is a rational number, then

 i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Proof

i. By definition,
ii. We have

Use                on the last integral in this expression. Let  Then  Furthermore, when
and when                   So we get

iv. Note that

Furthermore,

Since the derivatives of these two functions are the same, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, they must differ by a
constant. So we have

for some constant Taking             we get

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.7 · Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 197

Thus           and the proof is complete. Note that we can extend this property to irrational values of  later in this

section.

Part iii. follows from parts ii. and iv. and the proof is left to you.



EXAMPLE 2.37

Using Properties of Logarithms
Use properties of logarithms to simplify the following expression into a single logarithm:

     Solution
We have

      2.37 Use properties of logarithms to simplify the following expression into a single logarithm:

Defining the Number e

Now that we have the natural logarithm defined, we can use that function to define the number
  Definition

  The number is defined to be the real number such that

To put it another way, the area under the curve  between                and  is (Figure 2.77). The proof that such a

number exists and is unique is left to you. (Hint: Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to prove existence and the fact

that is increasing to prove uniqueness.)

                                        Figure 2.77 The area under the curve from to is equal to one.

The number can be shown to be irrational, although we won't do so here (see the Student Project in Taylor and
Maclaurin Series). Its approximate value is given by
198 2 · Applications of Integration

The Exponential Function

We now turn our attention to the function Note that the natural logarithm is one-to-one and therefore has an inverse

function. For now, we denote this inverse function by        Then,

The following figure shows the graphs of               and

                                     Figure 2.78 The graphs of and

We hypothesize that                  For rational values of  this is easy to show. If is rational, then we have
                                                             For irrational values of we simply define as the inverse
                     Thus, when is rational,

function of

Definition

For any real number define           to be the number for which

                                                                                                            (2.25)

Then we have                         for all and thus

                                                                                                            (2.26)

for all                                                                                                     we must

Properties of the Exponential Function

Since the exponential function was defined in terms of an inverse function, and not in terms of a power of
verify that the usual laws of exponents hold for the function

Theorem 2.19

Properties of the Exponential Function
If and are any real numbers and is a rational number, then

  i.
 ii.
iii.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     2.7 · Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 199

Proof

Note that if and are rational, the properties hold. However, if or are irrational, we must apply the inverse function
definition of and verify the properties. Only the first property is verified here; the other two are left to you. We have

Since is one-to-one, then



As with part iv. of the logarithm properties, we can extend property iii. to irrational values of  and we do so by the end
of the section.

We also want to verify the differentiation formula for the function  To do this, we need to use implicit

differentiation. Let  Then

Thus, we see

as desired, which leads immediately to the integration formula

We apply these formulas in the following examples.
  EXAMPLE 2.38

Using Properties of Exponential Functions
Evaluate the following derivatives:
 a.
b.

     Solution
We apply the chain rule as necessary.
 a.
b.

       2.38 Evaluate the following derivatives:
                     a.
                     b.
200 2 · Applications of Integration

  EXAMPLE 2.39
Using Properties of Exponential Functions
Evaluate the following integral:

     Solution                        Then              and we have
Using -substitution, let

         2.39 Evaluate the following integral:

General Logarithmic and Exponential Functions

We close this section by looking at exponential functions and logarithms with bases other than Exponential functions

are functions of the form            Note that unless       we still do not have a mathematically rigorous definition of

these functions for irrational exponents. Let's rectify that here by defining the function   in terms of the

exponential function We then examine logarithms with bases other than as inverse functions of exponential

functions.

    Definition

    For any       and for any real number define       as follows:

Now is defined rigorously for all values of x. This definition also allows us to generalize property iv. of logarithms and
property iii. of exponential functions to apply to both rational and irrational values of It is straightforward to show that
properties of exponents hold for general exponential functions defined in this way.

Let's now apply this definition to calculate a differentiation formula for We have

The corresponding integration formula follows immediately.

    Theorem 2.20

    Derivatives and Integrals Involving General Exponential Functions

    Let         Then,

    and

If       then the function is one-to-one and has a well-defined inverse. Its inverse is denoted by  Then,

Note that general logarithm functions can be written in terms of the natural logarithm. Let         Then,
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of this second equation, we get

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              2.7 · Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 201

Thus, we see that all logarithmic functions are constant multiples of one another. Next, we use this formula to find a

differentiation formula for a logarithm with base Again, let  Then,

Theorem 2.21

Derivatives of General Logarithm Functions

Let  Then,

  EXAMPLE 2.40

Calculating Derivatives of General Exponential and Logarithm Functions
Evaluate the following derivatives:

 a.
b.

     Solution
We need to apply the chain rule as necessary.

 a.
b.

     2.40 Evaluate the following derivatives:
                   a.
                   b.

  EXAMPLE 2.41
Integrating General Exponential Functions
Evaluate the following integral:

     Solution  and let  Then                   and we have
Use
202 2 · Applications of Integration

      2.41 Evaluate the following integral:

        SECTION 2.7 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the derivative

295.                                 296.                               297.

For the following exercises, find the indefinite integral.

298.                                 299.

For the following exercises, find the derivative      (You can use a calculator to plot the function and the derivative to
confirm that it is correct.)
                                                                               302. [T]
300. [T]                             301. [T]                                  305. [T]
                                                                               308. [T]
303. [T]                             304. [T]
306. [T]                             307. [T]

309. [T]

For the following exercises, find the definite or indefinite integral.

310.                                 311.                               312.

313.                                 314.                               315.

316.                                 317.                               318.

319.

For the following exercises, compute       by differentiating

320.                                 321.                               322.

323.                                 324.                               325.

326.                                 327.                               328.

329.

For the following exercises, evaluate by any method.

330.                                 331.                               332.

333.                                 334.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2.8 · Exponential Growth and Decay 203

For the following exercises, use the function      If you are unable to find intersection points analytically, use a
calculator.

335. Find the area of the             336. [T] Find the arc length of     337. Find the area between
                                                                                        and the x-axis from
      region enclosed by                       from  to

      and  above

338. Find the volume of the shape create3d39. [T] Find the surface area

      when rotating this curve from            of the shape created

                      around the x-axis, as    when rotating the curve

      pictured here.                           in the previous exercise

                                               from  to

                                               around the x-axis.

If you are unable to find intersection points analytically in the following exercises, use a calculator.

340. Find the area of the             341. [T] Find the arc length of     342. Find the area under
        hyperbolic quarter-circle                        from                                and above the
        enclosed by
                               above                                              x-axis from

For the following exercises, verify the derivatives and antiderivatives.

343.                                  344.                                345.

346.                                         347.

2.8 Exponential Growth and Decay

Learning Objectives

      2.8.1 Use the exponential growth model in applications, including population growth and compound
               interest.

      2.8.2 Explain the concept of doubling time.
      2.8.3 Use the exponential decay model in applications, including radioactive decay and Newton's law of

               cooling.
      2.8.4 Explain the concept of half-life.

One of the most prevalent applications of exponential functions involves growth and decay models. Exponential growth
and decay show up in a host of natural applications. From population growth and continuously compounded interest to
radioactive decay and Newton's law of cooling, exponential functions are ubiquitous in nature. In this section, we
examine exponential growth and decay in the context of some of these applications.

Exponential Growth Model

Many systems exhibit exponential growth. These systems follow a model of the form  where represents the

initial state of the system and is a positive constant, called the growth constant. Notice that in an exponential growth
204 2 · Applications of Integration

model, we have

                                                                                                  (2.27)

That is, the rate of growth is proportional to the current function value. This is a key feature of exponential growth.
Equation 2.27 involves derivatives and is called a differential equation. We learn more about differential equations in
Introduction to Differential Equations.

Rule: Exponential Growth Model

Systems that exhibit exponential growth increase according to the mathematical model

where represents the initial state of the system and  is a constant, called the growth constant.

Population growth is a common example of exponential growth. Consider a population of bacteria, for instance. It seems

plausible that the rate of population growth would be proportional to the size of the population. After all, the more

bacteria there are to reproduce, the faster the population grows. Figure 2.79 and Table 2.1 represent the growth of a

population of bacteria with an initial population of bacteria and a growth constant of           Notice that after only

hours  minutes), the population is times its original size!

                                     Figure 2.79 An example of exponential growth for bacteria.
                                            Time (min) Population Size (no. of bacteria)

                                                 Table 2.1 Exponential Growth of a Bacterial
                                                 Population

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             2.8 · Exponential Growth and Decay 205

                                 Time (min) Population Size (no. of bacteria)

                                 Table 2.1 Exponential Growth of a Bacterial
                                 Population

Note that we are using a continuous function to model what is inherently discrete behavior. At any given time, the real-
world population contains a whole number of bacteria, although the model takes on noninteger values. When using
exponential growth models, we must always be careful to interpret the function values in the context of the
phenomenon we are modeling.

EXAMPLE 2.42

Population Growth

Consider the population of bacteria described earlier. This population grows according to the function

where t is measured in minutes. How many bacteria are present in the population after hours  minutes)? When

does the population reach        bacteria?

     Solution              Then
We have

There are      bacteria in the population after hours.

To find when the population reaches         bacteria, we solve the equation

The population reaches           bacteria after    minutes.

2.42 Consider a population of bacteria that grows according to the function                             where is

               measured in minutes. How many bacteria are present in the population after 4 hours? When does the

               population reach million bacteria?

Let's now turn our attention to a financial application: compound interest. Interest that is not compounded is called

simple interest. Simple interest is paid once, at the end of the specified time period (usually year). So, if we put      in

a savings account earning simple interest per year, then at the end of the year we have

Compound interest is paid multiple times per year, depending on the compounding period. Therefore, if the bank

compounds the interest every months, it credits half of the year's interest to the account after months. During the

second half of the year, the account earns interest not only on the initial  but also on the interest earned during

the first half of the year. Mathematically speaking, at the end of the year, we have
206 2 · Applications of Integration

Similarly, if the interest is compounded every months, we have

and if the interest is compounded daily  times per year), we have              If we extend this concept, so that the

interest is compounded continuously, after years we have

                                                                             

Now let's manipulate this expression so that we have an exponential growth function. Recall that the number can be
expressed as a limit:

                                           

Based on this, we want the expression inside the parentheses to have the form    Let  Note that as

   as well. Then we get

                                                                               

We recognize the limit inside the brackets as the number So, the balance in our bank account after years is given by
                Generalizing this concept, we see that if a bank account with an initial balance of earns interest at a rate

of compounded continuously, then the balance of the account after years is

  EXAMPLE 2.43

Compound Interest
A 25-year-old student is offered an opportunity to invest some money in a retirement account that pays annual
interest compounded continuously. How much does the student need to invest today to have million when she retires
at age What if she could earn annual interest compounded continuously instead?

     Solution
We have

She must invest                      at   interest.
                                         then the equation becomes
If, instead, she is able to earn

In this case, she needs to invest only   This is roughly two-thirds the amount she needs to invest at The

fact that the interest is compounded continuously greatly magnifies the effect of the increase in interest rate.

2.43 Suppose instead of investing at age , the student waits until age How much would she have to
             invest at At

If a quantity grows exponentially, the time it takes for the quantity to double remains constant. In other words, it takes

the same amount of time for a population of bacteria to grow from to bacteria as it does to grow from                       to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          2.8 · Exponential Growth and Decay 207

          bacteria. This time is called the doubling time. To calculate the doubling time, we want to know when the quantity
reaches twice its original size. So we have

Definition

If a quantity grows exponentially, the doubling time is the amount of time it takes the quantity to double. It is given
by

EXAMPLE 2.44

Using the Doubling Time
Assume a population of fish grows exponentially. A pond is stocked initially with fish. After months, there are
fish in the pond. The owner will allow his friends and neighbors to fish on his pond after the fish population reaches

           When will the owner's friends be allowed to fish?

Solution

We know it takes the population of fish months to double in size. So, if t represents time in months, by the doubling-

time formula, we have             Then,  Thus, the population is given by                        To figure out

when the population reaches       fish, we must solve the following equation:

The owner's friends have to wait  months (a little more than years) to fish in the pond.

2.44 Suppose it takes months for the fish population in Example 2.44 to reach             fish. Under these
             circumstances, how long do the owner's friends have to wait?

Exponential Decay Model

Exponential functions can also be used to model populations that shrink (from disease, for example), or chemical
compounds that break down over time. We say that such systems exhibit exponential decay, rather than exponential
growth. The model is nearly the same, except there is a negative sign in the exponent. Thus, for some positive constant

   we have

As with exponential growth, there is a differential equation associated with exponential decay. We have

Rule: Exponential Decay Model
Systems that exhibit exponential decay behave according to the model

where represents the initial state of the system and  is a constant, called the decay constant.
208 2 · Applications of Integration

       The following figure shows a graph of a representative exponential decay function.

                                                     Figure 2.80 An example of exponential decay.

Let's look at a physical application of exponential decay. Newton's law of cooling says that an object cools at a rate
proportional to the difference between the temperature of the object and the temperature of the surroundings. In other
words, if represents the temperature of the object and represents the ambient temperature in a room, then

Note that this is not quite the right model for exponential decay. We want the derivative to be proportional to the

function, and this expression has the additional term. Fortunately, we can make a change of variables that resolves

this issue. Let                  Then                          and our equation becomes

From our previous work, we know this relationship between y and its derivative leads to exponential decay. Thus,

and we see that

where represents the initial temperature. Let's apply this formula in the following example.

EXAMPLE 2.45

Newton's Law of Cooling

According to experienced baristas, the optimal temperature to serve coffee is between      and         Suppose coffee

is poured at a temperature of          and after minutes in a  room it has cooled to          When is the coffee first

cool enough to serve? When is the coffee too cold to serve? Round answers to the nearest half minute.

     Solution
We have

Then, the model is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.8 · Exponential Growth and Decay 209

The coffee reaches  when

The coffee can be served about minutes after it is poured. The coffee reaches        at

The coffee is too cold to be served about minutes after it is poured.

2.45 Suppose the room is warmer  and, after minutes, the coffee has cooled only to       When is the

coffee first cool enough to serve? When is the coffee be too cold to serve? Round answers to the nearest

half minute.

Just as systems exhibiting exponential growth have a constant doubling time, systems exhibiting exponential decay have
a constant half-life. To calculate the half-life, we want to know when the quantity reaches half its original size. Therefore,
we have

Note: This is the same expression we came up with for doubling time.

  Definition

  If a quantity decays exponentially, the half-life is the amount of time it takes the quantity to be reduced by half. It is
  given by

  EXAMPLE 2.46                                                                           decays (emits a

Radiocarbon Dating
One of the most common applications of an exponential decay model is carbon dating.
210 2 · Applications of Integration

radioactive particle) at a regular and consistent exponential rate. Therefore, if we know how much carbon was originally

present in an object and how much carbon remains, we can determine the age of the object. The half-life of               is

approximately          years--meaning, after that many years, half the material has converted from the original

to the new nonradioactive                        If we have g                today, how much is left in years? If an artifact that

originally contained g of carbon now contains g of carbon, how old is it? Round the answer to the nearest

hundred years.

     Solution
We have

So, the model says
In years, we have

Therefore, in years,                 g of        remains.

To determine the age of the artifact, we must solve

The artifact is about                years old.

2.46 If we have g of                             how much is left after years? If an artifact that originally contained

               g of carbon now contains of carbon, how old is it? Round the answer to the nearest hundred years.

        SECTION 2.8 EXERCISES

True or False? If true, prove it. If false, find the true answer.

348. The doubling time for                 349. If you invest        an      350. If you leave a  pot
                   is
                                                 annual rate of interest of  of tea at room

                                                 yields more money in        temperature          and

                                                 the first year than a       an identical pot in the

                                                 continuous rate of          refrigerator         with

                                                 interest.                   the tea in the

                                                                             refrigerator reaches a

                                                                             drinkable temperature

                                                                             more than

                                                                             minutes before the tea at

                                                                             room temperature.

351. If given a half-life of t
        years, the constant for
                   is calculated by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.8 · Exponential Growth and Decay 211

For the following exercises, use  353. If bacteria increase by a     354. How old is a skull that
                                          factor of in hours,                contains one-fifth as
352. If a culture of bacteria             how many hours does it             much radiocarbon as a
        doubles in hours, how             take to increase by                modern skull? Note that
        many hours does it take                                              the half-life of
        to multiply by                                                       radiocarbon is
                                                                             years.

355. If a relic contains   as     356. The population of Cairo       357. The populations of New
                                          grew from million to
much radiocarbon as new                   million in years. Use an   York and Los Angeles are
                                          exponential model to find
material, can it have come                when the population was    growing at and                   a
                                            million.
from the time of Christ                                              year, respectively. Starting

(approximately                                                       from million (New York)

years ago)? Note that the                                            and million (Los

half-life of radiocarbon is                                          Angeles), when are the

              years.                                                 populations equal?

358. Suppose the value of         359. The effect of advertising     360. If            at   and
                                                                             was     at     what
in Japanese yen decreases         decays exponentially. If                        at

at per year. Starting                  of the population

from                      when    remembers a new

will                              product after days, how

                                  long will      remember

                                  it?

361. If           at     and      362. If a bank offers annual       363. What continuous interest
        does  at      when                                                   rate has the same yield as
                                  interest of        or                      an annual rate of

                                  continuous interest of             366. You are cooling a turkey
                                                                             that was taken out of the
                                       which has a better                    oven with an internal
                                                                             temperature of
                                  annual yield?                              After minutes of
                                                                             resting the turkey in a
364. If you deposit        at     365. You are trying to save                       apartment, the
                                                                             temperature has reached
      annual interest, how                   in years for                              What is the
                                                                             temperature of the turkey
many years can you                college tuition for your                       minutes after taking it
                                                                             out of the oven?
withdraw              (starting   child. If interest is a

after the first year)             continuous         how

without running out of            much do you need to

money?                            invest initially?
212 2 · Applications of Integration

367. You are trying to thaw                 368. You are an archaeologist       369. The spent fuel of a
                                                    and are given a bone that
some vegetables that are                            is claimed to be from a     nuclear reactor contains
                                                    Tyrannosaurus Rex. You
at a temperature of                                 know these dinosaurs        plutonium-239, which has
                                                    lived during the
To thaw vegetables safely,                          Cretaceous Era              a half-life of            years.
                                                    million years to million
you must put them in the                            years ago), and you find    If barrel containing
                                                    by radiocarbon dating
refrigerator, which has an                          that there is                     of plutonium-239 is
                                                    the amount of
ambient temperature of                              radiocarbon. Is this bone   sealed, how many years
                                                    from the Cretaceous?
You check on your                                                               must pass until only

vegetables hours after                                                          of plutonium-239 is left?

putting them in the

refrigerator to find that

they are now                         Plot

the resulting temperature

curve and use it to

determine when the

vegetables reach

For the next set of exercises, use the following table, which features the world population by decade.

                                            Years since 1950 Population (millions)

                                            Source: http://www.factmonster.com/ipka/
                                            A0762181.html.

370. [T] The best-fit                       371. [T] Find and graph the         372. [T] Find and graph the
        exponential curve to the                    derivative of your                  second derivative of your
        data of the form                            equation. Where is it               equation. Where is it
                         is given by                increasing and what is the          increasing and what is the
                                       Use          meaning of this increase?           meaning of this increase?
        a graphing calculator to
        graph the data and the
        exponential curve
        together.

373. [T] Find the predicted
        date when the population
        reaches billion. Using
        your previous answers
        about the first and
        second derivatives,
        explain why exponential
        growth is unsuccessful in
        predicting the future.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 213

For the next set of exercises, use the following table, which shows the population of San Francisco during the 19th
century.

                                                     Years since 1850 Population (thousands)

                                      Source: http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/
                                      hgpop.htm.

374. [T] The best-fit                 375. [T] Find and graph the         376. [T] Find and graph the
        exponential curve to the              derivative of your                  second derivative of your
        data of the form                      equation. Where is it               equation. Where is it
                         is given by          increasing? What is the             increasing? What is the
                                              meaning of this increase?           meaning of this increase?
        Use a graphing calculator             Is there a value where the
        to graph the data and the             increase is maximal?
        exponential curve
        together.

2.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions

Learning Objectives

      2.9.1 Apply the formulas for derivatives and integrals of the hyperbolic functions.
      2.9.2 Apply the formulas for the derivatives of the inverse hyperbolic functions and their associated

               integrals.
      2.9.3 Describe the common applied conditions of a catenary curve.

We were introduced to hyperbolic functions in Introduction to Functions and Graphs (http://openstax.org/books/
calculus-volume-1/pages/1-5-exponential-and-logarithmic-functions), along with some of their basic properties. In this
section, we look at differentiation and integration formulas for the hyperbolic functions and their inverses.

Derivatives and Integrals of the Hyperbolic Functions

Recall that the hyperbolic sine and hyperbolic cosine are defined as

The other hyperbolic functions are then defined in terms of  and          The graphs of the hyperbolic functions are

shown in the following figure.
214 2 · Applications of Integration

                                                    Figure 2.81 Graphs of the hyperbolic functions.   we have
It is easy to develop differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions. For example, looking at

Similarly,                           We summarize the differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions in the following
table.

                                     Table 2.2 Derivatives of
                                     the Hyperbolic Functions

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 215

                            Table 2.2 Derivatives of
                            the Hyperbolic Functions

Let's take a moment to compare the derivatives of the hyperbolic functions with the derivatives of the standard

trigonometric functions. There are a lot of similarities, but differences as well. For example, the derivatives of the sine

functions match:       and                                  The derivatives of the cosine functions, however, differ

in sign:          but                                       As we continue our examination of the hyperbolic functions,

we must be mindful of their similarities and differences to the standard trigonometric functions.

These differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions lead directly to the following integral formulas.

  EXAMPLE 2.47
Differentiating Hyperbolic Functions
Evaluate the following derivatives:
 a.
b.

     Solution
Using the formulas in Table 2.2 and the chain rule, we get
 a.
b.

       2.47 Evaluate the following derivatives:
                     a.
                     b.

  EXAMPLE 2.48
Integrals Involving Hyperbolic Functions
Evaluate the following integrals:
 a.
b.

     Solution
We can use u-substitution in both cases.
216 2 · Applications of Integration

a. Let     Then,                     and
b. Let          Then,                          and

Note that                            for all so we can eliminate the absolute value signs and obtain

2.48 Evaluate the following integrals:
              a.
              b.

Calculus of Inverse Hyperbolic Functions

Looking at the graphs of the hyperbolic functions, we see that with appropriate range restrictions, they all have inverses.
Most of the necessary range restrictions can be discerned by close examination of the graphs. The domains and ranges
of the inverse hyperbolic functions are summarized in the following table.

                                     Function         Domain        Range

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                  

                                                                                         

                                                                  

                                                                                         

                                            Table 2.3 Domains and Ranges of the Inverse
                                            Hyperbolic Functions

The graphs of the inverse hyperbolic functions are shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 217

                                              Figure 2.82 Graphs of the inverse hyperbolic functions.
To find the derivatives of the inverse functions, we use implicit differentiation. We have

Recall that  so  Then,

We can derive differentiation formulas for the other inverse hyperbolic functions in a similar fashion. These
differentiation formulas are summarized in the following table.

                 Table 2.4 Derivatives of
                 the Inverse Hyperbolic
                 Functions
218 2 · Applications of Integration

                                          Table 2.4 Derivatives of
                                          the Inverse Hyperbolic
                                          Functions

Note that the derivatives of         and  are the same. Thus, when we integrate       we need to select

the proper antiderivative based on the domain of the functions and the values of Integration formulas involving the

inverse hyperbolic functions are summarized as follows.

  EXAMPLE 2.49
Differentiating Inverse Hyperbolic Functions
Evaluate the following derivatives:
 a.
b.

     Solution
Using the formulas in Table 2.4 and the chain rule, we obtain the following results:
 a.

b.

       2.49 Evaluate the following derivatives:
                     a.
                     b.

  EXAMPLE 2.50
Integrals Involving Inverse Hyperbolic Functions
Evaluate the following integrals:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 219

a.

b.

     Solution  Then,  in both cases.
We can use                     and we have

 a. Let

b. Let         Then,  and we obtain

       2.50 Evaluate the following integrals:

                     a.

                     b.

Applications

One physical application of hyperbolic functions involves hanging cables. If a cable of uniform density is suspended
between two supports without any load other than its own weight, the cable forms a curve called a catenary. High-
voltage power lines, chains hanging between two posts, and strands of a spider's web all form catenaries. The following
figure shows chains hanging from a row of posts.
220 2 · Applications of Integration

Figure 2.83 Chains between these posts take the shape of a catenary. (credit: modification of work by  are catenaries.
OKFoundryCompany, Flickr)

Hyperbolic functions can be used to model catenaries. Specifically, functions of the form
Figure 2.84 shows the graph of

              Figure 2.84 A hyperbolic cosine function forms the shape of a catenary.

EXAMPLE 2.51

Using a Catenary to Find the Length of a Cable

Assume a hanging cable has the shape            for  where is measured in feet. Determine the

length of the cable (in feet).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 221

     Solution         that the formula for arc length is
Recall from Section

We have                               so                   Then

Now recall that                           so we have

2.51 Assume a hanging cable has the shape                                     for            Determine the length of the cable

          (in feet).

SECTION 2.9 EXERCISES

377. [T] Find expressions for             378. From the definitions of             379. Show that     and
                              and
                               Use a                  and               find                 satisfy

        calculator to graph these         their antiderivatives.
        functions and ensure your
        expression is correct.

380. Use the quotient rule to             381. Derive                              382. Take the derivative of the
        verify that                               from the definition.                     previous expression to
                                                                                           find an expression for

383. Prove                                                 384. Take the derivative of the
        by changing the expression to exponentials.                previous expression to
                                                                   find an expression for

For the following exercises, find the derivatives of the given functions and graph along with the function to ensure your
answer is correct.

385. [T]                                  386. [T]                                 387. [T]

388. [T]                                  389. [T]                                 390. [T]
391. [T]                                  392. [T]                                 393. [T]

394. [T]
222 2 · Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, find the antiderivatives for the given functions.

395.                                        396.                                        397.

398.                                        399.                                        400.

401.                                        402.                                        403.

404.

For the following exercises, find the derivatives for the functions.

405.                                        406.                                        407.

408.                                        409.                                        410.

411.

For the following exercises, find the antiderivatives for the functions.

412.                                        413.                                        414.

415.                                        416.                                        417.

418.

For the following exercises, use the fact that a falling body with friction equal to velocity squared obeys the equation

419. Show that                              420. Derive the previous                    421. [T] Estimate how far a
        satisfies this equation.                    expression for by                           body has fallen in
                                                    integrating                                 seconds by finding the
                                                                                                area underneath the
                                                                                                curve of

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A cable hanging under its own weight has a slope                                  that satisfies
                             The constant is the ratio of cable density to tension.

422. Show that                              423. Integrate                              424. Sketch the cable and
        satisfies this equation.                                                                determine how far down
                                                                    to find                     it sags at

                                                  the cable height     if

For the following exercises, solve each problem.

425. [T] A chain hangs from                 426. [T] A chain hangs from                 427. [T] A high-voltage power
        two posts m apart to                        two posts four meters                       line is a catenary
        form a catenary described                   apart to form a catenary                    described by
        by the equation                             described by the equation                                               Find
                                      Find                                        Find          the ratio of the area
        the slope of the catenary                   the total length of the                     under the catenary to its
        at the left fence post.                     catenary (arc length).                      arc length. What do you
                                                                                                notice?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.9 · Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 223

428. A telephone line is a                 429. Prove the formula for the       430. Prove the formula for the
        catenary described by                      derivative of                        derivative of
                                 Find the                              by                                    by
        ratio of the area under                    differentiating                      differentiating
        the catenary to its arc                                     (Hint: Use
        length. Does this confirm                  hyperbolic trigonometric             (Hint: Use hyperbolic
        your answer for the                        identities.)                         trigonometric identities.)
        previous question?
                                           432. Prove that
431. Prove the formula for the
        derivative of                      434. Prove the expression for
                             by                                     Multiply
        differentiating
                          (Hint: Use
        hyperbolic trigonometric
        identities.)

433. Prove the expression for
                        Multiply

by and solve for Does                      by and solve for Does
your expression match the                  your expression match the
textbook?                                  textbook?
224 2 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

arc length the arc length of a curve can be thought of as the distance a person would travel along the path of the

curve

catenary a curve in the shape of the function                 is a catenary; a cable of uniform density suspended

between two supports assumes the shape of a catenary

center of mass the point at which the total mass of the system could be concentrated without changing the moment

centroid the centroid of a region is the geometric center of the region; laminas are often represented by regions in the

plane; if the lamina has a constant density, the center of mass of the lamina depends only on the shape of the

corresponding planar region; in this case, the center of mass of the lamina corresponds to the centroid of the

representative region

cross-section the intersection of a plane and a solid object

density function a density function describes how mass is distributed throughout an object; it can be a linear density,

expressed in terms of mass per unit length; an area density, expressed in terms of mass per unit area; or a volume

density, expressed in terms of mass per unit volume; weight-density is also used to describe weight (rather than

mass) per unit volume

disk method a special case of the slicing method used with solids of revolution when the slices are disks

doubling time if a quantity grows exponentially, the doubling time is the amount of time it takes the quantity to

double, and is given by

exponential decay systems that exhibit exponential decay follow a model of the form

exponential growth systems that exhibit exponential growth follow a model of the form

frustum a portion of a cone; a frustum is constructed by cutting the cone with a plane parallel to the base

half-life if a quantity decays exponentially, the half-life is the amount of time it takes the quantity to be reduced by half.

It is given by

Hooke's law this law states that the force required to compress (or elongate) a spring is proportional to the distance

the spring has been compressed (or stretched) from equilibrium; in other words,        where is a constant

hydrostatic pressure the pressure exerted by water on a submerged object

lamina a thin sheet of material; laminas are thin enough that, for mathematical purposes, they can be treated as if

they are two-dimensional

method of cylindrical shells a method of calculating the volume of a solid of revolution by dividing the solid into

nested cylindrical shells; this method is different from the methods of disks or washers in that we integrate with

respect to the opposite variable

moment if n masses are arranged on a number line, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is given by

                        if, instead, we consider a region in the plane, bounded above by a function  over an interval

       then the moments of the region with respect to the x- and y-axes are given by                            and

                                    respectively

slicing method a method of calculating the volume of a solid that involves cutting the solid into pieces, estimating the
    volume of each piece, then adding these estimates to arrive at an estimate of the total volume; as the number of
    slices goes to infinity, this estimate becomes an integral that gives the exact value of the volume

solid of revolution a solid generated by revolving a region in a plane around a line in that plane
surface area the surface area of a solid is the total area of the outer layer of the object; for objects such as cubes or

    bricks, the surface area of the object is the sum of the areas of all of its faces
symmetry principle the symmetry principle states that if a region R is symmetric about a line l, then the centroid of R

    lies on l
theorem of Pappus for volume this theorem states that the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving a

    region around an external axis is equal to the area of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the centroid of
    the region
washer method a special case of the slicing method used with solids of revolution when the slices are washers
work the amount of energy it takes to move an object; in physics, when a force is constant, work is expressed as the
    product of force and distance

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      2 · Chapter Review 225

Key Equations

  Area between two curves, integrating on the x-axis
  Area between two curves, integrating on the y-axis
  Disk Method along the x-axis
  Disk Method along the y-axis
  Washer Method
  Method of Cylindrical Shells
  Arc Length of a Function of x
  Arc Length of a Function of y
  Surface Area of a Function of x
  Mass of a one-dimensional object
  Mass of a circular object
  Work done on an object
  Hydrostatic force on a plate
  Mass of a lamina
  Moments of a lamina
  Center of mass of a lamina
226 2 · Chapter Review

Natural logarithm function       Z

Exponential function                Z

Key Concepts

2.1 Areas between Curves

  · Just as definite integrals can be used to find the area under a curve, they can also be used to find the area between
      two curves.

  · To find the area between two curves defined by functions, integrate the difference of the functions.
  · If the graphs of the functions cross, or if the region is complex, use the absolute value of the difference of the

      functions. In this case, it may be necessary to evaluate two or more integrals and add the results to find the area of
      the region.
  · Sometimes it can be easier to integrate with respect to y to find the area. The principles are the same regardless of
      which variable is used as the variable of integration.

2.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing

  · Definite integrals can be used to find the volumes of solids. Using the slicing method, we can find a volume by
      integrating the cross-sectional area.

  · For solids of revolution, the volume slices are often disks and the cross-sections are circles. The method of disks
      involves applying the method of slicing in the particular case in which the cross-sections are circles, and using the
      formula for the area of a circle.

  · If a solid of revolution has a cavity in the center, the volume slices are washers. With the method of washers, the
      area of the inner circle is subtracted from the area of the outer circle before integrating.

2.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells

  · The method of cylindrical shells is another method for using a definite integral to calculate the volume of a solid of
      revolution. This method is sometimes preferable to either the method of disks or the method of washers because
      we integrate with respect to the other variable. In some cases, one integral is substantially more complicated than
      the other.

  · The geometry of the functions and the difficulty of the integration are the main factors in deciding which integration
      method to use.

2.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area

  · The arc length of a curve can be calculated using a definite integral.
  · The arc length is first approximated using line segments, which generates a Riemann sum. Taking a limit then gives

      us the definite integral formula. The same process can be applied to functions of
  · The concepts used to calculate the arc length can be generalized to find the surface area of a surface of revolution.
  · The integrals generated by both the arc length and surface area formulas are often difficult to evaluate. It may be

      necessary to use a computer or calculator to approximate the values of the integrals.

2.5 Physical Applications

  · Several physical applications of the definite integral are common in engineering and physics.
  · Definite integrals can be used to determine the mass of an object if its density function is known.
  · Work can also be calculated from integrating a force function, or when counteracting the force of gravity, as in a

      pumping problem.
  · Definite integrals can also be used to calculate the force exerted on an object submerged in a liquid.

2.6 Moments and Centers of Mass

  · Mathematically, the center of mass of a system is the point at which the total mass of the system could be
      concentrated without changing the moment. Loosely speaking, the center of mass can be thought of as the
      balancing point of the system.

  · For point masses distributed along a number line, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is

                                  For point masses distributed in a plane, the moments of the system with respect to the x- and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2 · Chapter Review 227

y-axes, respectively, are                   and                     respectively.

· For a lamina bounded above by a function       the moments of the system with respect to the x- and y-axes,

respectively, are                   and

  · The x- and y-coordinates of the center of mass can be found by dividing the moments around the y-axis and around
      the x-axis, respectively, by the total mass. The symmetry principle says that if a region is symmetric with respect to a
      line, then the centroid of the region lies on the line.

  · The theorem of Pappus for volume says that if a region is revolved around an external axis, the volume of the
      resulting solid is equal to the area of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the centroid of the region.

2.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms

  · The earlier treatment of logarithms and exponential functions did not define the functions precisely and formally.
      This section develops the concepts in a mathematically rigorous way.

  · The cornerstone of the development is the definition of the natural logarithm in terms of an integral.
  · The function is then defined as the inverse of the natural logarithm.
  · General exponential functions are defined in terms of and the corresponding inverse functions are general

      logarithms.
  · Familiar properties of logarithms and exponents still hold in this more rigorous context.

2.8 Exponential Growth and Decay

  · Exponential growth and exponential decay are two of the most common applications of exponential functions.
  · Systems that exhibit exponential growth follow a model of the form
  · In exponential growth, the rate of growth is proportional to the quantity present. In other words,
  · Systems that exhibit exponential growth have a constant doubling time, which is given by
  · Systems that exhibit exponential decay follow a model of the form
  · Systems that exhibit exponential decay have a constant half-life, which is given by

2.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions

  · Hyperbolic functions are defined in terms of exponential functions.
  · Term-by-term differentiation yields differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions. These differentiation

      formulas give rise, in turn, to integration formulas.
  · With appropriate range restrictions, the hyperbolic functions all have inverses.
  · Implicit differentiation yields differentiation formulas for the inverse hyperbolic functions, which in turn give rise to

      integration formulas.
  · The most common physical applications of hyperbolic functions are calculations involving catenaries.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

435. The amount of work to          436. If the force is constant,  437. The disk method can be
        pump the water out of a                                             used in any situation in
        half-full cylinder is half  the amount of work to                   which the washer method
        the amount of work to                                               is successful at finding
        pump the water out of       move an object from                     the volume of a solid of
        the full cylinder.                                                  revolution.
                                            to   is

438. If the half-life of
                               is

        ms, then
228 2 · Chapter Review

For the following exercises, use the requested method to determine the volume of the solid.

439. The volume that has a            440. The region bounded by                 441.         and
        base of the ellipse                   the curve
                               and            and the x-axis from                      rotated around the y-axis
        cross-sections of an                                        rotated
        equilateral triangle                  around the y-axis using                  using the washer method
        perpendicular to the                  the washer method
                  Use the method of
        slicing.

442.
        rotated around the x-axis
        using cylindrical shells

For the following exercises, find

a. the area of the region,
b. the volume of the solid when rotated around the x-axis, and
c. the volume of the solid when rotated around the y-axis. Use whichever method seems most appropriate to you.

443.                                  444.                                             445. [T]

446.  and                             447.                                       448. Below        and
                                              and
                                                                                       above

449. Find the mass of                 450. Find the center of mass               451. Find the mass and the
        on a disk centered at the                                                        center of mass of
        origin with radius            for              on                                on the region bounded by
                                                                                                   and

For the following exercises, find the requested arc lengths.

452. The length of for                453. The length of for
                          from
                                                       from                  to

For the following exercises, find the surface area and volume when the given curves are revolved around the specified
axis.

454. The shape created by             455. The loudspeaker created               456. For this exercise, consider
        revolving the region                                                             the Karun-3 dam in Iran.
        between                       by revolving            from                       Its shape can be
                                 and                                                     approximated as an
                 rotated around the                to  around the                        inverted isosceles triangle
        y-axis.                                                                          spanning across the river,
                                      x-axis.                                            with height 205 m and
                                                                                         width (across the top of
                                                                                         the dam) 388 m. Assume
                                                                                         the current depth of the
                                                                                         water is 180 m. The
                                                                                         density of water is 1000
                                                                                         kg/m3. Find the total force
                                                                                         on the wall of the dam.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2 · Chapter Review 229

457. You are a crime scene

investigator attempting to

determine the time of

death of a victim. It is

noon and        outside

and the temperature of

the body is       You

know the cooling

constant is

When did the victim die,

assuming that a human's

temperature is    ?

For the following exercise, consider the stock market crash in  in the United States. The table lists the Dow Jones
industrial average per year leading up to the crash.

                                          Years after 1920 Value ($)

                                          Source: http://stockcharts.com/
                                          freecharts/historical/
                                          djia19201940.html

458. [T] The best-fit
        exponential curve to
        these data is given by
                                     Why
        do you think the gains of
        the market were
        unsustainable? Use first
        and second derivatives to
        help justify your answer.
        What would this model
        predict the Dow Jones
        industrial average to be in
                ?
230 2 · Chapter Review

For the following exercises, consider the catenoid, the only solid of revolution that has a minimal surface, or zero mean
curvature. A catenoid in nature can be found when stretching soap between two rings.

459. Find the volume of the catenoid    from

                        that is created by rotating this curve

around the              as shown here.

460. Find surface area of the catenoid

from        to                   that is created by rotating

this curve around the

Access for free at openstax.org
                              3 · Introduction 231

3  TECHNIQUES OF INTEGRATION

Figure 3.1 Careful planning of traffic signals can prevent or reduce the number of accidents at busy intersections. (credit:
modification of work by David McKelvey, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Integration by Parts
  3.2 Trigonometric Integrals
  3.3 Trigonometric Substitution
  3.4 Partial Fractions
  3.5 Other Strategies for Integration
  3.6 Numerical Integration
  3.7 Improper Integrals

      Introduction

In a large city, accidents occurred at an average rate of one every three months at a particularly busy intersection. After
residents complained, changes were made to the traffic lights at the intersection. It has now been eight months since
the changes were made and there have been no accidents. Were the changes effective or is the eight-month interval
without an accident a result of chance? We explore this question later in this chapter and see that integration is an
essential part of determining the answer (see Example 3.49).

We saw in the previous chapter how important integration can be for all kinds of different topics--from calculations of
volumes to flow rates, and from using a velocity function to determine a position to locating centers of mass. It is no
surprise, then, that techniques for finding antiderivatives (or indefinite integrals) are important to know for everyone
who uses them. We have already discussed some basic integration formulas and the method of integration by
substitution. In this chapter, we study some additional techniques, including some ways of approximating definite
integrals when normal techniques do not work.

3.1 Integration by Parts

Learning Objectives

      3.1.1 Recognize when to use integration by parts.
      3.1.2 Use the integration-by-parts formula to solve integration problems.
      3.1.3 Use the integration-by-parts formula for definite integrals.
232 3 · Techniques of Integration

By now we have a fairly thorough procedure for how to evaluate many basic integrals. However, although we can

integrate                          by using the substitution,  something as simple looking as  defies us. Many

students want to know whether there is a product rule for integration. There isn't, but there is a technique based on the
product rule for differentiation that allows us to exchange one integral for another. We call this technique integration by
parts.

The Integration-by-Parts Formula

If,                 then by using the product rule, we obtain                                  Although at first it may

seem counterproductive, let's now integrate both sides of this equation:

This gives us

Now we solve for

By making the substitutions        and                         which in turn make  and         we have the

more compact form

Theorem 3.1

Integration by Parts

Let            and                 be functions with continuous derivatives. Then, the integration-by-parts formula for the

integral involving these two functions is:

                                                                                                               (3.1)

The advantage of using the integration-by-parts formula is that we can use it to exchange one integral for another,
possibly easier, integral. The following example illustrates its use.

EXAMPLE 3.1

Using Integration by Parts

Use integration by parts with      and                         to evaluate

     Solution

By choosing         we have        Since                       we get                          It is handy to keep track of

these values as follows:

Applying the integration-by-parts formula results in

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  3.1 · Integration by Parts 233

Analysis

At this point, there are probably a few items that need clarification. First of all, you may be curious about what would

have happened if we had chosen             and                             If we had done so, then we would have  and

                                                                                            

Thus, after applying integration by parts, we have

Unfortunately, with the new integral, we are in no better position than before. It is important to keep in mind that when
we apply integration by parts, we may need to try several choices for and before finding a choice that works.

                                                                             we do not use                        To see that it
Second, you may wonder why, when we find

makes no difference, we can rework the problem using

As you can see, it makes no difference in the final solution.
Last, we can check to make sure that our antiderivative is correct by differentiating

Therefore, the antiderivative checks out.

MEDIA

Watch this video (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_intbyparts1) and visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/
20_intbyparts2) for examples of integration by parts.

                                using the integration-by-parts formula with            and
3.1 Evaluate

The natural question to ask at this point is: How do we know how to choose and Sometimes it is a matter of trial
and error; however, the acronym LIATE can often help to take some of the guesswork out of our choices. This acronym
stands for Logarithmic Functions, Inverse Trigonometric Functions, Algebraic Functions, Trigonometric Functions, and
Exponential Functions. This mnemonic serves as an aid in determining an appropriate choice for

The type of function in the integral that appears first in the list should be our first choice of For example, if an integral

contains a logarithmic function and an algebraic function, we should choose to be the logarithmic function, because L

comes before A in LIATE. The integral in Example 3.1 has a trigonometric function           and an algebraic function

Because A comes before T in LIATE, we chose to be the algebraic function. When we have chosen                     is selected to be

the remaining part of the function to be integrated, together with

Why does this mnemonic work? Remember that whatever we pick to be must be something we can integrate. Since
we do not have integration formulas that allow us to integrate simple logarithmic functions and inverse trigonometric
234 3 · Techniques of Integration

functions, it makes sense that they should not be chosen as values for Consequently, they should be at the head of

the list as choices for Thus, we put LI at the beginning of the mnemonic. (We could just as easily have started with IL,

since these two types of functions won't appear together in an integration-by-parts problem.) The exponential and

trigonometric functions are at the end of our list because they are fairly easy to integrate and make good choices for

Thus, we have TE at the end of our mnemonic. (We could just as easily have used ET at the end, since when these types

of functions appear together it usually doesn't really matter which one is and which one is                         Algebraic functions are

generally easy both to integrate and to differentiate, and they come in the middle of the mnemonic.

EXAMPLE 3.2

Using Integration by Parts
Evaluate

     Solution
Begin by rewriting the integral:

                                                                                       

Since this integral contains the algebraic function and the logarithmic function                            choose  since L comes

before A in LIATE. After we have chosen   we must choose

Next, since          we have                                                                  Summarizing,
                                          Also,

                                                                                         

Substituting into the integration-by-parts formula (Equation 3.1) gives

                                                             

                                        

                            
3.2 Evaluate

In some cases, as in the next two examples, it may be necessary to apply integration by parts more than once.

  EXAMPLE 3.3

Applying Integration by Parts More Than Once
                

Evaluate

Solution

Using LIATE, choose                and    Thus,                                          and                Therefore,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             3.1 · Integration by Parts 235

Substituting into Equation 3.1 produces

We still cannot integrate    directly, but the integral now has a lower power on We can evaluate this new

integral by using integration by parts again. To do this, choose                               and           Thus,           and

                           Now we have

Substituting back into the previous equation yields

                                                                                                    

After evaluating the last integral and simplifying, we obtain

  EXAMPLE 3.4

Applying Integration by Parts When LIATE Doesn't Quite Work
                

Evaluate

     Solution                                                                                                we end up with  and

If we use a strict interpretation of the mnemonic LIATE to make our choice of                                However, since we can evaluate
                                                                                                           

Unfortunately, this choice won't work because we are unable to evaluate



  we can try choosing                    and         With these choices we have

                                                                                             
Thus, we obtain
236 3 · Techniques of Integration

  EXAMPLE 3.5

Applying Integration by Parts More Than Once
                

Evaluate

Solution

This integral appears to have only one function--namely,        --however, we can always use the constant function 1

as the other function. In this example, let's choose            and                        (The decision to use          is easy.

We can't choose                        because if we could integrate it, we wouldn't be using integration by parts in the first

                                                              

place!) Consequently,                                    and         After applying integration by parts to the integral

and simplifying, we have

                                                                                

Unfortunately, this process leaves us with a new integral that is very similar to the original. However, let's see what

happens when we apply integration by parts again. This time let's choose                     and                 making

                                       

                              and                        Substituting, we have

                                                                                       

After simplifying, we obtain

                                                                                         

The last integral is now the same as the original. It may seem that we have simply gone in a circle, but now we can

                                                                                           

actually evaluate the integral. To see how to do this more clearly, substitute                    Thus, the equation

becomes

First, add to both sides of the equation to obtain

Next, divide by 2:

                                       again, we have
Substituting                                    

From this we see that                                         is an antiderivative of        For the most general
antiderivative, add

                                                     

     Analysis
If this method feels a little strange at first, we can check the answer by differentiation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.1 · Integration by Parts 237

                                 
     3.3 Evaluate

Integration by Parts for Definite Integrals

Now that we have used integration by parts successfully to evaluate indefinite integrals, we turn our attention to definite
integrals. The integration technique is really the same, only we add a step to evaluate the integral at the upper and lower
limits of integration.

Theorem 3.2

Integration by Parts for Definite Integrals

Let          and                   be functions with continuous derivatives on  Then

                                                                                                                  (3.2)

  EXAMPLE 3.6                                                           and below by the -axis over the interval

Finding the Area of a Region
Find the area of the region bounded above by the graph of

     Solution

This region is shown in Figure 3.2. To find the area, we must evaluate

             Figure 3.2 To find the area of the shaded region, we have to use integration by parts.

For this integral, let's choose    and                 thereby making                 and  After applying the

integration-by-parts formula (Equation 3.2) we obtain
238 3 · Techniques of Integration

Use u-substitution to obtain

Thus,

At this point it might not be a bad idea to do a "reality check" on the reasonableness of our solution. Since
                              and from Figure 3.2 we expect our area to be slightly less than 0.5, this solution appears to be

reasonable.

EXAMPLE 3.7

Finding a Volume of Revolution

Find the volume of the solid obtained by revolving the region bounded by the graph of                      the x-axis, the y-axis,

and the line  about the y-axis.

     Solution
The best option to solving this problem is to use the shell method. Begin by sketching the region to be revolved, along
with a typical rectangle (see the following graph).

                                   Figure 3.3 We can use the shell method to find a volume of revolution.

To find the volume using shells, we must evaluate  To do this, let                     and                 These choices lead

              

to     and                         Substituting into Equation 3.2, we obtain

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           3.1 · Integration by Parts 239

     Analysis
Again, it is a good idea to check the reasonableness of our solution. We observe that the solid has a volume slightly less
than that of a cylinder of radius and height of added to the volume of a cone of base radius and height of
Consequently, the solid should have a volume a bit less than

Since              we see that our calculated volume is reasonable.

     3.4 Evaluate

        SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES

In using the technique of integration by parts, you must carefully choose which expression is u. For each of the following
problems, use the guidelines in this section to choose u. Do not evaluate the integrals.

1.                 2.                  3.

4.                 5.

Find the integral by using the simplest method. Not all problems require integration by parts.

6.                 7.   (Hint:         is 8.

                        equivalent to

9.                 10.                 11.

12.                13.                 14.

15.                16.                 17.

18.                19.                 20.

21.                22.                 23.

24.                25.                 26.

27.                28.                 29.

30.                31.                 32.

33.                34.                 35.

36.                37.
240 3 · Techniques of Integration

Compute the definite integrals. Use a graphing utility to confirm your answers.

38.                                  39.            (Express the 40.

                                          answer in exact form.)

41.                                  42.                                             43.      (Express the

                                                                                          answer in exact form.)

44.            (Express              45.            (Express                         46.      (Express the

     the answer in exact form.)           the answer in exact form.)                      answer using five
                                                                                          significant digits.)

47. Evaluate

Derive the following formulas using the technique of integration by parts. Assume that n is a positive integer. These
formulas are called reduction formulas because the exponent in the x term has been reduced by one in each case. The
second integral is simpler than the original integral.

48.                                       49.

50.                                  51. Integrate

                                          using two methods:
                                           a. Using parts, letting

                                          b. Substitution, letting

State whether you would use integration by parts to evaluate the integral. If so, identify u and dv. If not, describe the
technique used to perform the integration without actually doing the problem.

52.                                  53.                                             54.

55.                                  56.                                             57.

Sketch the region bounded above by the curve, the x-axis, and         and find the area of the region. Provide the exact
form or round answers to the number of places indicated.

58.            (Approximate          59.
                                           (Approximate answer to
     answer to four decimal                five decimal places.)

     places.)

Find the volume generated by rotating the region bounded by the given curves about the specified line. Express the
answers in exact form or approximate to the number of decimal places indicated.

60.                                       61.                                             62. A particle moving along a
      about the y-axis (Express the                                           about
      answer in exact form.)                                                              straight line has a velocity
                                                         (Express the answer
                                                in exact form.)                           of                    after t sec.

                                                                                          How far does it travel in

                                                                                          the first 2 sec? (Assume the

                                                                                          units are in feet and

                                                                                          express the answer in

                                                                                          exact form.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.2 · Trigonometric Integrals 241

63. Find the area under the    64. Find the area between              65. Find the area of the region
                                                                            enclosed by the curve
graph of             from                     and the                                       and the x-axis
                                                                            for
               (Round the      x-axis from    to                                                    (Express

answer to two significant      (Express the answer in                       the answer in exact form.)

digits.)                       exact form.)

66. Find the volume of the     67. Find the volume of the             68. Find the volume of the
                                     solid generated by
solid generated by                   revolving the region             solid generated by
                                     bounded by the curve
revolving the region                                 and the x-axis,  revolving the region in the
                                                        about the
bounded by the curve                                                  first quadrant bounded by
                                     x-axis. (Express the answer
          the x-axis, and the        in exact form.)                               and the x-axis, from

vertical line       about                                                          to        about

the x-axis. (Express the                                              the y-axis. (Express the

answer in exact form.)                                                answer in exact form.)

3.2 Trigonometric Integrals

Learning Objectives

3.2.1 Solve integration problems involving products and powers of             and

3.2.2 Solve integration problems involving products and powers of             and

3.2.3 Use reduction formulas to solve trigonometric integrals.

In this section we look at how to integrate a variety of products of trigonometric functions. These integrals are called

trigonometric integrals. They are an important part of the integration technique called trigonometric substitution,

which is featured in Trigonometric Substitution. This technique allows us to convert algebraic expressions that we may

not be able to integrate into expressions involving trigonometric functions, which we may be able to integrate using the

techniques described in this section. In addition, these types of integrals appear frequently when we study polar,

cylindrical, and spherical coordinate systems later. Let's begin our study with products of  and

Integrating Products and Powers of sinx and cosx

A key idea behind the strategy used to integrate combinations of products and powers of      and              involves

rewriting these expressions as sums and differences of integrals of the form                 or                         After

rewriting these integrals, we evaluate them using u-substitution. Before describing the general process in detail, let's
take a look at the following examples.

EXAMPLE 3.8

Integrating                    In this case,              Thus,

Evaluate

     Solution
Use -substitution and let

3.5 Evaluate
242 3 · Techniques of Integration                         Where k is Odd                       and make the substitution
                                                                      rewrite
         EXAMPLE 3.9
       A Preliminary Example: Integrating
       Evaluate

            Solution
       To convert this integral to integrals of the form

                                   Thus,

     3.6 Evaluate

In the next example, we see the strategy that must be applied when there are only even powers of  and                 For

integrals of this type, the identities

and

are invaluable. These identities are sometimes known as power-reducing identities and they may be derived from the

double-angle identity                                     and the Pythagorean identity

EXAMPLE 3.10

Integrating an Even Power of
Evaluate

     Solution                                                                           Thus,
To evaluate this integral, let's use the trigonometric identity

     3.7 Evaluate

The general process for integrating products of powers of        and           is summarized in the following set of

guidelines.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.2 · Trigonometric Integrals 243

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integrating Products and Powers of sin x and cos x

To integrate                    use the following strategies:

1. If is odd, rewrite             and use the identity                         to rewrite  in terms of

Integrate using the substitution                      This substitution makes

2. If is odd, rewrite             and use the identity                         to rewrite  in terms of

Integrate using the substitution                      This substitution makes  (Note: If both and are

odd, either strategy 1 or strategy 2 may be used.)

3. If both and are even, use                                   and                         After applying these

formulas, simplify and reapply strategies 1 through 3 as appropriate.

  EXAMPLE 3.11                 where k is Odd
                       is odd, use strategy 1. Thus,
Integrating
Evaluate

     Solution
Since the power on

  EXAMPLE 3.12            where k and j are Even

Integrating            is even  and the power on               is even         we must use strategy 3. Thus,
Evaluate

     Solution
Since the power on
244 3 · Techniques of Integration

Since  has an even power, substitute

3.8 Evaluate

3.9 Evaluate

In some areas of physics, such as quantum mechanics, signal processing, and the computation of Fourier series, it is

often necessary to integrate products that include                        and      These integrals are evaluated

by applying trigonometric identities, as outlined in the following rule.

Rule: Integrating Products of Sines and Cosines of Different Angles

To integrate products involving                     and                   use the substitutions

                                                                                                 (3.3)

                                                                                                 (3.4)

                                                                                                 (3.5)

These formulas may be derived from the sum-of-angle formulas for sine and cosine.
  EXAMPLE 3.13

Evaluating                                          Thus,

Evaluate

     Solution
Apply the identity

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.2 · Trigonometric Integrals 245

    3.10 Evaluate

Integrating Products and Powers of tanx and secx

Before discussing the integration of products and powers of  and    it is useful to recall the integrals involving

    and       we have already learned:

1.

2.

3.

4.

For most integrals of products and powers of  and            we rewrite the expression we wish to integrate as the sum
                                                                                 As we see in the following example, we can
or difference of integrals of the form                 or

evaluate these new integrals by using u-substitution.

EXAMPLE 3.14

Evaluating

Evaluate

    Solution

Start by rewriting        as

    MEDIA
    You can read some interesting information at this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_intseccube) to learn about
    a common integral involving the secant.

    3.11 Evaluate

We now take a look at the various strategies for integrating products and powers of  and

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integrating                   use the following strategies:
To integrate
 1. If is even and        rewrite                          and use                   to rewrite  in terms of
246 3 · Techniques of Integration

          Let                      and

2. If is odd and                   rewrite                                 and use             to rewrite

             in terms of                Let    and                         (Note: If is even and is odd, then either

strategy 1 or strategy 2 may be used.)

3. If is odd where                      and    rewrite

                                                                           It may be necessary to repeat this

process on the                          term.

4. If is even and is odd, then use                             to express  in terms of  Use integration by parts

to integrate odd powers of

EXAMPLE 3.15

Integrating                                when is Even
                                   is even, rewrite
Evaluate

Solution

Since the power on                                             and use                  to rewrite the first          in

terms of     Thus,

  EXAMPLE 3.16                             when is Odd                                  Thus,
                                   is odd, begin by rewriting
Integrating
Evaluate

     Solution
Since the power on

Access for free at openstax.org
  EXAMPLE 3.17      where is Odd and                                                        3.2 · Trigonometric Integrals 247

Integrating                                                      Thus,
Evaluate

     Solution
Begin by rewriting

For the first integral, use the substitution  For the second integral, use the formula.

EXAMPLE 3.18

Integrating

Integrate

Solution

This integral requires integration by parts. To begin, let  and  These choices make

and          Thus,

We now have

Since the integral             has reappeared on the right-hand side, we can solve for   by adding it to both

sides. In doing so, we obtain

Dividing by 2, we arrive at

     3.12 Evaluate
248 3 · Techniques of Integration

Reduction Formulas

Evaluating  for values of where is odd requires integration by parts. In addition, we must also know the

value of    to evaluate                  The evaluation of  also requires being able to integrate

            To make the process easier, we can derive and apply the following power reduction formulas. These

rules allow us to replace the integral of a power of  or  with the integral of a lower power of  or

Rule: Reduction Formulas for        and

                                                                                                                (3.6)

                                                                                                                (3.7)

The first power reduction rule may be verified by applying integration by parts. The second may be verified by
following the strategy outlined for integrating odd powers of

  EXAMPLE 3.19

Revisiting
Apply a reduction formula to evaluate

     Solution
By applying the first reduction formula, we obtain

  EXAMPLE 3.20                      we have
Using a Reduction Formula
Evaluate

     Solution
Applying the reduction formula for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.2 · Trigonometric Integrals 249

      3.13 Apply the reduction formula to

        SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES

Fill in the blank to make a true statement.

69.   70.

Use an identity to reduce the power of the trigonometric function to a trigonometric function raised to the first power.

71.   72.

Evaluate each of the following integrals by u-substitution.

73.   74.                                                               75.

76.   77.                                                               78.

Compute the following integrals using the guidelines for integrating powers of trigonometric functions. Use a CAS to
check the solutions. (Note: Some of the problems may be done using techniques of integration learned previously.)

79.   80.                                                               81.

82.   83.                                                               84.

85.   86.                                                               87.

88.   89.                                                               90.

91.   92.                                                               93.

94.

For the following exercises, find a general formula for the integrals.

95.   96.

Use the double-angle formulas to evaluate the following integrals.

97.   98.                                                               99.

100.  101.                                                              102.

For the following exercises, evaluate the definite integrals. Express answers in exact form whenever possible.

103.  104.                                                              105.

106.  107.                                                              108.
250 3 · Techniques of Integration

109.           (Round                  110.                                   111.

        this answer to three                 113. Find the area of the region bounded by
        decimal places.)                             the graphs of the equations

112. Find the area of the region bounded
        by the graphs of the equations

114. A particle moves in a             115. Find the average value of
        straight line with the                 the function
        velocity function                                                  over
                                               the interval
        Find its position function
                    if

For the following exercises, solve the differential equations.

116.  The curve                        117.                                      118. Find the length of the
                                                                                         curve
      passes through point

119. Find the length of the            120. Find the volume
        curve                                  generated by revolving
                                               the curve
                                               about the x-axis,

For the following exercises, use this information: The inner product of two functions f and g over            is defined by
                                                 Two distinct functions f and g are said to be orthogonal if

121. Show that                         122. Evaluate                             123. Integrate
                                  are

        orthogonal over the
        interval

For each pair of integrals, determine which one is more difficult to evaluate. Explain your reasoning.

124.                               or  125.                     or

3.3 Trigonometric Substitution

Learning Objectives

      3.3.1 Solve integration problems involving the square root of a sum or difference of two squares.

In this section, we explore integrals containing expressions of the form                                and   where the

values of are positive. We have already encountered and evaluated integrals containing some expressions of this type,

but many still remain inaccessible. The technique of trigonometric substitution comes in very handy when evaluating

these integrals. This technique uses substitution to rewrite these integrals as trigonometric integrals.

Integrals Involving

Before developing a general strategy for integrals containing                    consider the integral        This

integral cannot be evaluated using any of the techniques we have discussed so far. However, if we make the substitution

      we have                          After substituting into the integral, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 251

                                                              

After simplifying, we have

                                                              

Letting                     we now have

                                                                

Assuming that      we have

                                                                  

At this point, we can evaluate the integral using the techniques developed for integrating powers and products of
trigonometric functions. Before completing this example, let's take a look at the general theory behind this idea.

To evaluate integrals involving                we make the substitution         and         To see that this actually

makes sense, consider the following argument: The domain of               is         Thus,            Consequently,

              Since the range of       over             is        there is a unique angle satisfying

so that            or equivalently, so that             If we substitute        into        we get

Since          on                 and                           We can see, from this discussion, that by making the

substitution       we are able to convert an integral involving a radical into an integral involving trigonometric

functions. After we evaluate the integral, we can convert the solution back to an expression involving To see how to do

this, let's begin by assuming that             In this case,             Since        we can draw the reference triangle

in Figure 3.4 to assist in expressing the values of           and the remaining trigonometric functions in terms of It

can be shown that this triangle actually produces the correct values of the trigonometric functions evaluated at for all

satisfying         It is useful to observe that the expression                  actually appears as the length of one side

of the triangle. Last, should appear by itself, we use

           Figure 3.4 A reference triangle can help express the trigonometric functions evaluated at in terms of
The essential part of this discussion is summarized in the following problem-solving strategy.
252 3 · Techniques of Integration

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integrating Expressions Involving
 1. It is a good idea to make sure the integral cannot be evaluated easily in another way. For example, although this

       method can be applied to integrals of the form                                    and             they

       can each be integrated directly either by formula or by a simple u-substitution.

2. Make the substitution                 and           Note: This substitution yields

3. Simplify the expression.

4. Evaluate the integral using techniques from the section on trigonometric integrals.

5. Use the reference triangle from Figure 3.4 to rewrite the result in terms of You may also need to use some

       trigonometric identities and the relationship

The following example demonstrates the application of this problem-solving strategy.

  EXAMPLE 3.21

Integrating an Expression Involving
                  

Evaluate

Solution

Begin by making the substitutions             and      Since  we can construct the reference

triangle shown in the following figure.

                                   Figure 3.5 A reference triangle can be constructed for Example 3.21.

Thus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 253

                                

                                

                                

                                

                                

                                

EXAMPLE 3.22

Integrating an Expression Involving
Evaluate

Solution

First make the substitutions         and  Since  we can construct the reference triangle

shown in the following figure.

              Figure 3.6 A reference triangle can be constructed for Example 3.22.

Thus,
254 3 · Techniques of Integration

                                   

In the next example, we see that we sometimes have a choice of methods.

EXAMPLE 3.23

Integrating an Expression Involving                  Two Ways
                  

Evaluate                           two ways: first by using the substitution  and then by using a trigonometric

substitution.

     Solution
Method 1

Let            and hence             Thus,           In this case, the integral becomes
                                                   
               

                                     

Method 2       In this case,         Using this substitution, we have
Let

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 255

                                          

                                          

                                          

3.14 Rewrite the integral                         using the appropriate trigonometric substitution (do not evaluate
            the integral).

Integrating Expressions Involving

For integrals containing             let's first consider the domain of this expression. Since  is defined for all

real values of we restrict our choice to those trigonometric functions that have a range of all real numbers. Thus, our

choice is restricted to selecting either    or    Either of these substitutions would actually work, but the

standard substitution is       or, equivalently,  With this substitution, we make the assumption that

               so that we also have               The procedure for using this substitution is outlined in the

following problem-solving strategy.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integrating Expressions Involving

1. Check to see whether the integral can be evaluated easily by using another method. In some cases, it is more

convenient to use an alternative method.

2. Substitute             and               This substitution yields

                                                                                        (Since  and

  over this interval,

3. Simplify the expression.

4. Evaluate the integral using techniques from the section on trigonometric integrals.

5. Use the reference triangle from Figure 3.7 to rewrite the result in terms of You may also need to use some

trigonometric identities and the relationship     (Note: The reference triangle is based on the

assumption that              however, the trigonometric ratios produced from the reference triangle are the same as
the ratios for which
256 3 · Techniques of Integration

Figure 3.7 A reference triangle can be constructed to express the trigonometric functions evaluated at in terms of

EXAMPLE 3.24

Integrating an Expression Involving

Evaluate      and check the solution by differentiating.

Solution

Begin with the substitution            and  Since         draw the reference triangle in the following

figure.

Thus,                              Figure 3.8 The reference triangle for Example 3.24.
                                    

To check the solution, differentiate:

Since         for all values of we could rewrite                                        if desired.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 257

EXAMPLE 3.25

Evaluating             Using a Different Substitution

Use the substitution   to evaluate

Solution

Because        has a range of all real numbers, and                    we may also use the substitution  to

evaluate this integral. In this case,            Consequently,

                                       

Analysis

This answer looks quite different from the answer obtained using the substitution  To see that the solutions are

the same, set          Thus,             From this equation we obtain:

After multiplying both sides by and rewriting, this equation becomes:
Use the quadratic equation to solve for

Simplifying, we have:

Since                  it must be the case that                 Thus,

Last, we obtain

After we make the final observation that, since
we see that the two different methods produced equivalent solutions.
258 3 · Techniques of Integration

EXAMPLE 3.26

Finding an Arc Length                   over the interval
Find the length of the curve

     Solution    the arc length is given by
Because

To evaluate this integral, use the substitution            and                       We also need to change the limits of
                                                             Thus,
integration. If      then               and if   then

                                                 by using a substitution involving
    3.15 Rewrite

Integrating Expressions Involving

The domain of the expression                    is           Thus, either            or      Hence,  or

    Since these intervals correspond to the range of        on the set                  it makes sense to use the

substitution         or, equivalently,               where          or               The corresponding substitution for

is                                 The procedure for using this substitution is outlined in the following problem-solving strategy.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Integrals Involving

1. Check to see whether the integral cannot be evaluated using another method. If so, we may wish to consider

    applying an alternative technique.

2. Substitute                      and                     This substitution yields

    For                                 and for

3. Simplify the expression.

4. Evaluate the integral using techniques from the section on trigonometric integrals.

5. Use the reference triangles from Figure 3.9 to rewrite the result in terms of You may also need to use some

    trigonometric identities and the relationship                   (Note: We need both reference triangles, since the

    values of some of the trigonometric ratios are different depending on whether        or

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 259

Figure 3.9 Use the appropriate reference triangle to express the trigonometric functions evaluated at in terms of

EXAMPLE 3.27

Finding the Area of a Region                      and the x-axis over the interval
Find the area of the region between the graph of

     Solution
First, sketch a rough graph of the region described in the problem, as shown in the following figure.

Figure 3.10 Calculating the area of the shaded region requires evaluating an integral with a trigonometric substitution.

We can see that the area is                       To evaluate this definite integral, substitute       and

              We must also change the limits of integration. If  then    and hence                          If

then          After making these substitutions and simplifying, we have
260 3 · Techniques of Integration

      3.16 Evaluate                Assume that

        SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES

Simplify the following expressions by writing each one using a single trigonometric function.

126.                               127.         128.

129.                               130.

Use the technique of completing the square to express each trinomial as the square of a binomial or the square of a
binomial plus a constant.

131.                               132.         133.

Integrate using the method of trigonometric substitution. Express the final answer in terms of the variable.

134.                               135.         136.

137.                               138.         139.

140.                               141.         142.

143.                               144.         145.

146.                               147.         148.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      3.3 · Trigonometric Substitution 261

149.                                  150.                                      151.

152.                                  153.

In the following exercises, use the substitutions                           or        Express the final answers in terms of the
variable x.

154.                                  155.                                      156.

157.                                  158.                                      159.

Use the technique of completing the square to evaluate the following integrals.

160.                                  161.                                      162.

163.                                  164.                                      165. Evaluate the integral

                                                                                      without using calculus:

166. Find the area enclosed by        167. Evaluate the integral                168. Evaluate the integral
        the ellipse                                              using two                                   using the

                                            different substitutions.                    substitution
                                                                                        Next, evaluate the same
                                            First, let           and                    integral using the
                                                                                        substitution
                                            evaluate using                              Show that the results are
                                                                                        equivalent.
                                            trigonometric
                                                                                171. State the method of
                                            substitution. Second, let                   integration you would use
                                                                                        to evaluate the integral
                                                        and use                                                   Why
                                                                                        did you choose this
                                            trigonometric                               method?

                                            substitution. Are the

                                            answers the same?

169. Evaluate the integral            170. State the method of
                           using the          integration you would use
                                              to evaluate the integral

      form     Next,                                             Why did

      evaluate the same                     you choose this method?
      integral using
      Are the results the same?

172. Evaluate                         173. Find the length of the arc           174. Find the surface area of the solid
                                              of the curve over the                     generated by revolving the
                                              specified interval:                       region bounded by the graphs of
                                                                   Round the
                                              answer to three decimal                   about the x-axis. (Round the
                                              places.                                   answer to three decimal places).
262 3 · Techniques of Integration

175. The region bounded by
        the graph of

      and the x-axis between

      and            is

      revolved about the x-axis.

      Find the volume of the

      solid that is generated.

Solve the initial-value problem for y as a function of x.

176.                                177.                     178. Find the area bounded by

179. An oil storage tank can be           180. During each cycle, the              181. Find the length of the
        described as the volume                   velocity v (in feet per
        generated by revolving the area           second) of a robotic             curve
        bounded by                                welding device is given by
                                                                       where t is  between  and

      about the x-axis. Find the          time in seconds. Find the
      volume of the tank (in cubic        expression for the
      meters).                            displacement s (in feet) as
                                          a function of t if
                                          when

3.4 Partial Fractions

Learning Objectives

      3.4.1 Integrate a rational function using the method of partial fractions.
      3.4.2 Recognize simple linear factors in a rational function.
      3.4.3 Recognize repeated linear factors in a rational function.
      3.4.4 Recognize quadratic factors in a rational function.

We have seen some techniques that allow us to integrate specific rational functions. For example, we know that

However, we do not yet have a technique that allows us to tackle arbitrary quotients of this type. Thus, it is not

immediately obvious how to go about evaluating               However, we know from material previously

developed that

In fact, by getting a common denominator, we see that
Consequently,

In this section, we examine the method of partial fraction decomposition, which allows us to decompose rational

functions into sums of simpler, more easily integrated rational functions. Using this method, we can rewrite an

expression such as:                as an expression such as

The key to the method of partial fraction decomposition is being able to anticipate the form that the decomposition of a
rational function will take. As we shall see, this form is both predictable and highly dependent on the factorization of the
denominator of the rational function. It is also extremely important to keep in mind that partial fraction decomposition

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          3.4 · Partial Fractions 263

can be applied to a rational function  only if                                In the case when

we must first perform long division to rewrite the quotient  in the form         where

                           We then do a partial fraction decomposition on     The following example, although not

requiring partial fraction decomposition, illustrates our approach to integrals of rational functions of the form

               where

  EXAMPLE 3.28        where
                                          we perform long division to obtain
Integrating
Evaluate

     Solution
Since

Thus,

    MEDIA
    Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_polylongdiv) for a review of long division of polynomials.

    3.17 Evaluate

To integrate          where                                  we must begin by factoring
                                                                    where each linear factor is distinct, then it is possible to
Nonrepeated Linear Factors

If     can be factored as

find constants             satisfying

The proof that such constants exist is beyond the scope of this course.
In this next example, we see how to use partial fractions to integrate a rational function of this type.

  EXAMPLE 3.29
Partial Fractions with Nonrepeated Linear Factors
Evaluate

     Solution                          we begin by factoring the denominator of                 We can see that
Since

                             Thus, there are constants       and satisfying
264 3 · Techniques of Integration

We must now find these constants. To do so, we begin by getting a common denominator on the right. Thus,

Now, we set the numerators equal to each other, obtaining                                                                            (3.8)
                                                                 and We refer to these as the method of equating
There are two different strategies for finding the coefficients
coefficients and the method of strategic substitution.

  Rule: Method of Equating Coefficients
  Rewrite Equation 3.8 in the form

Equating coefficients produces the system of equations

To solve this system, we first observe that                      Substituting this value into the first two equations
gives us the system

Multiplying the second equation by and adding the resulting equation to the first produces

which in turn implies that         Substituting this value into the equation  yields                 Thus, solving
these equations yields                  and

It is important to note that the system produced by this method is consistent if and only if we have set up the
decomposition correctly. If the system is inconsistent, there is an error in our decomposition.

Rule: Method of Strategic Substitution

The method of strategic substitution is based on the assumption that we have set up the decomposition correctly. If

the decomposition is set up correctly, then there must be values of      and that satisfy Equation 3.8 for all values

of That is, this equation must be true for any value of we care to substitute into it. Therefore, by choosing values

of carefully and substituting them into the equation, we may find        and easily. For example, if we substitute

the equation reduces to                             Solving for yields        Next, by substituting  the equation

reduces to                         or equivalently  Last, we substitute       into the equation and obtain

            Solving, we have

It is important to keep in mind that if we attempt to use this method with a decomposition that has not been set up
correctly, we are still able to find values for the constants, but these constants are meaningless. If we do opt to use
the method of strategic substitution, then it is a good idea to check the result by recombining the terms algebraically.

Now that we have the values of     and we rewrite the original integral:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.4 · Partial Fractions 265

Evaluating the integral gives us

In the next example, we integrate a rational function in which the degree of the numerator is not less than the degree of
the denominator.

  EXAMPLE 3.30

Dividing before Applying Partial Fractions
Evaluate

     Solution                               we must perform long division of polynomials. This results in
Since

Next, we perform partial fraction decomposition on              We have

Thus,

Solving for and using either method, we obtain             and

Rewriting the original integral, we have

Evaluating the integral produces

As we see in the next example, it may be possible to apply the technique of partial fraction decomposition to a
nonrational function. The trick is to convert the nonrational function to a rational function through a substitution.

  EXAMPLE 3.31

Applying Partial Fractions after a Substitution
Evaluate

     Solution           Consequently,                      After making these substitutions, we have
Let's begin by letting

Applying partial fraction decomposition to          gives
Thus,
266 3 · Techniques of Integration

3.18 Evaluate

Repeated Linear Factors

For some applications, we need to integrate rational expressions that have denominators with repeated linear

factors--that is, rational functions with at least one factor of the form       where is a positive integer greater

than or equal to If the denominator contains the repeated linear factor         then the decomposition must

contain

As we see in our next example, the basic technique used for solving for the coefficients is the same, but it requires more
algebra to determine the numerators of the partial fractions.

  EXAMPLE 3.32

Partial Fractions with Repeated Linear Factors
Evaluate

     Solution                           so we can proceed with the decomposition. Since                       is a
We have
repeated linear factor, include         in the decomposition. Thus,

After getting a common denominator and equating the numerators, we have

                                                                                                              (3.9)

We then use the method of equating coefficients to find the values of      and

Equating coefficients yields                               and                  Solving this system yields
          and

Alternatively, we can use the method of strategic substitution. In this case, substituting  and  into Equation

3.9 easily produces the values     and  At this point, it may seem that we have run out of good choices for

however, since we already have values for and we can substitute in these values and choose any value for not

previously used. The value         is a good option. In this case, we obtain the equation

                                   or, equivalently,

Now that we have the values for    and we rewrite the original integral and evaluate it:

       3.19 Set up the partial fraction decomposition for                       (Do not solve for the coefficients or
                    complete the integration.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           3.4 · Partial Fractions 267

The General Method

Now that we are beginning to get the idea of how the technique of partial fraction decomposition works, let's outline the
basic method in the following problem-solving strategy.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Partial Fraction Decomposition            use the following steps:
To decompose the rational function

1. Make sure that                                           If not, perform long division of polynomials.

2. Factor      into the product of linear and irreducible quadratic factors. An irreducible quadratic is a quadratic

that has no real zeros.

3. Assuming that                         the factors of           determine the form of the decomposition of

a. If          can be factored as                                   where each linear factor is distinct, then it is

             possible to find constants       satisfying

b. If          contains the repeated linear factor          then the decomposition must contain

c. For each irreducible quadratic factor                    that  contains, the decomposition must include

d. For each repeated irreducible quadratic factor                   the decomposition must include

e. After the appropriate decomposition is determined, solve for the constants.
f. Last, rewrite the integral in its decomposed form and evaluate it using previously developed techniques or

     integration formulas.

Simple Quadratic Factors

Now let's look at integrating a rational expression in which the denominator contains an irreducible quadratic factor.

Recall that the quadratic                is irreducible if        has no real zeros--that is, if

EXAMPLE 3.33

Rational Expressions with an Irreducible Quadratic Factor
Evaluate

     Solution              factor the denominator and proceed with partial fraction decomposition. Since
Since

               contains the irreducible quadratic factor          include  as part of the decomposition, along

with for the linear term Thus, the decomposition has the form

After getting a common denominator and equating the numerators, we obtain the equation

Solving for    and we get                and
268 3 · Techniques of Integration

       Thus,
       Substituting back into the integral, we obtain

Note: We may rewrite                                   if we wish to do so, since

  EXAMPLE 3.34
Partial Fractions with an Irreducible Quadratic Factor
Evaluate

Solution

We can start by factoring                               We see that the quadratic factor              is irreducible since

                           Using the decomposition described in the problem-solving strategy, we get

After obtaining a common denominator and equating the numerators, this becomes

Applying either method, we get

Rewriting             we have

We can see that                                               requires a bit more effort. Let's begin by completing the square on
                                          but          we see that

                 to obtain

By letting  and consequently

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.4 · Partial Fractions 269

Substituting back into the original integral and simplifying gives
                                  

Here again, we can drop the absolute value if we wish to do so, since  for all

EXAMPLE 3.35

Finding a Volume

Find the volume of the solid of revolution obtained by revolving the region enclosed by the graph of       and

the x-axis over the interval  about the y-axis.

     Solution
Let's begin by sketching the region to be revolved (see Figure 3.11). From the sketch, we see that the shell method is a
good choice for solving this problem.

Figure 3.11 We can use the shell method to find the volume of revolution obtained by revolving the region shown about
the y-axis.

The volume is given by

Since                         we can proceed with partial fraction decomposition. Note that                is a

repeated irreducible quadratic. Using the decomposition described in the problem-solving strategy, we get

Finding a common denominator and equating the numerators gives

Solving, we obtain            and                Substituting back into the integral, we have
270 3 · Techniques of Integration

      3.20 Set up the partial fraction decomposition for

        SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES

Express the rational function as a sum or difference of two simpler rational expressions.

182.                               183.                    184.

185.                               186.  (Hint: Use long   187.

                                         division first.)

188.                               189.                    190.

191.                               192.                    193.

194.                               195.

Use the method of partial fractions to evaluate each of the following integrals.

196.                               197.                    198.

199.                               200.                    201.

202.                               203.                    204.

205.                               206.

Evaluate the following integrals, which have irreducible quadratic factors.

207.                               208.                                      209.

210.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            3.4 · Partial Fractions 271

Use the method of partial fractions to evaluate the following integrals.

211.                              212.                                    213.                  (Hint:

                                                                                Use the rational root
                                                                                theorem.)

Use substitution to convert the integrals to integrals of rational functions. Then use partial fractions to evaluate the
integrals.

214.       (Give the 215.                                                 216.

      exact answer and the
      decimal equivalent.
      Round to five decimal
      places.)

217.                              218.                                    219.

220.                              221.                                    222.

223.                              224.                                    225.

226.                              227.

Use the given substitution to convert the integral to an integral of a rational function, then evaluate.

228.                              229.                                    230. Graph the curve

                                                                                over the interval
                                                                                Then, find the area of the
                                                                                region bounded by the
                                                                                curve, the x-axis, and the
                                                                                line

231. Find the volume of the       232. The velocity of a particle
        solid generated when the          moving along a line is a
        region bounded by                 function of time given by

      and  is                                               Find the

      revolved about the x-axis.          distance that the particle
                                          has traveled after
                                          sec.
272 3 · Techniques of Integration

Solve the initial-value problem for x as a function of t.

233.                                         234.

235.                                         236. Find the x-coordinate of

                                                   the centroid of the area

                                                   bounded by

237. Find the volume generated by revolving           (Round the answer to two            239. Evaluate the integral
        the area bounded by                           decimal places.)

                                                   238. Find the area bounded by

      about the y-axis.                                    (Round the answer to the
                                                           nearest hundredth.)

For the following problems, use the substitutions                                           and

240.                               241. Find the area under the               242. Given         derive

                                   curve                                      the formulas

                                   between                 and

                                   (Assume the dimensions and
                                   are in inches.)

243. Evaluate

3.5 Other Strategies for Integration

Learning Objectives

      3.5.1 Use a table of integrals to solve integration problems.
      3.5.2 Use a computer algebra system (CAS) to solve integration problems.

In addition to the techniques of integration we have already seen, several other tools are widely available to assist with
the process of integration. Among these tools are integration tables, which are readily available in many books,
including the appendices to this one. Also widely available are computer algebra systems (CAS), which are found on
calculators and in many campus computer labs, and are free online.

Tables of Integrals

Integration tables, if used in the right manner, can be a handy way either to evaluate or check an integral quickly. Keep in

mind that when using a table to check an answer, it is possible for two completely correct solutions to look very different.

For example, in Trigonometric Substitution, we found that, by using the substitution             we can arrive at

However, using                     we obtained a different solution--namely,

We later showed algebraically that the two solutions are equivalent. That is, we showed that
                                            In this case, the two antiderivatives that we found were actually equal. This need not be

the case. However, as long as the difference in the two antiderivatives is a constant, they are equivalent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.5 · Other Strategies for Integration 273

  EXAMPLE 3.36

Using a Formula from a Table to Evaluate an Integral
Use the table formula

to evaluate

Solution

If we look at integration tables, we see that several formulas contain expressions of the form  This expression

is actually similar to       where         and        Keep in mind that we must also have       Multiplying

the numerator and the denominator of the given integral by should help to put this integral in a useful form. Thus, we

now have

Substituting            and  produces                    From the integration table (#88 in Appendix A),

Thus,

Computer Algebra Systems

If available, a CAS is a faster alternative to a table for solving an integration problem. Many such systems are widely
available and are, in general, quite easy to use.

EXAMPLE 3.37

Using a Computer Algebra System to Evaluate an Integral

Use a computer algebra system to evaluate             Compare this result with                  a result we

might have obtained if we had used trigonometric substitution.

     Solution
Using Wolfram Alpha, we obtain

Notice that
274 3 · Techniques of Integration

Since these two antiderivatives differ by only a constant, the solutions are equivalent. We could have also demonstrated
that each of these antiderivatives is correct by differentiating them.

MEDIA
You can access an integral calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_intcalc) for more examples.

EXAMPLE 3.38

Using a CAS to Evaluate an Integral
                  

Evaluate                           using a CAS. Compare the result to       the result we might have obtained

using the technique for integrating odd powers of  discussed earlier in this chapter.

     Solution
Using Wolfram Alpha, we obtain

This looks quite different from                    To see that these antiderivatives are equivalent, we can make use of
a few trigonometric identities:

Thus, the two antiderivatives are identical.
We may also use a CAS to compare the graphs of the two functions, as shown in the following figure.

          Figure 3.12 The graphs of                                    and             are identical.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         3.5 · Other Strategies for Integration 275

      3.21 Use a CAS to evaluate

        SECTION 3.5 EXERCISES

Use a table of integrals to evaluate the following integrals.

244.      245.                                                 246.

247.      248.                                                 249.

250.      251.                                                 252.

253.      254.                                                 255.

256.      257.                                                 258.

259.      260.

Use a CAS to evaluate the following integrals. Tables can also be used to verify the answers.

261. [T]  262. [T]                                             263. [T]

264. [T]  265. [T]                                             266. [T]
                                                               269. [T]
267. [T]  268. [T]                                             272. [T]

270. [T]  271. [T]                                             275. [T]

Use a calculator or CAS to evaluate the following integrals.

273. [T]  274. [T]

276. [T]  277. [T]                                             278. [T]

Use tables to evaluate the integrals. You may need to complete the square or change variables to put the integral into a
form given in the table.

279.      280.                                                 281.

282.      283.                                                 284.
276 3 · Techniques of Integration

Use tables to perform the integration.

285.                                     286.                                      287.

288.                                     289. Find the area bounded by

                                               Use a table of integrals or a CAS.

290. The region bounded                  291. Use substitution and a               292. [T] Use an integral table
        between the curve                        table of integrals to find                and a calculator to find
                                                 the area of the surface                   the area of the surface
        and the x-axis is revolved               generated by revolving                    generated by revolving
        about the x-axis to generate             the curve                                 the curve
        a solid. Use a table of                                             about
        integrals to find the volume             the x-axis. (Round the                                                about
        of the solid generated.                  answer to two decimal
        (Round the answer to two                 places.)                                  the x-axis. (Round the
        decimal places.)                                                                   answer to two decimal
                                                                                           places.)

293. [T] Use a CAS or tables to          294. Find the length of the               295. Find the length of the
        find the area of the
        surface generated by                   curve       over                          curve     over
        revolving the curve

      about the x-axis. (Round
      the answer to two
      decimal places.)

296. Find the area of the                297. Find the average value of            298. Approximate the arc
        surface formed by                        the function                              length of the curve
        revolving the graph of                                                                               over the
                      over the interval          over the interval
                                                                                         interval  (Round
                about the x-axis.
                                                                                         the answer to three
                                                                                         decimal places.)

3.6 Numerical Integration

Learning Objectives

      3.6.1 Approximate the value of a definite integral by using the midpoint and trapezoidal rules.
      3.6.2 Determine the absolute and relative error in using a numerical integration technique.
      3.6.3 Estimate the absolute and relative error using an error-bound formula.
      3.6.4 Recognize when the midpoint and trapezoidal rules over- or underestimate the true value of an

               integral.
      3.6.5 Use Simpson's rule to approximate the value of a definite integral to a given accuracy.

The antiderivatives of many functions either cannot be expressed or cannot be expressed easily in closed form (that is, in
terms of known functions). Consequently, rather than evaluate definite integrals of these functions directly, we resort to
various techniques of numerical integration to approximate their values. In this section we explore several of these
techniques. In addition, we examine the process of estimating the error in using these techniques.

The Midpoint Rule

Earlier in this text we defined the definite integral of a function over an interval as the limit of Riemann sums. In general,

any Riemann sum of a function            over an interval  may be viewed as an estimate of                             Recall that a

Riemann sum of a function                over an interval  is obtained by selecting a partition

and a set

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.6 · Numerical Integration 277

The Riemann sum corresponding to the partition and the set is given by            where                             the

length of the ith subinterval.

The midpoint rule for estimating a definite integral uses a Riemann sum with subintervals of equal width and the
midpoints, of each subinterval in place of Formally, we state a theorem regarding the convergence of the
midpoint rule as follows.

Theorem 3.3

The Midpoint Rule

Assume that   is continuous on           Let n be a positive integer and      If  is divided into

subintervals, each of length and is the midpoint of the ith subinterval, set

                                                                                                   (3.10)

Then
           

As we can see in Figure 3.13, if         over  then                       corresponds to the sum of the areas of

rectangles approximating the area between the graph of  and the x-axis over       The graph shows the rectangles

corresponding to for a nonnegative function over a closed interval

Figure 3.13 The midpoint rule approximates the area between the graph of  and the x-axis by summing the areas of
rectangles with midpoints that are points on

EXAMPLE 3.39

Using the Midpoint Rule with             using four subintervals. Compare the result with the actual value of this
Use the midpoint rule to estimate        Therefore, the subintervals consist of
integral.

     Solution
Each subinterval has length

The midpoints of these subintervals are        Thus,
278 3 · Techniques of Integration

Since

we see that the midpoint rule produces an estimate that is somewhat close to the actual value of the definite integral.

    EXAMPLE 3.40

Using the Midpoint Rule with

Use to estimate the length of the curve           on

     Solution     on               is
The length of

Since          this integral becomes

If     is divided into six subintervals, then each subinterval has length  and the midpoints of the

subintervals are                       If we set

    3.22 Use the midpoint rule with      to estimate

The Trapezoidal Rule

We can also approximate the value of a definite integral by using trapezoids rather than rectangles. In Figure 3.14, the
area beneath the curve is approximated by trapezoids rather than by rectangles.

Figure 3.14 Trapezoids may be used to approximate the area under a curve, hence approximating the definite integral.

The trapezoidal rule for estimating definite integrals uses trapezoids rather than rectangles to approximate the area

under a curve. To gain insight into the final form of the rule, consider the trapezoids shown in Figure 3.14. We assume

that the length of each subinterval is given by First, recall that the area of a trapezoid with a height of h and bases of

length and is given by                            We see that the first trapezoid has a height and parallel bases of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.6 · Numerical Integration 279

length          and   Thus, the area of the first trapezoid in Figure 3.14 is

The areas of the remaining three trapezoids are

Consequently,

After taking out a common factor of      and combining like terms, we have

Generalizing, we formally state the following rule.

Theorem 3.4

The Trapezoidal Rule

Assume that          is continuous over  Let n be a positive integer and            Let  be divided into

subintervals, each of length with endpoints at                                 Set

                                                                                                                      (3.11)

Then,
              

Before continuing, let's make a few observations about the trapezoidal rule. First of all, it is useful to note that

That is, and approximate the integral using the left-hand and right-hand endpoints of each subinterval,
respectively. In addition, a careful examination of Figure 3.15 leads us to make the following observations about using
the trapezoidal rules and midpoint rules to estimate the definite integral of a nonnegative function. The trapezoidal rule
tends to overestimate the value of a definite integral systematically over intervals where the function is concave up and
to underestimate the value of a definite integral systematically over intervals where the function is concave down. On the
other hand, the midpoint rule tends to average out these errors somewhat by partially overestimating and partially
underestimating the value of the definite integral over these same types of intervals. This leads us to hypothesize that, in
general, the midpoint rule tends to be more accurate than the trapezoidal rule.

                     Figure 3.15 The trapezoidal rule tends to be less accurate than the midpoint rule.
280 3 · Techniques of Integration

  EXAMPLE 3.41                        using four subintervals.
Using the Trapezoidal Rule
Use the trapezoidal rule to estimate

Solution

The endpoints of the subintervals consist of elements of the set                       and         Thus,

3.23 Use the trapezoidal rule with    to estimate

Absolute and Relative Error

An important aspect of using these numerical approximation rules consists of calculating the error in using them for
estimating the value of a definite integral. We first need to define absolute error and relative error.

Definition

If is our estimate of some quantity having an actual value of then the absolute error is given by         The

relative error is the error as a percentage of the absolute value and is given by

  EXAMPLE 3.42                                                    using the midpoint rule, found in Example 3.39.
Calculating Error in the Midpoint Rule
Calculate the absolute and relative error in the estimate of

     Solution                            and our estimate from the example is          Thus, the absolute error is given
The calculated value is            The relative error is
by

  EXAMPLE 3.43                                                    using the trapezoidal rule, found in Example 3.41.
Calculating Error in the Trapezoidal Rule
Calculate the absolute and relative error in the estimate of

     Solution                                    and our estimate from the example is  Thus, the absolute error is given
The calculated value is            The relative error is given by
by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.6 · Numerical Integration 281

     3.24 In an earlier checkpoint, we estimated     to be using The actual value of this integral is

             Using         and                    calculate the absolute error and the relative error.

In the two previous examples, we were able to compare our estimate of an integral with the actual value of the integral;
however, we do not typically have this luxury. In general, if we are approximating an integral, we are doing so because
we cannot compute the exact value of the integral itself easily. Therefore, it is often helpful to be able to determine an
upper bound for the error in an approximation of an integral. The following theorem provides error bounds for the
midpoint and trapezoidal rules. The theorem is stated without proof.

Theorem 3.5

Error Bounds for the Midpoint and Trapezoidal Rules

Let    be a continuous function over         having a second derivative  over this interval. If is the

maximum value of     over             then the upper bounds for the error in using and to estimate

                are

                                                                                                        (3.12)

and
                                                                                                                                                             (3.13)

We can use these bounds to determine the value of necessary to guarantee that the error in an estimate is less than a
specified value.

EXAMPLE 3.44

Determining the Number of Intervals to Use

What value of should be used to guarantee that an estimate of            is accurate to within 0.01 if we use the

midpoint rule?

     Solution                              the maximum value of  over    for  Since
We begin by determining the value of

                       we have

Thus,

From the error-bound Equation 3.12, we have

Now we solve the following inequality for
282 3 · Techniques of Integration

Thus,                              Since must be an integer satisfying this inequality, a choice of  would guarantee that

Analysis

We might have been tempted to round  down and choose  but this would be incorrect because we must have

an integer greater than or equal to  We need to keep in mind that the error estimates provide an upper bound only

for the error. The actual estimate may, in fact, be a much better approximation than is indicated by the error bound.

3.25 Use Equation 3.13 to find an upper bound for the error in using to estimate

Simpson's Rule

With the midpoint rule, we estimated areas of regions under curves by using rectangles. In a sense, we approximated
the curve with piecewise constant functions. With the trapezoidal rule, we approximated the curve by using piecewise
linear functions. What if we were, instead, to approximate a curve using piecewise quadratic functions? With Simpson's
rule, we do just this. We partition the interval into an even number of subintervals, each of equal width. Over the first

pair of subintervals we approximate  with             where                                          is the quadratic

function passing through             and              (Figure 3.16). Over the next pair of subintervals we
approximate
                                   with the integral of another quadratic function passing through                     and

          This process is continued with each successive pair of subintervals.

     Figure 3.16 With Simpson's rule, we approximate a definite integral by integrating a piecewise quadratic function.

To understand the formula that we obtain for Simpson's rule, we begin by deriving a formula for this approximation over
the first two subintervals. As we go through the derivation, we need to keep in mind the following relationships:

          where is the length of a subinterval.

Thus,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.6 · Numerical Integration 283

If we approximate  using the same method, we see that we have

Combining these two approximations, we get

The pattern continues as we add pairs of subintervals to our approximation. The general rule may be stated as follows.

Theorem 3.6

Simpson's Rule

Assume that        is continuous over  Let n be a positive even integer and  Let  be divided into

subintervals, each of length with endpoints at    Set

                                                                                  (3.14)

Then,

                                                

Just as the trapezoidal rule is the average of the left-hand and right-hand rules for estimating definite integrals,
Simpson's rule may be obtained from the midpoint and trapezoidal rules by using a weighted average. It can be shown
that

It is also possible to put a bound on the error when using Simpson's rule to approximate a definite integral. The bound in
the error is given by the following rule:
284 3 · Techniques of Integration

Rule: Error Bound for Simpson's Rule

Let       be a continuous function over        having a fourth derivative,  over this interval. If      is the
                                                                                                                    is
maximum value of                   over        then the upper bound for the error in using to estimate
                                                                                                                  (3.15)
given by

  EXAMPLE 3.45                           Estimate a bound for the error in
Applying Simpson's Rule 1
Use to approximate

     Solution

Since     is divided into two intervals, each subinterval has length        The endpoints of these subintervals

are            If we set                 then

                                               Since                        and consequently            we see that

This bound indicates that the value obtained through Simpson's rule is exact. A quick check will verify that, in fact,

EXAMPLE 3.46

Applying Simpson's Rule 2                      over
Use to estimate the length of the curve         If we divide

     Solution

The length of             over           is                                 into six subintervals, then each subinterval has
                                                                                                  Setting
length                    and the endpoints of the subintervals are

After substituting, we have

     3.26 Use to estimate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.6 · Numerical Integration 285

        SECTION 3.6 EXERCISES

Approximate the following integrals using either the midpoint rule, trapezoidal rule, or Simpson's rule as indicated.
(Round answers to three decimal places.)

299.            trapezoidal rule; 300.                                    301.
                                                                                  trapezoidal rule;
                                        trapezoidal rule;

302.            midpoint rule; 303.                                       304. Use the midpoint rule
                                                                                  with eight subdivisions to
                                        midpoint rule;
                                                                                  estimate

305. Use the trapezoidal rule      306. Find the exact value of
        with four subdivisions to
                                                          Find the error
        estimate
                                           of approximation
                                           between the exact value
                                           and the value calculated
                                           using the trapezoidal rule
                                           with four subdivisions.
                                           Draw a graph to illustrate.

Approximate the integral to three decimal places using the indicated rule.

307.                               308.                                   309.
        trapezoidal rule;                  trapezoidal rule;                      trapezoidal rule;

310.            trapezoidal        311.                 Simpson's         312.
        rule;                              rule;                                  trapezoidal rule;

313.                               314.                                   315.           Simpson's
        Simpson's rule;                    trapezoidal rule;                      rule;

316. Evaluate                      317. Approximate                       318. Approximate
                                           using the midpoint rule                using the trapezoidal rule
      exactly and show that the            with four subdivisions to              with eight subdivisions to
      result is Then, find                 four decimal places.                   four decimal places.
      the approximate value of
      the integral using the       320. Use the trapezoidal rule          321. Using Simpson's rule with
      trapezoidal rule with                with four subdivisions to              four subdivisions, find
                                           estimate
              subdivisions. Use            Compare this value with
      the result to approximate            the exact value and find
      the value of                         the error estimate.

319. Use the trapezoidal rule
        with four subdivisions to

      estimate              to

      four decimal places.
286 3 · Techniques of Integration

322. Show that the exact value            323. Given                                 324. Find an upper bound for
                                                                                             the error in estimating
        of
                                              use the trapezoidal rule                                     using the
        Find the absolute error if            with 16 subdivisions to
        you approximate the                   approximate the integral               trapezoidal rule with six
        integral using the                    and find the absolute                  steps.
        midpoint rule with 16                 error.
        subdivisions.
                                          326. Find an upper bound for               327. Find an upper bound for
325. Find an upper bound for                      the error in estimating                    the error in estimating
        the error in estimating
                                                      using                          using
                                using
                                              Simpson's rule with                    Simpson's rule with
        the trapezoidal rule with                       steps.                                 steps.
        seven subdivisions.
                                          329. Estimate the minimum                  330. Determine a value of n
328. Find an upper bound for                      number of subintervals                     such that the trapezoidal
        the error in estimating                   needed to approximate                      rule will approximate
                                using             the integral
                                                                                                                     with an
        Simpson's rule with four                                            with an
        steps.                                                                               error of no more than
                                                  error magnitude of less                    0.01.
331. Estimate the minimum                         than 0.0001 using the
        number of subintervals                    trapezoidal rule.
        needed to approximate
        the integral                      332. Estimate the minimum                  333. Use Simpson's rule with
                                                  number of subintervals                     four subdivisions to
                                    with          needed to approximate                      approximate the area
                                                  the integral                               under the probability
        an error of magnitude                                                                density function
        less than 0.0001 using the                                        with an
        trapezoidal rule.                                                                                           from
                                                  error magnitude of less
334. Use Simpson's rule with                      than 0.0001 using the                               to
                  to approximate (to              trapezoidal rule.

        three decimal places) the         335. The length of one arch of the
        area of the region
        bounded by the graphs of              curve                is given by

                           and                Estimate L using the trapezoidal
                                              rule with

336. The length of the ellipse                337. Estimate the area of the          338. Estimate the area of the
                                                      surface generated by                   surface generated by
        is given by                                   revolving the curve                    revolving the curve
                                                                                                                         about
        where e is the eccentricity of the            about the x-axis. Use the              the x-axis. Use Simpson's
        ellipse. Use Simpson's rule with              trapezoidal rule with six              rule with
                                                      subdivisions.
                subdivisions to estimate the
        length of the ellipse when
        and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             3.7 · Improper Integrals 287

339. The growth rate of a                 340. [T] Use a calculator to             341. [T] Given
        certain tree (in feet) is                 approximate
        given by                                                                           approximate the value of
                                                                        using the          this integral using the
                                 where t                                                   trapezoidal rule with 16
                                                  midpoint rule with 25                    subdivisions and
        is time in years. Estimate                subdivisions. Compute                    determine the absolute
        the growth of the tree                    the relative error of                    error.
        through the end of the                    approximation.
        second year by using
        Simpson's rule, using two         343. The table represents the            344. Choose the correct
        subintervals. (Round the                                                           answer. When Simpson's
        answer to the nearest                   coordinates  that                          rule is used to
        hundredth.)                                                                        approximate the definite
                                                  give the boundary of a lot.              integral, it is necessary
342. Given that we know the                       The units of measurement                 that the number of
        Fundamental Theorem of                    are meters. Use the                      partitions be____
        Calculus, why would we                    trapezoidal rule to                       a. an even number
        want to develop                           estimate the number of                    b. odd number
        numerical methods for                     square meters of land                     c. either an even or an
        definite integrals?                       that is in this lot.                           odd number
                                                                                            d. a multiple of 4
                                          x  y    x  y

                                          0  125 600 95

                                          100 125 700 88

                                          200 120 800 75

                                          300 112 900 35

                                          400 90 1000 0

                                          500 90

345. The "Simpson" sum is                 346. The error formula for
        based on the area under                   Simpson's rule depends
        a ____.                                   on___.
                                                   a.
                                                   b.
                                                   c.
                                                   d. the number of steps

3.7 Improper Integrals

Learning Objectives

      3.7.1 Evaluate an integral over an infinite interval.
      3.7.2 Evaluate an integral over a closed interval with an infinite discontinuity within the interval.
      3.7.3 Use the comparison theorem to determine whether a definite integral is convergent.

Is the area between the graph of          and the x-axis over the interval  finite or infinite? If this same region

is revolved about the x-axis, is the volume finite or infinite? Surprisingly, the area of the region described is infinite, but
the volume of the solid obtained by revolving this region about the x-axis is finite.
288 3 · Techniques of Integration

In this section, we define integrals over an infinite interval as well as integrals of functions containing a discontinuity on
the interval. Integrals of these types are called improper integrals. We examine several techniques for evaluating
improper integrals, all of which involve taking limits.

Integrating over an Infinite Interval                                                          We can integrate  for any value of

                                                                                     
How should we go about defining an integral of the type

so it is reasonable to look at the behavior of this integral as we substitute larger values of Figure 3.17 shows that

            may be interpreted as area for various values of In other words, we may define an improper integral as a

limit, taken as one of the limits of integration increases or decreases without bound.

Figure 3.17 To integrate a function over an infinite interval, we consider the limit of the integral as the upper limit
increases without bound.

Definition

1. Let      be continuous over an interval of the form          Then
                                                           
                                                                                                                 (3.16)

provided this limit exists.

2. Let      be continuous over an interval of the form                                   Then

                                                                                                                 (3.17)

                                                                                       

provided this limit exists.

In each case, if the limit exists, then the improper integral is said to converge. If the limit does not exist, then

the improper integral is said to diverge.

3. Let      be continuous over   Then

                                                                                                                 (3.18)

                                                             

provided that                                      both converge. If either one or both of these two integrals
                                   and
diverge, then
                                   diverges. (It can be shown that, in fact,

                                               
                                                               for any value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.7 · Improper Integrals 289

In our first example, we return to the question we posed at the start of this section: Is the area between the graph of

           and the -axis over the interval  finite or infinite?

EXAMPLE 3.47

Finding an Area                                  and the x-axis over the interval        is finite or infinite.
Determine whether the area between the graph of

     Solution
We first do a quick sketch of the region in question, as shown in the following graph.

              Figure 3.18 We can find the area between the curve                             and the x-axis on an infinite interval.
                                                                                  Then we have

We can see that the area of this region is given by

                                                

                                                                                        and the x-axis over the

                                                 

                                                 

                                     
Since the improper integral diverges to  the area of the region is infinite.

  EXAMPLE 3.48
Finding a Volume
Find the volume of the solid obtained by revolving the region bounded by the graph of

interval  about the -axis.

     Solution
The solid is shown in Figure 3.19. Using the disk method, we see that the volume V is
290 3 · Techniques of Integration

                                                                                            

                Figure 3.19 The solid of revolution can be generated by rotating an infinite area about the x-axis.
Then we have

                                                             

                                 

                                 
                                 

The improper integral converges to Therefore, the volume of the solid of revolution is

In conclusion, although the area of the region between the x-axis and the graph of            over the interval 

is infinite, the volume of the solid generated by revolving this region about the x-axis is finite. The solid generated is
known as Gabriel's Horn.

MEDIA

Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_GabrielsHorn) to read more about Gabriel's Horn.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             3.7 · Improper Integrals 291

  EXAMPLE 3.49
Chapter Opener: Traffic Accidents in a City

                  Figure 3.20 (credit: modification of work by David McKelvey, Flickr)

In the chapter opener, we stated the following problem: Suppose that at a busy intersection, traffic accidents occur at an
average rate of one every three months. After residents complained, changes were made to the traffic lights at the
intersection. It has now been eight months since the changes were made and there have been no accidents. Were the
changes effective or is the 8-month interval without an accident a result of chance?

Probability theory tells us that if the average time between events is                 the probability that  the time between events,
is between and is given by

Thus, if accidents are occurring at a rate of one every 3 months, then the probability that                  the time between accidents,
is between and is given by

To answer the question, we must compute      
                                                             and decide whether it is likely that 8 months

could have passed without an accident if there had been no improvement in the traffic situation.

     Solution
We need to calculate the probability as an improper integral:

                                                                                     

                                                           
                                                           
                                                           

The value         represents the probability of no accidents in 8 months under the initial conditions. Since this

value is very, very small, it is reasonable to conclude the changes were effective.

EXAMPLE 3.50

Evaluating an Improper Integral over an Infinite Interval

Evaluate          State whether the improper integral converges or diverges.
                
292 3 · Techniques of Integration

     Solution                        as a limit using Equation 3.17 from the definition. Thus,
Begin by rewriting                              

                              

                              

                                                           
                                                             

The improper integral converges to

EXAMPLE 3.51

Evaluating an Improper Integral on  

                                State whether the improper integral converges or diverges.
Evaluate

                

     Solution
Start by splitting up the integral:

                                                                             
                                                                   diverges. Compute each integral separately. For the
                                                               

If either                                                      
                    or               diverges, then

first integral,                                              

                                   

                                   
                                   

                                                                                            

                                                                                            

                                                                                                

The first improper integral converges. For the second integral,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.7 · Improper Integrals 293

                
                                       

                                                                            diverges as well.
Thus,
                                               

                                               

                                      

                                                                          
                diverges. Since this integral diverges,

                                                                        

                                     State whether the improper integral converges or diverges.
3.27 Evaluate

Integrating a Discontinuous Integrand

Now let's examine integrals of functions containing an infinite discontinuity in the interval over which the integration

occurs. Consider an integral of the form         where                      is continuous over  and discontinuous at Since

the function    is continuous over        for all values of satisfying      the integral         is defined for all

such values of Thus, it makes sense to consider the values of               as approaches for    That is, we

define                               provided this limit exists. Figure 3.21 illustrates         as areas of regions
for values of approaching

Figure 3.21 As t approaches b from the left, the value of the area from a to t approaches the area from a to b.

We use a similar approach to define              where  is continuous over                      and discontinuous at We now
proceed with a formal definition.

Definition

1. Let          be continuous over        Then,
294 3 · Techniques of Integration

2. Let          be continuous over      Then,                                                         (3.19)
                                                                                                      (3.20)

In each case, if the limit exists, then the improper integral is said to converge. If the limit does not exist, then the

improper integral is said to diverge.

3. If          is continuous over       except at a point in  then

                                                                                                      (3.21)

provided both                      and         converge. If either of these integrals diverges, then

diverges.

The following examples demonstrate the application of this definition.

EXAMPLE 3.52

Integrating a Discontinuous Integrand

Evaluate                           if possible. State whether the integral converges or diverges.

     Solution        is continuous over        and discontinuous at 4. Using Equation 3.19 from the definition,
The function    as a limit:

rewrite

The improper integral converges.

EXAMPLE 3.53

Integrating a Discontinuous Integrand

Evaluate        State whether the integral converges or diverges.

     Solution   is continuous over      and is discontinuous at zero, we can rewrite the integral in limit form using
Since
Equation 3.20:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    3.7 · Improper Integrals 295

                                                                            

The improper integral converges.

EXAMPLE 3.54

Integrating a Discontinuous Integrand

Evaluate       State whether the improper integral converges or diverges.

     Solution  is discontinuous at zero, using Equation 3.21, we can write
Since

If either of the two integrals diverges, then the original integral diverges. Begin with

Therefore,            diverges. Since          diverges,       diverges.

3.28 Evaluate                     State whether the integral converges or diverges.

A Comparison Theorem

It is not always easy or even possible to evaluate an improper integral directly; however, by comparing it with another

carefully chosen integral, it may be possible to determine its convergence or divergence. To see this, consider two

continuous functions  and         satisfying              for  (Figure 3.22). In this case, we may view integrals

of these functions over intervals of the form  as areas, so we have the relationship
296 3 · Techniques of Integration

               Figure 3.22 If                           for    then for

Thus, if

                                                

                                                                                        

                                                                        

then

                                          as well. That is, if the area of the region between the graph of   and the

x-axis over                                                                                                  is
infinite too.
                is infinite, then the area of the region between the graph of and the x-axis over           increases as

On the other hand, if

                                                for some real number then
                       



                                             must converge to some value less than or equal to since
                        

increases and                          for all

If the area of the region between the graph of          and the x-axis over   is finite, then the area of the region

between the graph of               and the x-axis over   is also finite.

These conclusions are summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 3.7

A Comparison Theorem

Let       and  be continuous over                Assume that                 for

                                                         then                                         
i. If
                                                                             
                                     
                                                        where is a real number, then
             
ii. If

                                     

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.7 · Improper Integrals 297

                                                     for some real number
                                      

  EXAMPLE 3.55                                       converges.

Applying the Comparison Theorem
                                                 

Use a comparison to show that

     Solution
We can see that

                                                                                                    first rewrite it as a limit:
so if             converges, then so does                          To evaluate

                                                         

                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   

                                                   
Since             converges, so does

  EXAMPLE 3.56                                                     diverges for all

Applying the Comparison Theorem
                                                                 

Use the comparison theorem to show that

     Solution     over                                                                                                       
For
diverges for all                         In Example 3.47, we showed that                             Therefore,

                                                                   diverges.
3.29 Use a comparison to show that

STUDENT PROJECT

Laplace Transforms
In the last few chapters, we have looked at several ways to use integration for solving real-world problems. For this
298 3 · Techniques of Integration

next project, we are going to explore a more advanced application of integration: integral transforms. Specifically, we
describe the Laplace transform and some of its properties. The Laplace transform is used in engineering and physics
to simplify the computations needed to solve some problems. It takes functions expressed in terms of time and
transforms them to functions expressed in terms of frequency. It turns out that, in many cases, the computations
needed to solve problems in the frequency domain are much simpler than those required in the time domain.

The Laplace transform is defined in terms of an integral as

                                                                                        

Note that the input to a Laplace transform is a function of time,    and the output is a function of frequency,

Although many real-world examples require the use of complex numbers (involving the imaginary number

in this project we limit ourselves to functions of real numbers.

Let's start with a simple example. Here we calculate the Laplace transform of         . We have
                                                                                  

This is an improper integral, so we express it in terms of a limit, which gives
                                                                     
                                                                                          

Now we use integration by parts to evaluate the integral. Note that we are integrating with respect to t, so we treat
the variable s as a constant. We have

Then we obtain                                
                                         

                                              

                                              

                                              

                                                                                    

1. Calculate the Laplace transform of

2. Calculate the Laplace transform of

3. Calculate the Laplace transform of         (Note, you will have to integrate by parts twice.)

Laplace transforms are often used to solve differential equations. Differential equations are not covered in detail

until later in this book; but, for now, let's look at the relationship between the Laplace transform of a function

and the Laplace transform of its derivative.

Let's start with the definition of the Laplace transform. We have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.7 · Improper Integrals 299

                                                             
                                                                                      

4. Use integration by parts to evaluate                        (Let                     and
                                                           

      After integrating by parts and evaluating the limit, you should see that

      Then,

      Thus, differentiation in the time domain simplifies to multiplication by s in the frequency domain.
      The final thing we look at in this project is how the Laplace transforms of and its antiderivative are related.

      Let     Then,

                                                             

                                                                     

5. Use integration by parts to evaluate                        (Let                     and  Note, by the way, that we
                                                           

     have defined
     As you might expect, you should see that

      Integration in the time domain simplifies to division by s in the frequency domain.

      SECTION 3.7 EXERCISES

Evaluate the following integrals. If the integral is not convergent, answer "divergent."

                                          

347.                                348.                             349.

                                                                                 
350.                                351.                             352.

                                                                                

353. Without integrating,           354. Without integrating,
        determine whether the               determine whether the
                                                           
        integral                            integral

        converges or diverges by            converges or diverges.
        comparing the function

                              with
300 3 · Techniques of Integration

Determine whether the improper integrals converge or diverge. If possible, determine the value of the integrals that
converge.

                                         

355.                               356.                               357.

358.                                                                  360.
                                   359.                                           
361.
                                                                      363.
                                               
364.                               362.                               366.
           
                                   365.

367.                               368.                               369.

      

370.                               371.

Determine the convergence of each of the following integrals by comparison with the given integral. If the integral
converges, find the number to which it converges.

                  compare                            compare
372.                               373.

                                                   
      with                               with

Evaluate the integrals. If the integral diverges, answer "diverges."

      

374.                               375.                               376.

377.                               378.                               379.
                                              
380.                                                                              
                                   381.                               382.
                                               
383.
                                   384.

Evaluate the improper integrals. Each of these integrals has an infinite discontinuity either at an endpoint or at an
interior point of the interval.

385.                               386.                               387.

388.                               389.                               390.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      3.7 · Improper Integrals 301

391. Evaluate                       392. Evaluate                            393. Evaluate
                                                                                         
                                            (Express the answer in
      (Be careful!) (Express your           exact form.)
      answer using three
      decimal places.)

394. Find the area of the           395. Find the area of the                396. Find the area under the
                                                                                     curve
      region in the first                 region bounded by the
                                                                                     bounded on the left by
      quadrant between the                curve   the x-axis,

      curve      and the                  and on the left by

      x-axis.

397. Find the area under            398. Find the volume of the              399. Find the volume of the
                      in the first
                                          solid generated by                       solid generated by

      quadrant.                           revolving about the x-axis               revolving about the y-axis

                                          the region under the                     the region under the

                                          curve   from                             curve             in the

                                          to                                       first quadrant.

400. Find the volume of the
        solid generated by
        revolving about the x-axis
        the area under the curve
                      in the first
        quadrant.

                                                                                                                                      (see the

The Laplace transform of a continuous function over the interval  is defined by

Student Project). This definition is used to solve some important initial-value problems in differential equations, as
discussed later. The domain of F is the set of all real numbers s such that the improper integral converges. Find the
Laplace transform F of each of the following functions and give the domain of F.

401.                                402.                                     403.

404.                                405. Use the formula for arc

                                          length to show that the

                                          circumference of the

                                          circle              is

                                                                                                       

A non-negative function is a probability density function if it satisfies the following definition:                                   The

probability that a random variable x lies between a and b is given by

406. Show that                             407. Find the probability that x
                                    is is between 0 and 0.3. (Use
        a probability density
        function.                                  the function defined in
                                                   the preceding problem.)
                                                   Use four-place decimal
                                                   accuracy.
302 3 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review                                                               then the absolute error is given by

Key Terms

absolute error if is an estimate of some quantity having an actual value of

computer algebra system (CAS) technology used to perform many mathematical tasks, including integration

improper integral an integral over an infinite interval or an integral of a function containing an infinite discontinuity

on the interval; an improper integral is defined in terms of a limit. The improper integral converges if this limit is a

finite real number; otherwise, the improper integral diverges

integration by parts a technique of integration that allows the exchange of one integral for another using the formula

                        

integration table a table that lists integration formulas                    where is the midpoint of the ith
midpoint rule a rule that uses a Riemann sum of the form

    subinterval to approximate

numerical integration the variety of numerical methods used to estimate the value of a definite integral, including the
    midpoint rule, trapezoidal rule, and Simpson's rule

partial fraction decomposition a technique used to break down a rational function into the sum of simple rational
    functions

power reduction formula a rule that allows an integral of a power of a trigonometric function to be exchanged for an
    integral involving a lower power

relative error error as a percentage of the absolute value, given by

Simpson's rule a rule that approximates           using the integrals of a piecewise quadratic function. The

approximation to                     is given by

trapezoidal rule a rule that approximates         using trapezoids

trigonometric integral an integral involving powers and products of trigonometric functions
trigonometric substitution an integration technique that converts an algebraic integral containing expressions of the

form                             or        into a trigonometric integral

Key Equations

Integration by parts formula

  Integration by parts for definite integrals     and          use the substitutions.
To integrate products involving

  Sine Products
  Sine and Cosine Products
  Cosine Products
  Power Reduction Formula

  Power Reduction Formula

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           3 · Chapter Review 303

Midpoint
rule

Trapezoidal
rule

Simpson's
rule

Error
bound for
midpoint
rule

Error
bound for
trapezoidal
rule

Error
bound for
Simpson's
rule

                                       

                                                               

Improper integrals  

                                                                 

                               

Key Concepts

3.1 Integration by Parts

  · The integration-by-parts formula allows the exchange of one integral for another, possibly easier, integral.
  · Integration by parts applies to both definite and indefinite integrals.

3.2 Trigonometric Integrals

  · Integrals of trigonometric functions can be evaluated by the use of various strategies. These strategies include
       1. Applying trigonometric identities to rewrite the integral so that it may be evaluated by u-substitution
       2. Using integration by parts
       3. Applying trigonometric identities to rewrite products of sines and cosines with different arguments as the sum
             of individual sine and cosine functions
       4. Applying reduction formulas

3.3 Trigonometric Substitution

· For integrals involving      use the substitution                   and
· For integrals involving
· For integrals involving      use the substitution                   and

                               substitute                        and

3.4 Partial Fractions

· Partial fraction decomposition is a technique used to break down a rational function into a sum of simple rational
304 3 · Chapter Review

      functions that can be integrated using previously learned techniques.
  · When applying partial fraction decomposition, we must make sure that the degree of the numerator is less than the

      degree of the denominator. If not, we need to perform long division before attempting partial fraction
      decomposition.
  · The form the decomposition takes depends on the type of factors in the denominator. The types of factors include
      nonrepeated linear factors, repeated linear factors, nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factors, and repeated
      irreducible quadratic factors.

3.5 Other Strategies for Integration

  · An integration table may be used to evaluate indefinite integrals.
  · A CAS (or computer algebra system) may be used to evaluate indefinite integrals.
  · It may require some effort to reconcile equivalent solutions obtained using different methods.

3.6 Numerical Integration

  · We can use numerical integration to estimate the values of definite integrals when a closed form of the integral is
      difficult to find or when an approximate value only of the definite integral is needed.

  · The most commonly used techniques for numerical integration are the midpoint rule, trapezoidal rule, and
      Simpson's rule.

  · The midpoint rule approximates the definite integral using rectangular regions whereas the trapezoidal rule
      approximates the definite integral using trapezoidal approximations.

  · Simpson's rule approximates the definite integral by first approximating the original function using piecewise
      quadratic functions.

3.7 Improper Integrals

  · Integrals of functions over infinite intervals are defined in terms of limits.
  · Integrals of functions over an interval for which the function has a discontinuity at an endpoint may be defined in

      terms of limits.
  · The convergence or divergence of an improper integral may be determined by comparing it with the value of an

      improper integral for which the convergence or divergence is known.

Review Exercises

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false. Justify your answer with a proof or a
counterexample.

408.  cannot be                     409.  cannot be                 410. In numerical integration,
                                                                            increasing the number of
      integrated by parts.                integrated using partial          points decreases the
                                          fractions.                        error.

411. Integration by parts can
        always yield the integral.

For the following exercises, evaluate the integral using the specified method.

412.                    using       413.                   using    414.        using

      integration by parts                  trigonometric                       integration by parts
                                            substitution

415.                                416.                   using    417.
        using partial fractions
                                            trigonometric                   using a table of integrals
                                            substitution                    or a CAS

For the following exercises, integrate using whatever method you choose.

418.                                419.                            420.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      3 · Chapter Review 305

421.                                422.

For the following exercises, approximate the integrals using the midpoint rule, trapezoidal rule, and Simpson's rule using
four subintervals, rounding to three decimals.

423. [T]                            424. [T]                       425. [T]

For the following exercises, evaluate the integrals, if possible.

                for what                        
426.                                427.

      values of does this
      integral converge or
      diverge?

                                                                                                           
For the following exercises, consider the gamma function given by

428. Show that                      429. Extend to show that                 430. [T] Use the graph to

                                          assuming is a positive integer.                                    estimate the velocity

                                          The fastest car in the world, the                                  every 20 sec and fit to a

                                          Bugati Veyron, can reach a top speed graph of the form

                                          of 408 km/h. The graph represents its

                                          velocity.                                                          (Hint: Consider the time

                                                                                                             units.)

431. [T] Using your function
        from the previous
        problem, find exactly how
        far the Bugati Veyron
        traveled in the 1 min 40
        sec included in the graph.
306 3 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                                 4 · Introduction 307

4  INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL
   EQUATIONS

Figure 4.1 The white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) of the eastern United States. Differential equations can be used
to study animal populations. (credit: modification of work by Rachel Kramer, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Basics of Differential Equations
  4.2 Direction Fields and Numerical Methods
  4.3 Separable Equations
  4.4 The Logistic Equation
  4.5 First-order Linear Equations

      Introduction

Many real-world phenomena can be modeled mathematically by using differential equations. Population growth,
radioactive decay, predator-prey models, and spring-mass systems are four examples of such phenomena. In this
chapter we study some of these applications.

Suppose we wish to study a population of deer over time and determine the total number of animals in a given area. We
can first observe the population over a period of time, estimate the total number of deer, and then use various
assumptions to derive a mathematical model for different scenarios. Some factors that are often considered are
environmental impact, threshold population values, and predators. In this chapter we see how differential equations can
be used to predict populations over time (see Example 4.14).

Another goal of this chapter is to develop solution techniques for different types of differential equations. As the
equations become more complicated, the solution techniques also become more complicated, and in fact an entire
course could be dedicated to the study of these equations. In this chapter we study several types of differential
equations and their corresponding methods of solution.
308 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

4.1 Basics of Differential Equations

Learning Objectives

      4.1.1 Identify the order of a differential equation.
      4.1.2 Explain what is meant by a solution to a differential equation.
      4.1.3 Distinguish between the general solution and a particular solution of a differential equation.
      4.1.4 Identify an initial-value problem.
      4.1.5 Identify whether a given function is a solution to a differential equation or an initial-value problem.

Calculus is the mathematics of change, and rates of change are expressed by derivatives. Thus, one of the most common

ways to use calculus is to set up an equation containing an unknown function               and its derivative, known as a

differential equation. Solving such equations often provides information about how quantities change and frequently

provides insight into how and why the changes occur.

Techniques for solving differential equations can take many different forms, including direct solution, use of graphs, or
computer calculations. We introduce the main ideas in this chapter and describe them in a little more detail later in the
course. In this section we study what differential equations are, how to verify their solutions, some methods that are
used for solving them, and some examples of common and useful equations.

General Differential Equations

Consider the equation            which is an example of a differential equation because it includes a derivative. There is

a relationship between the variables and is an unknown function of Furthermore, the left-hand side of the

equation is the derivative of Therefore we can interpret this equation as follows: Start with some function

and take its derivative. The answer must be equal to      What function has a derivative that is equal to    One such

function is         so this function is considered a solution to a differential equation.

Definition

A differential equation is an equation involving an unknown function              and one or more of its derivatives. A

solution to a differential equation is a function         that satisfies the differential equation when and its

derivatives are substituted into the equation.

MEDIA
Go to this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_Differential) to explore more on this topic.

Some examples of differential equations and their solutions appear in Table 4.1.

                                                Equation  Solution

                                 Table 4.1 Examples of Differential Equations and
                                 Their Solutions

Note that a solution to a differential equation is not necessarily unique, primarily because the derivative of a constant is

zero. For example,               is also a solution to the first differential equation in Table 4.1. We will return to this idea a

little bit later in this section. For now, let's focus on what it means for a function to be a solution to a differential

equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4.1 · Basics of Differential Equations 309

EXAMPLE 4.1

Verifying Solutions of Differential Equations

Verify that the function   is a solution to the differential equation

     Solution                                                                                             Next we
To verify the solution, we first calculate using the chain rule for derivatives. This gives
substitute and into the left-hand side of the differential equation:

The resulting expression can be simplified by first distributing to eliminate the parentheses, giving

Combining like terms leads to the expression     which is equal to the right-hand side of the differential equation.

This result verifies that  is a solution of the differential equation.

4.1 Verify that            is a solution to the differential equation

It is convenient to define characteristics of differential equations that make it easier to talk about them and categorize
them. The most basic characteristic of a differential equation is its order.

  Definition

  The order of a differential equation is the highest order of any derivative of the unknown function that appears in
  the equation.

EXAMPLE 4.2

Identifying the Order of a Differential Equation
What is the order of each of the following differential equations?

 a.
b.
 c.

    Solution                                     so the order is
a. The highest derivative in the equation is     so the order is
b. The highest derivative in the equation is
c. The highest derivative in the equation is       so the order is

4.2 What is the order of the following differential equation?

General and Particular Solutions

We already noted that the differential equation  has at least two solutions:                 and          The only

difference between these two solutions is the last term, which is a constant. What if the last term is a different constant?

Will this expression still be a solution to the differential equation? In fact, any function of the form  where

represents any constant, is a solution as well. The reason is that the derivative of         is regardless of the value of

It can be shown that any solution of this differential equation must be of the form                       This is an example of a

general solution to a differential equation. A graph of some of these solutions is given in Figure 4.2. (Note: in this graph

we used even integer values for ranging between and In fact, there is no restriction on the value of it can be

an integer or not.)
310 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                                 Figure 4.2 Family of solutions to the differential equation

In this example, we are free to choose any solution we wish; for example,                     is a member of the family of

solutions to this differential equation. This is called a particular solution to the differential equation. A particular

solution can often be uniquely identified if we are given additional information about the problem.

EXAMPLE 4.3

Finding a Particular Solution                                passing through the point
Find the particular solution to the differential equation

Solution

Any function of the form                      is a solution to this differential equation. To determine the value of  we substitute
                                 into this equation and solve for
the values   and

Therefore the particular solution passing through the point  is

4.3 Find the particular solution to the differential equation

            passing through the point           given that                 is a general solution to the differential
            equation.

Initial-Value Problems

Usually a given differential equation has an infinite number of solutions, so it is natural to ask which one we want to use.
To choose one solution, more information is needed. Some specific information that can be useful is an initial value,
which is an ordered pair that is used to find a particular solution.

A differential equation together with one or more initial values is called an initial-value problem. The general rule is

that the number of initial values needed for an initial-value problem is equal to the order of the differential equation. For

example, if we have the differential equation   then                is an initial value, and when taken together, these

equations form an initial-value problem. The differential equation                            is second order, so we need two

initial values. With initial-value problems of order greater than one, the same value should be used for the independent

variable. An example of initial values for this second-order equation would be                and    These two initial

values together with the differential equation form an initial-value problem. These problems are so named because

often the independent variable in the unknown function is which represents time. Thus, a value of                     represents the

beginning of the problem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   4.1 · Basics of Differential Equations 311

EXAMPLE 4.4

Verifying a Solution to an Initial-Value Problem

Verify that the function  is a solution to the initial-value problem

Solution

For a function to satisfy an initial-value problem, it must satisfy both the differential equation and the initial condition. To

show that satisfies the differential equation, we start by calculating This gives                          Next we substitute

both and into the left-hand side of the differential equation and simplify:

This is equal to the right-hand side of the differential equation, so        solves the differential equation. Next
we calculate

This result verifies the initial value. Therefore the given function satisfies the initial-value problem.

4.4 Verify that           is a solution to the initial-value problem

In Example 4.4, the initial-value problem consisted of two parts. The first part was the differential equation

          and the second part was the initial value                    These two equations together formed the initial-value

problem.

The same is true in general. An initial-value problem consists of two parts: the differential equation and the initial

condition. The differential equation has a family of solutions, and the initial condition determines the value of The

family of solutions to the differential equation in Example 4.4 is given by        This family of solutions is

shown in Figure 4.3, with the particular solution              labeled.

Figure 4.3 A family of solutions to the differential equation                The particular solution            is

labeled.
312 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

         EXAMPLE 4.5
      Solving an Initial-value Problem
      Solve the following initial-value problem:

            Solution
      The first step in solving this initial-value problem is to find a general family of solutions. To do this, we find an
      antiderivative of both sides of the differential equation

namely,

                                                                                                                             (4.1)

We are able to integrate both sides because the y term appears by itself. Notice that there are two integration constants:
    and Solving Equation 4.1 for gives

Because and      are both constants,       is also a constant. We can therefore define            which leads
to the equation

Next we determine the value of To do this, we substitute  and  into Equation 4.1 and solve for

Now we substitute the value      into Equation 4.1. The solution to the initial-value problem is

     Analysis
The difference between a general solution and a particular solution is that a general solution involves a family of
functions, either explicitly or implicitly defined, of the independent variable. The initial value or values determine which
particular solution in the family of solutions satisfies the desired conditions.

4.5 Solve the initial-value problem

In physics and engineering applications, we often consider the forces acting upon an object, and use this information to

understand the resulting motion that may occur. For example, if we start with an object at Earth's surface, the primary

force acting upon that object is gravity. Physicists and engineers can use this information, along with Newton's second

law of motion (in equation form            where represents force, represents mass, and represents acceleration),

to derive an equation that can be solved.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.1 · Basics of Differential Equations 313

Figure 4.4 For a baseball falling in air, the only force acting on it is gravity (neglecting air resistance).

In Figure 4.4 we assume that the only force acting on a baseball is the force of gravity. This assumption ignores air

resistance. (The force due to air resistance is considered in a later discussion.) The acceleration due to gravity at Earth's

surface, is approximately           We introduce a frame of reference, where Earth's surface is at a height of 0 meters.

Let represent the velocity of the object in meters per second. If  the ball is rising, and if               the ball is

falling (Figure 4.5).

                               Figure 4.5 Possible velocities for the rising/falling baseball.

Our goal is to solve for the velocity at any time To do this, we set up an initial-value problem. Suppose the mass of

the ball is where is measured in kilograms. We use Newton's second law, which states that the force acting on an

object is equal to its mass times its acceleration          Acceleration is the derivative of velocity, so

Therefore the force acting on the baseball is given by         However, this force must be equal to the force of

gravity acting on the object, which (again using Newton's second law) is given by               since this force acts in a

downward direction. Therefore we obtain the equation           which becomes                    Dividing both sides of

the equation by gives the equation

Notice that this differential equation remains the same regardless of the mass of the object.

We now need an initial value. Because we are solving for velocity, it makes sense in the context of the problem to assume

that we know the initial velocity, or the velocity at time  This is denoted by

EXAMPLE 4.6

Velocity of a Moving Baseball

A baseball is thrown upward from a height of meters above Earth's surface with an initial velocity of       and the

only force acting on it is gravity. The ball has a mass of  .

a. Find the velocity of the baseball at time
b. What is its velocity after seconds?

    Solution
a. From the preceding discussion, the differential equation that applies in this situation is
314 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

where               The initial condition is                where                 Therefore the initial-value problem is

The first step in solving this initial-value problem is to take the antiderivative of both sides of the differential
equation. This gives

The next step is to solve for To do this, substitute              and

Therefore    and the velocity function is given by

b. To find the velocity after seconds, substitute           into

The units of velocity are meters per second. Since the answer is negative, the object is falling at a speed of

4.6 Suppose a rock falls from rest from a height of meters and the only force acting on it is gravity. Find an
           equation for the velocity as a function of time, measured in meters per second.

A natural question to ask after solving this type of problem is how high the object will be above Earth's surface at a given

point in time. Let denote the height above Earth's surface of the object, measured in meters. Because velocity is the

derivative of position (in this case height), this assumption gives the equation                    An initial value is necessary;

in this case the initial height of the object works well. Let the initial height be given by the equation  Together

these assumptions give the initial-value problem

If the velocity function is known, then it is possible to solve for the position function as well.

EXAMPLE 4.7

Height of a Moving Baseball

A baseball is thrown upward from a height of meters above Earth's surface with an initial velocity of      and the

only force acting on it is gravity. The ball has a mass of  kilogram.

a. Find the position of the baseball at time
b. What is its height after seconds?

Solution

a. We already know the velocity function for this problem is                      The initial height of the baseball is

meters, so          Therefore the initial-value problem for this example is

To solve the initial-value problem, we first find the antiderivatives:

Next we substitute               and solve for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.1 · Basics of Differential Equations 315

     Therefore the position function is
b. The height of the baseball after is given by

     Therefore the baseball is meters above Earth's surface after seconds. It is worth noting that the mass of the
     ball cancelled out completely in the process of solving the problem.

        SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES

Determine the order of the following differential equations.

1.                                 2.                                     3.

4.                                 5.                                     6.

7.

Verify that the following functions are solutions to the given differential equation.

8.         solves                  9.                      solves         10.             solves

11.           solves               12.           solves                   13.             solves
                                                          solves
14.                     solves     15.                                    16.
                                                                                solves

17.           solves

Verify the following general solutions and find the particular solution.

18. Find the particular solution   19. Find the particular solution       20. Find the particular solution

     to the differential equation       to the differential equation           to the differential equation

              that passes                        that passes                              that passes

     through            given           through            given               through    given that

     that               is a            that               is a                              is a general
                                                                               solution.
     general solution.                  general solution.

21. Find the particular solution   22. Find the particular solution       23. Find the particular solution
                                                                                to the differential equation
     to the differential equation       to the differential equation

              that passes                        that passes                              that passes

     through          given that        through            given               through    given that

                   is a general         that               is a                           is a general
     solution.
                                        general solution.                      solution.
316 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

24. Find the particular solution to             25. Find the particular solution    26. Find the particular solution
      the differential equation                       to the differential equation        to the differential equation
                                                                      that passes
      that passes through                                                                            that passes
      given that
                                                     through            given that          through  given that
      is a general solution.
27. Find the particular solution                                        is a                         is a

      to the differential equation                   general solution.                      general solution.
                                 that

      passes through
      given that

      is a general solution.

For the following problems, find the general solution to the differential equation.

28.                                             29.                                 30.

31.                                             32.                                 33.

34.                                             35.                                 36.

37.

Solve the following initial-value problems starting from                      and            Draw both solutions on the same graph.
                                                                                       40.
38.                                             39.

41.                                             42.

Solve the following initial-value problems starting from                      At what time does increase to    or drop to
                                                                                       45.
43.                                             44.

46.                                             47.

Recall that a family of solutions includes solutions to a differential equation that differ by a constant. For the following

problems, use your calculator to graph a family of solutions to the given differential equation. Use initial conditions from

         to                      increasing by Is there some critical point where the behavior of the solution begins to

change?

48. [T]                                         49. [T]                             50. [T]

51. [T]      (Hint:                             52. [T]                             53. Find the general solution
                                                                                          to describe the velocity of a
                        is the                                                            ball of mass that is
                                                                                          thrown upward at a rate
     general solution)                                                                    ft/sec.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 317

54. In the preceding problem,         55. You throw two objects with              56. [T] You throw a ball of
      if the initial velocity of the        differing masses and                        mass kilogram upward
      ball thrown into the air is                upward into the air                    with a velocity of
                ft/s, write the             with the same initial                       m/s on Mars, where the
      particular solution to the            velocity ft/s. What is the                  acceleration of gravity is
      velocity of the ball. Solve to        difference in their velocity                                 m/s2. Use your
      find the time when the ball           after second?                               calculator to approximate
      hits the ground.                                                                  how much longer the ball
                                                                                        is in the air on Mars than
                                                                                        on Earth, where
                                                                                                            .

57. [T] For the previous              58. [T] A car on the freeway                59. [T] For the car in the
      problem, use your                     accelerates according to                    preceding problem, find
      calculator to approximate                                   where is              the expression for the
      how much higher the ball              measured in hours. Set up                   distance the car has
      went on Mars, where                   and solve the differential                  traveled in time
                          .                 equation to determine the                   assuming an initial
                                            velocity of the car if it has               distance of How long
                                            an initial speed of mph.                    does it take the car to
                                            After minutes of driving,                   travel miles? Round
                                            what is the driver's                        your answer to hours and
                                            velocity?                                   minutes.

60. [T] For the previous              61. Substitute           into               62. Substitute
      problem, find the total
      distance traveled in the                        to find a
      first hour.
                                      particular solution.                        into               to

                                                                                  find a particular solution.

63. Substitute                        64. Substitute                              65. Solve       with the
                                                                            into
into            to find                                                           initial condition
                                                               to find a
a particular solution.                      particular solution.                  and solve          with the

                                                                                  same initial condition. As

                                                                                  approaches what do you

                                                                                  notice?

4.2 Direction Fields and Numerical Methods

Learning Objectives

      4.2.1 Draw the direction field for a given first-order differential equation.
      4.2.2 Use a direction field to draw a solution curve of a first-order differential equation.
      4.2.3 Use Euler's Method to approximate the solution to a first-order differential equation.

For the rest of this chapter we will focus on various methods for solving differential equations and analyzing the
behavior of the solutions. In some cases it is possible to predict properties of a solution to a differential equation without
knowing the actual solution. We will also study numerical methods for solving differential equations, which can be
programmed by using various computer languages or even by using a spreadsheet program, such as Microsoft Excel.

Creating Direction Fields

Direction fields (also called slope fields) are useful for investigating first-order differential equations. In particular, we
consider a first-order differential equation of the form

An applied example of this type of differential equation appears in Newton's law of cooling, which we will solve explicitly
later in this chapter. First, though, let us create a direction field for the differential equation

Here  represents the temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit) of an object at time and the ambient temperature is

      Figure 4.6 shows the direction field for this equation.
318 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Figure 4.6 Direction field for the differential equation        Two solutions are plotted: one with initial

temperature less than            and the other with initial temperature greater than

The idea behind a direction field is the fact that the derivative of a function evaluated at a given point is the slope of the
tangent line to the graph of that function at the same point. Other examples of differential equations for which we can
create a direction field include

To create a direction field, we start with the first equation:  We let                        be any ordered pair, and we

substitute these numbers into the right-hand side of the differential equation. For example, if we choose

                   substituting into the right-hand side of the differential equation yields

This tells us that if a solution to the differential equation   passes through the point                   then the slope

of the solution at that point must equal To start creating the direction field, we put a short line segment at the point

having slope We can do this for any point in the domain of the function                       which consists of

all ordered pairs      in  Therefore any point in the Cartesian plane has a slope associated with it, assuming that a

solution to the differential equation passes through that point. The direction field for the differential equation
                         is shown in Figure 4.7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 319

                                   Figure 4.7 Direction field for the differential equation
We can generate a direction field of this type for any differential equation of the form

  Definition

  A direction field (slope field) is a mathematical object used to graphically represent solutions to a first-order
  differential equation. At each point in a direction field, a line segment appears whose slope is equal to the slope of a
  solution to the differential equation passing through that point.

Using Direction Fields

We can use a direction field to predict the behavior of solutions to a differential equation without knowing the actual
solution. For example, the direction field in Figure 4.7 serves as a guide to the behavior of solutions to the differential
equation

To use a direction field, we start by choosing any point in the field. The line segment at that point serves as a signpost

telling us what direction to go from there. For example, if a solution to the differential equation passes through the point

     then the slope of the solution passing through that point is given by  Now let

increase slightly, say to     Using the method of linear approximations gives a formula for the approximate value of

for           In particular,

Substituting  into            gives an approximate value of

At this point the slope of the solution changes (again according to the differential equation). We can keep progressing,
recalculating the slope of the solution as we take small steps to the right, and watching the behavior of the solution.
Figure 4.8 shows a graph of the solution passing through the point
320 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Figure 4.8 Direction field for the differential equation                 with the solution passing through the point
The curve is the graph of the solution to the initial-value problem

This curve is called a solution curve passing through the point          The exact solution to this initial-value problem is

and the graph of this solution is identical to the curve in Figure 4.8.  and sketch a solution curve passing

       4.7 Create a direction field for the differential equation
                  through the point

MEDIA
Go to this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_SlopeFields) to see more about slope fields.

Now consider the direction field for the differential equation                      shown in Figure 4.9. This direction

field has several interesting properties. First of all, at      and      horizontal dashes appear all the way across the

graph. This means that if        then           Substituting this expression into the right-hand side of the differential

equation gives

Therefore        is a solution to the differential equation. Similarly,  is a solution to the differential equation. These

are the only constant-valued solutions to the differential equation, as we can see from the following argument. Suppose

is a constant solution to the differential equation. Then                Substituting this expression into the differential

equation yields                                 This equation must be true for all values of so the second factor must equal

zero. This result yields the equation           The solutions to this equation are  and        which are the

constant solutions already mentioned. These are called the equilibrium solutions to the differential equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 321

Figure 4.9 Direction field for the differential equation               showing two solutions. These solutions are
very close together, but one is barely above the equilibrium solution    and the other is barely below the same
equilibrium solution.

Definition

Consider the differential equation          An equilibrium solution is any solution to the differential equation of

the form         where is a constant.

To determine the equilibrium solutions to the differential equation            set the right-hand side equal to zero. An
equilibrium solution of the differential equation is any function of the form
in the domain of                                                               such that             for all values of

An important characteristic of equilibrium solutions concerns whether or not they approach the line  as an
asymptote for large values of

Definition

Consider the differential equation          and assume that all solutions to this differential equation are defined

for         Let  be an equilibrium solution to the differential equation.

1.          is an asymptotically stable solution to the differential equation if there exists    such that for any

     value       the solution to the initial-value problem

     approaches as approaches infinity.

2.          is an asymptotically unstable solution to the differential equation if there exists      such that for any

     value       the solution to the initial-value problem

     never approaches as approaches infinity.

3.          is an asymptotically semi-stable solution to the differential equation if it is neither asymptotically stable

     nor asymptotically unstable.

Now we return to the differential equation     with the initial condition                            The direction field

for this initial-value problem, along with the corresponding solution, is shown in Figure 4.10.
322 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

             Figure 4.10 Direction field for the initial-value problem

The values of the solution to this initial-value problem stay between           and      which are the equilibrium

solutions to the differential equation. However, an initial-value problem starting with  can never cross the

equilibrium solutions            and            . Therefore, since     and for                                      , is

decreasing and therefore approaches                  . Therefore,   is an asymptotically stable solution to the differential

equation.

What happens when the initial value is below            This scenario is illustrated in Figure 4.11, with the initial value

             Figure 4.11 Direction field for the initial-value problem

We can see that for initial values              for                     and is increasing and therefore approaches
          . This reaffirms that
                                                is an asymptotically stable solution to the differential equation.

EXAMPLE 4.8

Stability of an Equilibrium Solution

Create a direction field for the differential equation                           and identify any equilibrium solutions.

Classify each of the equilibrium solutions as stable, unstable, or semi-stable.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 323

     Solution
The direction field is shown in Figure 4.12.

Figure 4.12 Direction field for the differential equation

The equilibrium solutions are                 and          To classify each of the solutions, look at an arrow directly above

or below each of these values. For example, at     the arrows directly below this solution point up, and the arrows

directly above the solution point down. Therefore all initial conditions close to  approach          and the solution

is stable. For the solution    all initial conditions above and below  are repelled (pushed away) from                  so

this solution is unstable. The solution       is semi-stable, because for initial conditions slightly greater than the

solution approaches infinity, and for initial conditions slightly less than the solution approaches

     Analysis
It is possible to find the equilibrium solutions to the differential equation by setting the right-hand side equal to zero and
solving for This approach gives the same equilibrium solutions as those we saw in the direction field.

4.8 Create a direction field for the differential equation                                           and identify any

equilibrium solutions. Classify each of the equilibrium solutions as stable, unstable, or semi-stable.

Euler's Method

Consider the initial-value problem

Integrating both sides of the differential equation gives              and solving for yields the particular solution

The solution for this initial-value problem appears as the parabola in Figure 4.13.
324 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                   Figure 4.13 Euler's Method for the initial-value problem

The red graph consists of line segments that approximate the solution to the initial-value problem. The graph starts at

the same initial value of        Then the slope of the solution at any point is determined by the right-hand side of the

differential equation, and the length of the line segment is determined by increasing the value by each time (the

step size). This approach is the basis of Euler's Method.

Before we state Euler's Method as a theorem, let's consider another initial-value problem:

The idea behind direction fields can also be applied to this problem to study the behavior of its solution. For example, at

the point          the slope of the solution is given by                          so the slope of the tangent line to the

solution at that point is also equal to Now we define      and                    Since the slope of the solution at this point

is equal to we can use the method of linear approximation to approximate near

Here                    and                     so the linear approximation becomes

Now we choose a step size. The step size is a small value, typically or less, that serves as an increment for it is

represented by the variable In our example, let            Incrementing by gives our next value:

We can substitute                into the linear approximation to calculate

Therefore the approximate value for the solution when      is                     We can then repeat the process, using
                                                                                                                         First,
           and             to calculate and The new slope is given by

                                                Using linear approximation gives

Finally, we substitute           into the linear approximation to calculate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 325

Therefore the approximate value of the solution to the differential equation is  when

What we have just shown is the idea behind Euler's Method. Repeating these steps gives a list of values for the solution.
These values are shown in Table 4.2, rounded off to four decimal places.

                                    Table 4.2 Using Euler's Method to Approximate Solutions to a
                                    Differential Equation

Theorem 4.1

Euler's Method
Consider the initial-value problem

To approximate a solution to this problem using Euler's method, define

                                                                                                  (4.2)

Here      represents the step size and is an integer, starting with The number of steps taken is counted by the
variable

Typically is a small value, say or    The smaller the value of the more calculations are needed. The higher the

value of the fewer calculations are needed. However, the tradeoff results in a lower degree of accuracy for larger step

size, as illustrated in Figure 4.14.
326 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Figure 4.14 Euler's method for the initial-value problem                                    with (a) a step size of  and (b) a
step size of

  EXAMPLE 4.9

Using Euler's Method
Consider the initial-value problem

Use Euler's method with a step size of to generate a table of values for the solution for values of between and

Solution

We are given  and                                   Furthermore, the initial condition      gives                    and
                         we can generate Table 4.3.
Using Equation 4.2 with

                                                   Table 4.3 Using Euler's Method to
                                                   Approximate Solutions to a Differential
                                                   Equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 327

                                                   Table 4.3 Using Euler's Method to
                                                   Approximate Solutions to a Differential
                                                   Equation

With ten calculations, we are able to approximate the values of the solution to the initial-value problem for values of
between and

     MEDIA
     For more information on Euler's method (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_EulersMethod) use this applet.
     4.9 Consider the initial-value problem

                 Using a step size of generate a table with approximate values for the solution to the initial-value
                 problem for values of between and

     MEDIA
     Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_EulerMethod2) for a practical application of the material in this
     section.

        SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES                                                             Sketch the graph of the

For the following problems, use the direction field below from the differential equation
solution for the given initial conditions.

     66.                            67.

68.  69. Are there any equilibria?

     What are their stabilities?
328 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations                                                            Sketch the graph of

       For the following problems, use the direction field below from the differential equation
       the solution for the given initial conditions.

                                      70.                               71.

72.                              73. Are there any equilibria?

                                      What are their stabilities?

Draw the direction field for the following differential equations, then solve the differential equation.

74.                              75.                               76.

77.                              78.

Draw the directional field for the following differential equations. What can you say about the behavior of the solution?
Are there equilibria? What stability do these equilibria have?

79.                              80.                               81.

82.                              83.

Match the direction field with the given differential equations. Explain your selections.

Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 329
330 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                                                     84.

85.                                             86.       87.

88.

Match the direction field with the given differential equations. Explain your selections.

Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 331
332 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                                                     89.

90.                                             91.                         92.

93.

Estimate the following solutions using Euler's method with           steps over the interval         If you are able to solve

the initial-value problem exactly, compare your solution with the exact solution. If you are unable to solve the initial-

value problem, the exact solution will be provided for you to compare with Euler's method. How accurate is Euler's

method?

94.                                             95.                         96.                      Exact

                                                                                 solution is

97.                              Exact 98.                                  99. [T]
      solution is                                                                 Exact solution is

100.                                            101.                 Exact  102.                     Exact
        Exact solution is                               solution is                 solution is

103.
        Exact solution is

Differential equations can be used to model disease epidemics. In the next set of problems, we examine the change of
size of two sub-populations of people living in a city: individuals who are infected and individuals who are susceptible to
infection. represents the size of the susceptible population, and represents the size of the infected population. We
assume that if a susceptible person interacts with an infected person, there is a probability that the susceptible person
will become infected. Each infected person recovers from the infection at a rate and becomes susceptible again. We
consider the case of influenza, where we assume that no one dies from the disease, so we assume that the total
population size of the two sub-populations is a constant number, The differential equations that model these
population sizes are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.2 · Direction Fields and Numerical Methods 333

Here represents the contact rate and is the recovery rate.

104. Show that, by our              105. Assuming the parameters           106. [T] Use computational
        assumption that the total
        population size is          are                     and            software or a calculator to
        constant
        you can reduce the                draw the                         compute an approximate
        system to a single
        differential equation in    resulting directional field.           solution to the initial-value

                                                                           problem

                                                                           using Euler's Method with a

                                                                           given step size Find the

                                                                           solution at  in terms of

                                                                           Hint: Here is "pseudo-code"

                                                                           for how to write a computer

                                                                           program to perform Euler's

                                                                           Method for

                                                                           · Create function

                                                                           · Define parameters
                                                                                                              step

                                                                               size and total number of
                                                                               steps,

                                                                           · Write a for loop:

                                                                               for

Refer to your answer for Exercise 4.106 to solve the following exercises.

107. Solve the initial-value        108. Draw the directional field 109. Compute using
        problem for the exact
        solution.

110. Compute using [T]              111. Compute using [T]                 112. Compute using [T]

113. [T] Evaluate the exact

solution at  Make a

table of errors for the

relative error between the

Euler's method solution

and the exact solution.

How much does the error

change? Can you explain?

Consider the initial-value problem

114. Show that                      115. Draw the directional field        116. [T] By hand or by
        solves this initial-value           of this differential                   calculator or computer,
        problem.                            equation.                              approximate the solution
                                                                                   using Euler's Method at
                                                                                            using

117. [T] By calculator or           118. [T] Plot exact answer and

computer, approximate               each Euler approximation

the solution using Euler's          (for  and                    at

Method at    using                  each on the directional

                                    field. What do you notice?
334 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

4.3 Separable Equations

Learning Objectives

      4.3.1 Use separation of variables to solve a differential equation.
      4.3.2 Solve applications using separation of variables.

We now examine a solution technique for finding exact solutions to a class of differential equations known as separable
differential equations. These equations are common in a wide variety of disciplines, including physics, chemistry, and
engineering. We illustrate a few applications at the end of the section.

Separation of Variables

We start with a definition and some examples.

Definition

A separable differential equation is any equation that can be written in the form

                                                                                                                      (4.3)

The term `separable' refers to the fact that the right-hand side of the equation can be separated into a function of
times a function of Examples of separable differential equations include

The second equation is separable with                    and  the third equation is separable with                    and

            and the right-hand side of the fourth equation can be factored as              so it is separable

as well. The third equation is also called an autonomous differential equation because the right-hand side of the

equation is a function of alone. If a differential equation is separable, then it is possible to solve the equation using the

method of separation of variables.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Separation of Variables                           These correspond to constant solutions.
 1. Check for any values of that make

2. Rewrite the differential equation in the form

3. Integrate both sides of the equation.
4. Solve the resulting equation for if possible.
5. If an initial condition exists, substitute the appropriate values for and into the equation and solve for the

     constant.

Note that Step 4. states "Solve the resulting equation for if possible." It is not always possible to obtain as an
explicit function of Quite often we have to be satisfied with finding as an implicit function of

  EXAMPLE 4.10                                                using the method of separation of variables.

Using Separation of Variables
Find a general solution to the differential equation

     Solution
Follow the five-step method of separation of variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
1. In this example,          and                      Setting  gives                                4.3 · Separable Equations 335

                                                                              as a constant solution.

2. Rewrite the differential equation in the form

3. Integrate both sides of the equation:

Let            Then          so the equation becomes

4. To solve this equation for first multiply both sides of the equation by

Now we use some logic in dealing with the constant Since represents an arbitrary constant,  also represents
an arbitrary constant. If we call the second arbitrary constant the equation becomes

Now exponentiate both sides of the equation (i.e., make each side of the equation the exponent for the base

Again define a new constant               (note that

This corresponds to two separate equations:                    and

The solution to either equation can be written in the form

Since          it does not matter whether we use plus or minus, so the constant can actually have either sign.

Furthermore, the subscript on the constant is entirely arbitrary, and can be dropped. Therefore the solution can

be written as

5. No initial condition is imposed, so we are finished.
      4.10 Use the method of separation of variables to find a general solution to the differential equation

  EXAMPLE 4.11

Solving an Initial-Value Problem
Using the method of separation of variables, solve the initial-value problem
336 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

     Solution
Follow the five-step method of separation of variables.

1. In this example,                             and           Setting  gives  as constant solutions.
                                                     and multiply by
2. Divide both sides of the equation by                                This gives the equation

3. Next integrate both sides:

                                                                                                                (4.4)

To evaluate the left-hand side, use the method of partial fraction decomposition. This leads to the identity

Then Equation 4.4 becomes

     Multiplying both sides of this equation by and replacing with gives
4. It is possible to solve this equation for y. First exponentiate both sides of the equation and define

     Next we can remove the absolute value and let be either positive or negative. Then multiply both sides by

Now collect all terms involving y on one side of the equation, and solve for

5. To determine the value of substitute              and               into the general solution. Alternatively, we can put the

same values into an earlier equation, namely the equation                     This is much easier to solve for

      Therefore the solution to the initial-value problem is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.3 · Separable Equations 337

A graph of this solution appears in Figure 4.15.

Figure 4.15 Graph of the solution to the initial-value problem

4.11 Find the solution to the initial-value problem

using the method of separation of variables.

Applications of Separation of Variables

Many interesting problems can be described by separable equations. We illustrate two types of problems: solution
concentrations and Newton's law of cooling.

Solution concentrations

Consider a tank being filled with a salt solution. We would like to determine the amount of salt present in the tank as a
function of time. We can apply the process of separation of variables to solve this problem and similar problems
involving solution concentrations.

EXAMPLE 4.12

Determining Salt Concentration over Time

A tank containing  of a brine solution initially has of salt dissolved in the solution. At time  another brine

solution flows into the tank at a rate of  This brine solution contains a concentration of       of salt. At the

same time, a stopcock is opened at the bottom of the tank, allowing the combined solution to flow out at a rate of

so that the level of liquid in the tank remains constant (Figure 4.16). Find the amount of salt in the tank as a

function of time (measured in minutes), and find the limiting amount of salt in the tank, assuming that the solution in

the tank is well mixed at all times.
338 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Figure 4.16 A brine tank with an initial amount of salt solution accepts an input flow and delivers an output flow. How
does the amount of salt change with time?

Solution

First we define a function that represents the amount of salt in kilograms in the tank as a function of time. Then

represents the rate at which the amount of salt in the tank changes as a function of time. Also,  represents the

amount of salt in the tank at time              which is kilograms.

The general setup for the differential equation we will solve is of the form

                                                                                                                         (4.5)

INFLOW RATE represents the rate at which salt enters the tank, and OUTFLOW RATE represents the rate at which salt

leaves the tank. Because solution enters the tank at a rate of L/min, and each liter of solution contains kilogram of

salt, every minute                              of salt enters the tank. Therefore INFLOW RATE =

To calculate the rate at which salt leaves the tank, we need the concentration of salt in the tank at any point in time.

Since the actual amount of salt varies over time, so does the concentration of salt. However, the volume of the solution

remains fixed at 100 liters. The number of kilograms of salt in the tank at time is equal to      Thus, the concentration

of salt is kg/L, and the solution leaves the tank at a rate of L/min. Therefore salt leaves the tank at a rate of

          kg/min, and OUTFLOW RATE is equal to        Therefore the differential equation becomes

and the initial condition is                    The initial-value problem to be solved is

The differential equation is a separable equation, so we can apply the five-step strategy for solution.

Step 1. Setting                  gives          as a constant solution. Since the initial amount of salt in the tank is  kilograms,

this solution does not apply.

Step 2. Rewrite the equation as

Then multiply both sides by and divide both sides by

Step 3. Integrate both sides:

Step 4. Solve for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.3 · Separable Equations 339

Eliminate the absolute value by allowing the constant to be either positive or negative:
Finally, solve for
Step 5. Solve for

The solution to the initial value problem is                           To find the limiting amount of salt in the tank, take the
limit as approaches infinity:

                                                                     

Note that this was the constant solution to the differential equation. If the initial amount of salt in the tank is
kilograms, then it remains constant. If it starts at less than 50 kilograms, then it approaches 50 kilograms over time.

4.12 A tank contains kilograms of salt dissolved in liters of water. A salt solution of   is pumped

           into the tank at a rate of  and is drained at the same rate. Solve for the salt concentration at time

           Assume the tank is well mixed at all times.

Newton's law of cooling

Newton's law of cooling states that the rate of change of an object's temperature is proportional to the difference
between its own temperature and the ambient temperature (i.e., the temperature of its surroundings). If we let

represent the temperature of an object as a function of time, then represents the rate at which that temperature

changes. The temperature of the object's surroundings can be represented by  Then Newton's law of cooling can be
written in the form

or simply

                                                                                                                     (4.6)

The temperature of the object at the beginning of any experiment is the initial value for the initial-value problem. We call
this temperature Therefore the initial-value problem that needs to be solved takes the form

                                                                                                                                                                   (4.7)

where is a constant that needs to be either given or determined in the context of the problem. We use these equations
in Example 4.13.

  EXAMPLE 4.13

Waiting for a Pizza to Cool
A pizza is removed from the oven after baking thoroughly, and the temperature of the pizza when it comes out of the
340 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

oven is    The temperature of the kitchen is        and after      minute the temperature of the pizza is               We

would like to wait until the temperature of the pizza reaches      before cutting and serving it (Figure 4.17). How much

longer will we have to wait?

Figure 4.17 From Newton's law of cooling, if the pizza cools       in minute, how long before it cools to

Solution

The ambient temperature (surrounding temperature) is           so  The temperature of the pizza when it comes

out of the oven is  which is the initial temperature (i.e., initial value), so  Therefore Equation 4.4 becomes

To solve the differential equation, we use the five-step technique for solving separable equations.

1. Setting the right-hand side equal to zero gives      as a constant solution. Since the pizza starts at               this is

not the solution we are seeking.

2. Rewrite the differential equation by multiplying both sides by and dividing both sides by

3. Integrate both sides:

4. Solve for by first exponentiating both sides:

5. Solve for by using the initial condition

Therefore the solution to the initial-value problem is

To determine the value of we need to use the fact that after minute the temperature of the pizza is

Therefore                        Substituting this information into the solution to the initial-value problem, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   4.3 · Separable Equations 341

      So now we have                             When is the temperature  Solving for we find

      Therefore we need to wait an additional    minutes (after the temperature of the pizza reached  That

      should be just enough time to finish this calculation.

      4.13 A cake is removed from the oven after baking thoroughly, and the temperature of the cake when it comes

      out of the oven is  The temperature of the kitchen is               and after minutes the temperature of

      the cake is

      a. Write the appropriate initial-value problem to describe this situation.
      b. Solve the initial-value problem for
      c. How long will it take until the temperature of the cake is within of room temperature?

        SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES                                             and graph the solution.
                                                                       121.
Solve the following initial-value problems with the initial condition
                                                                       125.
119.                      120.                                         128.
                                                                       131.
122.
                                                                       135.
Find the general solution to the differential equation.                 138.

123.                      124.

126.                      127.

129.                      130.

132.

Find the solution to the initial-value problem.

133.                      134.

136.                      137.
342 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

139.                                            140.                               141.

142.

For the following problems, use a software program or your calculator to generate the directional fields. Solve explicitly
and draw solution curves for several initial conditions. Are there some critical initial conditions that change the behavior
of the solution?

143. [T]                                        144. [T]                           145. [T]

146. [T]                                        147. [T]                           148. Most drugs in the
                                                                                           bloodstream decay
                                                                                           according to the equation
                                                                                                       where is the
                                                                                           concentration of the drug
                                                                                           in the bloodstream. If the
                                                                                           half-life of a drug is
                                                                                           hours, what fraction of
                                                                                           the initial dose remains
                                                                                           after hours?

149. A drug is administered                     150. [T] How often should a        151. A tank contains
        intravenously to a patient                                                         kilogram of salt dissolved
        at a rate mg/h and is                   drug be taken if its dose is               in liters of water. A
        cleared from the body at                                                           salt solution of kg
        a rate proportional to the                    mg, it is cleared at a               salt/L is pumped into the
        amount of drug still                                                               tank at a rate of L/min
        present in the body, Set                rate      mg/h, and                        and is drained at the
        up and solve the                                                                   same rate. Solve for the
        differential equation,                  mg is required to be in                    salt concentration at time
        assuming there is no drug                                                            Assume the tank is well
        initially present in the                the bloodstream at all                     mixed.
        body.
                                                times?

152. A tank containing                          153. [T] For the preceding         154. Torricelli's law states that
                                                        problem, find how much             for a water tank with a
      kilograms of salt                                 salt is in the tank hour           hole in the bottom that
                                                        after the process begins.          has a cross-sectional area
      dissolved in       liters of                                                         of and with a height
                                                                                           of water above the
      water has two salt                                                                   bottom of the tank, the
                                                                                           rate of change of volume
      solutions pumped in. The                                                             of water flowing from the
                                                                                           tank is proportional to the
      first solution of kg                                                                 square root of the height
                                                                                           of water, according to
      salt/L is pumped in at a

      rate of L/min and the

      second solution of         kg

      salt/L is pumped in at a

      rate of L/min. The tank

      drains at L/min.

      Assume the tank is well                                                                where

      mixed. Solve for the salt                                                      is the acceleration due
                                                                                   to gravity. Note that
      concentration at time

                                                                                             where is

                                                                                   the cross-sectional area of
                                                                                   the tank. Solve the
                                                                                   resulting initial-value
                                                                                   problem for the height of
                                                                                   water, assuming a tankof

                                                                                   radius    with a

                                                                                   circular hole of radius ft.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   4.3 · Separable Equations 343

155. For the preceding
        problem, determine how
        long it takes the tank to
        drain.

For the following problems, use Newton's law of cooling.

156. The liquid base of an ice     157. [T] The liquid base of an         158. [T] You are organizing an

cream has an initial               ice cream has an initial               ice cream social. The

temperature of                     temperature of                         outside temperature is

before it is placed in a           before it is placed in a                   and the ice cream is

freezer with a constant            freezer with a constant                at       After minutes,

temperature of         After       temperature of                         the ice cream

hour, the temperature              After hours, the                       temperature has risen by

of the ice-cream base has          temperature of the ice-                    How much longer

decreased to                       cream base has                         can you wait before the

Formulate and solve the            decreased to               At          ice cream melts at

initial-value problem to           what time will the ice

determine the                      cream be ready to eat?

temperature of the ice             (Assume            is the

cream.                             optimal eating

                                   temperature.)

For Exercises 159--162, assume a cooling constant of               and assume time is in minutes.

159. You have a cup of coffee      160. [T] You have a cup of             161. You have a cup of coffee
                                           coffee at temperature
at temperature         and                         that you put           at temperature         and
                                           outside, where the
the ambient temperature                    ambient temperature is         you immediately pour in
                                                  After minutes, how
in the room is                             much colder is the coffee?     part milk to parts

Assuming a cooling rate                                                   coffee. The milk is initially

        write and solve                                                   at temperature         Write

the differential equation                                                 and solve the differential

to describe the                                                           equation that governs the

temperature of the coffee                                                 temperature of this

with respect to time.                                                     coffee.

162. You have a cup of coffee      163. Solve the generic problem         164. Prove the basic continual
        at temperature                                      with initial          compounded interest
        which you let cool                                                        equation. Assuming an
        minutes before you pour            condition                              initial deposit of and
        in the same amount of                                                     an interest rate of set
        milk at as in the                                                         up and solve an equation
        preceding problem. How                                                    for continually
        does the temperature                                                      compounded interest.
        compare to the previous
        cup after minutes?
344 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

165. Assume an initial nutrient                 166. Leaves accumulate on the       167. Leaves accumulate on the
        amount of kilograms in                          forest floor at a rate of           forest floor at a rate of
        a tank with liters.                             g/cm2/yr and also                   g/cm2/yr. These leaves
        Assume a concentration                          decompose at a rate of              decompose at a rate of
        of kg/L being pumped in                                per year. Write a                   per year. Write a
        at a rate of L/min. The                         differential equation               differential equation
        tank is well mixed and is                       governing the number of             governing the number of
        drained at a rate of L/                         grams of leaf litter per            grams of leaf litter per
        min. Find the equation                          square centimeter of                square centimeter of
        describing the amount of                        forest floor, assuming at           forest floor. Does this
        nutrient in the tank.                           time there is no leaf               amount approach a
                                                        litter on the ground. Does          steady value? What is that
                                                        this amount approach a              value?
                                                        steady value? What is that
                                                        value?

4.4 The Logistic Equation

Learning Objectives

      4.4.1 Describe the concept of environmental carrying capacity in the logistic model of population growth.
      4.4.2 Draw a direction field for a logistic equation and interpret the solution curves.
      4.4.3 Solve a logistic equation and interpret the results.

Differential equations can be used to represent the size of a population as it varies over time. We saw this in an earlier
chapter in the section on exponential growth and decay, which is the simplest model. A more realistic model includes
other factors that affect the growth of the population. In this section, we study the logistic differential equation and see
how it applies to the study of population dynamics in the context of biology.

Population Growth and Carrying Capacity

To model population growth using a differential equation, we first need to introduce some variables and relevant terms.

The variable will represent time. The units of time can be hours, days, weeks, months, or even years. Any given

problem must specify the units used in that particular problem. The variable will represent population. Since the

population varies over time, it is understood to be a function of time. Therefore we use the notation                   for the

population as a function of time. If            is a differentiable function, then the first derivative represents the

instantaneous rate of change of the population as a function of time.

In Exponential Growth and Decay, we studied the exponential growth and decay of populations and radioactive

substances. An example of an exponential growth function is                         In this function,  represents the

population at time  represents the initial population (population at time                and the constant               is called the

growth rate. Figure 4.18 shows a graph of       Here                                and

                                   Figure 4.18 An exponential growth model of population.

We can verify that the function                 satisfies the initial-value problem

This differential equation has an interesting interpretation. The left-hand side represents the rate at which the
population increases (or decreases). The right-hand side is equal to a positive constant multiplied by the current
population. Therefore the differential equation states that the rate at which the population increases is proportional to
the population at that point in time. Furthermore, it states that the constant of proportionality never changes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           4.4 · The Logistic Equation 345

One problem with this function is its prediction that as time goes on, the population grows without bound. This is
unrealistic in a real-world setting. Various factors limit the rate of growth of a particular population, including birth rate,
death rate, food supply, predators, and so on. The growth constant usually takes into consideration the birth and death
rates but none of the other factors, and it can be interpreted as a net (birth minus death) percent growth rate per unit
time. A natural question to ask is whether the population growth rate stays constant, or whether it changes over time.
Biologists have found that in many biological systems, the population grows until a certain steady-state population is
reached. This possibility is not taken into account with exponential growth. However, the concept of carrying capacity
allows for the possibility that in a given area, only a certain number of a given organism or animal can thrive without
running into resource issues.

  Definition

  The carrying capacity of an organism in a given environment is defined to be the maximum population of that
  organism that the environment can sustain indefinitely.

We use the variable to denote the carrying capacity. The growth rate is represented by the variable  Using these
variables, we can define the logistic differential equation.

Definition

Let represent the carrying capacity for a particular organism in a given environment, and let be a real number

that represents the growth rate. The function  represents the population of this organism as a function of time

and the constant represents the initial population (population of the organism at time     Then the logistic

differential equation is

                                                                                                           (4.8)

MEDIA
See this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_logisticEq) for more information on the logistic equation.

The logistic equation was first published by Pierre Verhulst in  This differential equation can be coupled with the

initial condition         to form an initial-value problem for

Suppose that the initial population is small relative to the carrying capacity. Then is small, possibly close to zero. Thus,

the quantity in parentheses on the right-hand side of Equation 4.8 is close to and the right-hand side of this equation

is close to If     then the population grows rapidly, resembling exponential growth.

However, as the population grows, the ratio also grows, because is constant. If the population remains below the

carrying capacity, then is less than so        Therefore the right-hand side of Equation 4.8 is still positive, but

the quantity in parentheses gets smaller, and the growth rate decreases as a result. If    then the right-hand side is
equal to zero, and the population does not change.

Now suppose that the population starts at a value higher than the carrying capacity. Then  and                Then

the right-hand side of Equation 4.8 is negative, and the population decreases. As long as  the population

decreases. It never actually reaches because will get smaller and smaller, but the population approaches the

carrying capacity as approaches infinity. This analysis can be represented visually by way of a phase line. A phase line
describes the general behavior of a solution to an autonomous differential equation, depending on the initial condition.
For the case of a carrying capacity in the logistic equation, the phase line is as shown in Figure 4.19.
346 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                   Figure 4.19 A phase line for the differential equation

This phase line shows that when is less than zero or greater than       the population decreases over time. When is
between and the population increases over time.

EXAMPLE 4.14

Chapter Opener: Examining the Carrying Capacity of a Deer Population

                                 Figure 4.20 (credit: modification of work by Rachel Kramer, Flickr)

Let's consider the population of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) in the state of Kentucky. The Kentucky

Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources (KDFWR) sets guidelines for hunting and fishing in the state. Before the

hunting season of  it estimated a population of       deer. Johnson notes: "A deer population that has plenty to

eat and is not hunted by humans or other predators will double every three years." (George Johnson, "The Problem of

Exploding Deer Populations Has No Attractive Solutions," January        accessed April 9, 2015,

http://www.txtwriter.com/onscience/Articles/deerpops.html.) This observation corresponds to a rate of increase

                   so the approximate growth rate is  per year. (This assumes that the population grows

exponentially, which is reasonable--at least in the short term--with plentiful food supply and no predators.) The KDFWR

also reports deer population densities for counties in Kentucky, the average of which is approximately deer per

square mile. Suppose this is the deer density for the whole state       square miles). The carrying capacity is

square miles times deer per square mile, or           deer.

a. For this application, we have                                   and     Substitute these values into Equation

4.8 and form the initial-value problem.

b. Solve the initial-value problem from part a.

c. According to this model, what will be the population in years? Recall that the doubling time predicted by Johnson

for the deer population was years. How do these values compare?

d. Suppose the population managed to reach            deer. What does the logistic equation predict will happen to

the population in this scenario?

    Solution
a. The initial value problem is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       4.4 · The Logistic Equation 347

b. The logistic equation is an autonomous differential equation, so we can use the method of separation of variables.

Step 1: Setting the right-hand side equal to zero gives  and                        This means that if the population

starts at zero it will never change, and if it starts at the carrying capacity, it will never change.

Step 2: Rewrite the differential equation and multiply both sides by:

Divide both sides by
Step 3: Integrate both sides of the equation using partial fraction decomposition:

Step 4: Multiply both sides by     and use the quotient rule for logarithms:

Here                      Next exponentiate both sides and eliminate the absolute value:

Here  but after eliminating the absolute value, it can be negative as well. Now solve for:

Step 5: To determine the value of  it is actually easier to go back a couple of steps to where was defined. In
particular, use the equation

The initial condition is           Replace with          and with zero:
348 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Therefore

Dividing the numerator and denominator by             gives

Figure 4.21 is a graph of this equation.

                      Figure 4.21 Logistic curve for the deer population with an initial population of  deer.
c. Using this model we can predict the population in years.

This is far short of twice the initial population of  Remember that the doubling time is based on the

assumption that the growth rate never changes, but the logistic model takes this possibility into account.

d. If the population reached                    deer, then the new initial-value problem would be

The general solution to the differential equation would remain the same.

To determine the value of the constant, return to the equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4.4 · The Logistic Equation 349

Substituting the values  and                           you get

Therefore

This equation is graphed in Figure 4.22.

           Figure 4.22 Logistic curve for the deer population with an initial population of  deer.

Solving the Logistic Differential Equation

The logistic differential equation is an autonomous differential equation, so we can use separation of variables to find
the general solution, as we just did in Example 4.14.

Step 1: Setting the right-hand side equal to zero leads to      and         as constant solutions. The first solution

indicates that when there are no organisms present, the population will never grow. The second solution indicates that

when the population starts at the carrying capacity, it will never change.

Step 2: Rewrite the differential equation in the form

Then multiply both sides by and divide both sides by                 This leads to

Multiply both sides of the equation by and integrate:

The left-hand side of this equation can be integrated using partial fraction decomposition. We leave it to you to verify
350 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

       that
       Then the equation becomes

Now exponentiate both sides of the equation to eliminate the natural logarithm:

We define  and, noting that                     and  , so that        we can drop the absolute value sign, so that
                                                                                                                              (4.9)
the equation becomes

To solve this equation for  first multiply both sides by        and collect the terms containing on the left-hand
side of the equation:

Next, factor from the left-hand side and divide both sides by the other factor:

                                                                                                (4.10)

The last step is to determine the value of      The easiest way to do this is to substitute  and in place of in
Equation 4.9 and solve for

Finally, substitute the expression for into Equation 4.10:

Now multiply the numerator and denominator of the right-hand side by             and simplify:

We state this result as a theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   4.4 · The Logistic Equation 351

Theorem 4.2

Solution of the Logistic Differential Equation                                   with carrying capacity and growth
Consider the logistic differential equation subject to an initial population of                                               (4.11)
rate The solution to the corresponding initial-value problem is given by

Now that we have the solution to the initial-value problem, we can choose values for  and and study the solution

curve. For example, in Example 4.14 we used the values                           and an initial population of

deer. This leads to the solution

Dividing top and bottom by             gives

This is the same as the original solution. The graph of this solution is shown again in blue in Figure 4.23, superimposed

over the graph of the exponential growth model with initial population           and growth rate   (appearing in

green). The red dashed line represents the carrying capacity, and is a horizontal asymptote for the solution to the logistic

equation.

Figure 4.23 A comparison of exponential versus logistic growth for the same initial population of  organisms and
growth rate of

Working under the assumption that the population grows according to the logistic differential equation, this graph

predicts that approximately years earlier        the growth of the population was very close to exponential. The net

growth rate at that time would have been around         per year. As time goes on, the two graphs separate. This

happens because the population increases, and the logistic differential equation states that the growth rate decreases as

the population increases. At the time the population was measured       it was close to carrying capacity, and the

population was starting to level off.

The solution to the logistic differential equation has a point of inflection. To find this point, set the second derivative
equal to zero:
352 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Setting the numerator equal to zero,

As long as      the entire quantity before and including is nonzero, so we can divide it out:
Solving for

Notice that if  then this quantity is undefined, and the graph does not have a point of inflection. In the logistic

graph, the point of inflection can be seen as the point where the graph changes from concave up to concave down. This

is where the "leveling off" starts to occur, because the net growth rate becomes slower as the population starts to

approach the carrying capacity.

4.14 A population of rabbits in a meadow is observed to be rabbits at time  After a month, the rabbit

                population is observed to have increased by Using an initial population of and a growth rate of

                with a carrying capacity of rabbits,

                a. Write the logistic differential equation and initial condition for this model.
                b. Draw a slope field for this logistic differential equation, and sketch the solution corresponding to an

                     initial population of rabbits.
                c. Solve the initial-value problem for
                d. Use the solution to predict the population after year.

STUDENT PROJECT

Student Project: Logistic Equation with a Threshold Population
An improvement to the logistic model includes a threshold population. The threshold population is defined to be
the minimum population that is necessary for the species to survive. We use the variable to represent the
threshold population. A differential equation that incorporates both the threshold population and carrying capacity

   is
                                                                                                                                                            (4.12)

where represents the growth rate, as before.
 1. The threshold population is useful to biologists and can be utilized to determine whether a given species should

      be placed on the endangered list. A group of Australian researchers say they have determined the threshold

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       4.4 · The Logistic Equation 353

      population for any species to survive:   adults. (Catherine Clabby, "A Magic Number," American Scientist 98(1):

      24, doi:10.1511/2010.82.24. accessed April 9, 2015, http://www.americanscientist.org/issues/pub/a-magic-

      number). Therefore we use               as the threshold population in this project. Suppose that the

      environmental carrying capacity in Montana for elk is              Set up Equation 4.12 using the carrying capacity of

           and threshold population of         Assume an annual net growth rate of

2. Draw the direction field for the differential equation from step along with several solutions for different initial

      populations. What are the constant solutions of the differential equation? What do these solutions correspond to

      in the original population model (i.e., in a biological context)?

3. What is the limiting population for each initial population you chose in step (Hint: use the slope field to see

      what happens for various initial populations, i.e., look for the horizontal asymptotes of your solutions.)

4. This equation can be solved using the method of separation of variables. However, it is very difficult to get the

      solution as an explicit function of Using an initial population of        elk, solve the initial-value problem and

      express the solution as an implicit function of or solve the general initial-value problem, finding a solution in

      terms of

        SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES                                                       Draw the directional field and find

For the following problems, consider the logistic equation in the form
the stability of the equilibria.

168.                                169.                                  170.

171. Solve the logistic equation    172. Solve the logistic equation      173. A population of deer
                                                                                  inside a park has a
      for       and an initial            for           and an initial            carrying capacity of
                                                                                  and a growth rate of
      condition of                        condition of                            If the initial population is
                                                                                      deer, what is the
                                                                                  population of deer at any
                                                                                  given time?

174. A population of frogs in a     175. [T] Bacteria grow at a rate      176. [T] Rabbits in a park have

      pond has a growth rate of           of   per hour in a petri              an initial population of

           If the initial                 dish. If there is initially           and grow at a rate of

      population is        frogs          one bacterium and a                   per year. If the carrying

      and the carrying capacity           carrying capacity of                  capacity is  at what

      is   what is the                    million cells, how long               time does the population

      population of frogs at any          does it take to reach                 reach rabbits?

      given time?                              cells?

177. [T] Two monkeys are            178. [T] A butterfly sanctuary is
        placed on an island. After
          years, there are                built that can hold
        monkeys, and the
        estimated carrying                butterflies, and
        capacity is monkeys.
        When does the                     butterflies are initially
        population of monkeys
        reach monkeys?                    moved in. If after

                                          months there are now

                                               butterflies, when

                                          does the population get

                                          to   butterflies?
354 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

The following problems consider the logistic equation with an added term for depletion, either through death or
emigration.

179. [T] The population of trout in             180. In the preceding problem,       181. [T] For the preceding
        a pond is given by                              what are the stabilities of          problem, use software to
                                                        the equilibria                       generate a directional
        where trout are caught                                                               field for the value
        per year. Use your calculator                                                                     What are the
        or computer software to draw                                                         stabilities of the
        a directional field and draw a                                                       equilibria?
        few sample solutions. What
        do you expect for the
        behavior?

182. [T] For the preceding                      183. [T] For the preceding
        problems, use software to                       problems, consider the
        generate a directional                          case where a certain
        field for the value                             number of fish are added
                     What are the                       to the pond, or
        stabilities of the                              What are the nonnegative
        equilibria?                                     equilibria and their
                                                        stabilities?

It is more likely that the amount of fishing is governed by the current number of fish present, so instead of a constant
number of fish being caught, the rate is proportional to the current number of fish present, with proportionality constant

   as

184. [T] For the previous                       185. [T] Use software or a           186. [T] Use software or a
        fishing problem, draw a                         calculator to draw                   calculator to draw
        directional field assuming                      directional fields for               directional fields for
                    Draw some                                       What are the                         What are the
        solutions that exhibit this                     nonnegative equilibria               equilibria and their
        behavior. What are the                          and their stabilities?               stabilities?
        equilibria and what are
        their stabilities?

187. Solve this equation,                       188. Solve this equation,

assuming a value of                             assuming a value of

and an initial                                  and an initial

condition of  fish.                             condition of  fish.

The following problems add in a minimal threshold value for the species to survive,  which changes the differential
equation to

189. Draw the directional field                 190. For the preceding               191. Bengal tigers in a
        of the threshold logistic                       problem, solve the logistic          conservation park have a
        equation, assuming                              threshold equation,                  carrying capacity of
                                                        assuming the initial                 and need a minimum of
        When does the                                   condition                                to survive. If they grow
        population survive? When                                                             in population at a rate of
        does it go extinct?                                                                       per year, with an initial
                                                                                             population of tigers,
                                                                                             solve for the number of
                                                                                             tigers present.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        4.4 · The Logistic Equation 355

192. A forest containing ring-       193. The population of
        tailed lemurs in
        Madagascar has the           mountain lions in
        potential to support
        individuals, and the lemur   Northern Arizona has an
        population grows at a
        rate of per year. A          estimated carrying
        minimum of
        individuals is needed for    capacity of and grows
        the lemurs to survive.
        Given an initial population  at a rate of            per
        of lemurs, solve for
        the population of lemurs.    year and there must be

                                         for the population to

                                     survive. With an initial

                                     population of

                                     mountain lions, how

                                     many years will it take to

                                     get the mountain lions off

                                     the endangered species

                                     list (at least

The following questions consider the Gompertz equation, a modification for logistic growth, which is often used for
modeling cancer growth, specifically the number of tumor cells.

194. The Gompertz equation is        195. Assume that for a               196. Solve the Gompertz
        given by                                                                  equation for generic
                                     population,                                  and and
        Draw the directional fields
        for this equation            and             Draw the
        assuming all parameters
        are positive, and given      directional field
        that
                                     associated with this

                                     differential equation and

                                     draw a few solutions.

                                     What is the behavior of

                                     the population?

197. [T] The Gompertz                198. [T] It is estimated that the    199. [T] It is estimated that the
        equation has been used
        to model tumor growth in     world human population               world human population
        the human body. Starting
        from one tumor cell on       reached billion people               reached billion people
        day and assuming
                   and a carrying    in   and billion in                  in  and billion in
        capacity of million
        cells, how long does it           Assuming a                          Assuming a
        take to reach "detection"
        stage at million cells?      carrying capacity of                 carrying capacity of

                                     billion humans, write and            billion humans, write and

                                     solve the differential               solve the differential

                                     equation for logistic                equation for Gompertz

                                     growth, and determine                growth, and determine

                                     what year the population             what year the population

                                     reached billion.                     reached billion. Was

                                                                          logistic growth or

                                                                          Gompertz growth more

                                                                          accurate, considering

                                                                          world population reached

                                                                          billion on October

200. Show that the population        201. When does population            202. When does population
        grows fastest when it                increase the fastest in the          increase the fastest for
        reaches half the carrying            threshold logistic equation          the Gompertz equation
        capacity for the logistic
        equation
356 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Below is a table of the populations of whooping cranes in the wild from                    The population rebounded from

near extinction after conservation efforts began. The following problems consider applying population models to fit the

data. Assume a carrying capacity of             cranes. Fit the data assuming years since  (so your initial population at

time would be cranes).

Year (years since conservation began) Whooping Crane Population

Source: https://www.savingcranes.org/images/stories/site_images/
conservation/whooping_crane/pdfs/historic_wc_numbers.pdf

203. Find the equation and                      204. Find the equation and         205. Find the equation and
        parameter that best fit                         parameters and that                parameter that best fit
        the data for the logistic                       best fit the data for the          the data for the Gompertz
        equation.                                       threshold logistic                 equation.
                                                        equation.

206. Graph all three solutions                  207. Using the three equations
        and the data on the same
        graph. Which model                      found in the previous
        appears to be most
        accurate?                               problems, estimate the

                                                population in   (year

                                                after conservation).

                                                The real population

                                                measured at that time

                                                was  Which model is

                                                most accurate?

4.5 First-order Linear Equations

Learning Objectives

      4.5.1 Write a first-order linear differential equation in standard form.
      4.5.2 Find an integrating factor and use it to solve a first-order linear differential equation.
      4.5.3 Solve applied problems involving first-order linear differential equations.

Earlier, we studied an application of a first-order differential equation that involved solving for the velocity of an object.
In particular, if a ball is thrown upward with an initial velocity of ft/s, then an initial-value problem that describes the
velocity of the ball after seconds is given by

This model assumes that the only force acting on the ball is gravity. Now we add to the problem by allowing for the
possibility of air resistance acting on the ball.

Air resistance always acts in the direction opposite to motion. Therefore if an object is rising, air resistance acts in a
downward direction. If the object is falling, air resistance acts in an upward direction (Figure 4.24). There is no exact
relationship between the velocity of an object and the air resistance acting on it. For very small objects, air resistance is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 357

proportional to velocity; that is, the force due to air resistance is numerically equal to some constant times For larger

(e.g., baseball-sized) objects, depending on the shape, air resistance can be approximately proportional to the square of

the velocity. In fact, air resistance may be proportional to  or  or some other power of

Figure 4.24 Forces acting on a moving baseball: gravity acts in a downward direction and air resistance acts in a direction
opposite to the direction of motion.

We will work with the linear approximation for air resistance. If we assume     then the expression for the force

due to air resistance is given by        Therefore the sum of the forces acting on the object is equal to the sum of

the gravitational force and the force due to air resistance. This, in turn, is equal to the mass of the object multiplied by its

acceleration at time (Newton's second law). This gives us the differential equation

Finally, we impose an initial condition  where                is the initial velocity measured in meters per second. This
                                                                                                                                           (4.13)
makes       The initial-value problem becomes

The differential equation in this initial-value problem is an example of a first-order linear differential equation. (Recall
that a differential equation is first-order if the highest-order derivative that appears in the equation is In this section,
we study first-order linear equations and examine a method for finding a general solution to these types of equations, as
well as solving initial-value problems involving them.

Definition

A first-order differential equation is linear if it can be written in the form

                                                                                          (4.14)

where       and  are arbitrary functions of

Remember that the unknown function depends on the variable that is, is the independent variable and is the
dependent variable. Some examples of first-order linear differential equations are

Examples of first-order nonlinear differential equations include
358 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

These equations are nonlinear because of terms like    etc. Due to these terms, it is impossible to put these
equations into the same form as Equation 4.14.

Standard Form

Consider the differential equation

Our main goal in this section is to derive a solution method for equations of this form. It is useful to have the coefficient
of be equal to To make this happen, we divide both sides by

This is called the standard form of the differential equation. We will use it later when finding the solution to a general

first-order linear differential equation. Returning to Equation 4.14, we can divide both sides of the equation by           This

leads to the equation

                                                                                                                   (4.15)

Now define             and                           Then Equation 4.14 becomes

                                                                                                                   (4.16)

We can write any first-order linear differential equation in this form, and this is referred to as the standard form for a
first-order linear differential equation.

EXAMPLE 4.15

Writing First-Order Linear Equations in Standard Form

Put each of the following first-order linear differential equations into standard form. Identify  and  for each

equation.

a.

b.          (here

c.

    Solution
a. Add to both sides:

     In this equation,           and                 from each side:
b. Multiply both sides by             then subtract

    Finally, divide both sides by to make the coefficient of equal to

                                                                                                                   (4.17)

    This is allowable because in the original statement of this problem we assumed that           (If  then the

    original equation becomes                        which is clearly a false statement.)

    In this equation,                           and

c. Subtract from each side and add

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 359

Next divide both sides by

In this equation,          and

4.15 Put the equation                       into standard form and identify     and

Integrating Factors

We now develop a solution technique for any first-order linear differential equation. We start with the standard form of a
first-order linear differential equation:

                                                                                                                                                                 (4.18)

The first term on the left-hand side of Equation 4.15 is the derivative of the unknown function, and the second term is

the product of a known function with the unknown function. This is somewhat reminiscent of the product rule from the

Differentiation Rules (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-3-differentiation-rules) section. If we

multiply Equation 4.16 by a yet-to-be-determined function        then the equation becomes

                                                                                                                    (4.19)

The left-hand side Equation 4.18 can be matched perfectly to the product rule:

Matching term by term gives                                 and                 Taking the derivative of            and
setting it equal to the right-hand side of
                                                                 leads to

This is a first-order, separable differential equation for       We know   because it appears in the differential

equation we are solving. Separating variables and integrating yields

Here can be an arbitrary (positive or negative) constant. This leads to a general method for solving a first-order linear

differential equation. We first multiply both sides of Equation 4.16 by the integrating factor  This gives

                                                                                                                    (4.20)

The left-hand side of Equation 4.20 can be rewritten as

                                                                                                                    (4.21)

Next integrate both sides of Equation 4.21 with respect to
360 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                                                                                                                       (4.22)

Divide both sides of Equation 4.22 by

                                                                                                                       (4.23)

Since  was previously calculated, we are now finished. An important note about the integrating constant It may

seem that we are inconsistent in the usage of the integrating constant. However, the integral involving  is necessary

in order to find an integrating factor for Equation 4.15. Only one integrating factor is needed in order to solve the

equation; therefore, it is safe to assign a value for for this integral. We chose  When calculating the integral

inside the brackets in Equation 4.21, it is necessary to keep our options open for the value of the integrating constant,

because our goal is to find a general family of solutions to Equation 4.15. This integrating factor guarantees just that.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Solving a First-order Linear Differential Equation

1. Put the equation into standard form and identify          and

2. Calculate the integrating factor                          and divide both sides by
3. Multiply both sides of the differential equation by
4. Integrate both sides of the equation obtained in step
5. If there is an initial condition, determine the value of

EXAMPLE 4.16

Solving a First-order Linear Equation                                  Assume
Find a general solution for the differential equation

    Solution
1. To put this differential equation into standard form, divide both sides by

Therefore     and

2. The integrating factor is                                 gives us
3. Multiplying both sides of the differential equation by

4. Integrate both sides of the equation.

5. There is no initial value, so the problem is complete.

Analysis

You may have noticed the condition that was imposed on the differential equation; namely,  For any nonzero value

of the general solution is not defined at       Furthermore, when              the integrating factor changes. The

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 361

integrating factor is given by Equation 4.19 as                 For this        we get

since  The behavior of the general solution changes at          largely due to the fact that  is not defined there.

       4.16 Find the general solution to the differential equation                            Assume

Now we use the same strategy to find the solution to an initial-value problem.
  EXAMPLE 4.17

A First-order Linear Initial-Value Problem
Solve the initial-value problem

Solution

1. This differential equation is already in standard form with         and

2. The integrating factor is                                    gives
3. Multiplying both sides of the differential equation by

Integrate both sides of the equation:

4. Now substitute  and  into the general solution and solve for

      Therefore the solution to the initial-value problem is

       4.17 Solve the initial-value problem

Applications of First-order Linear Differential Equations

We look at two different applications of first-order linear differential equations. The first involves air resistance as it
relates to objects that are rising or falling; the second involves an electrical circuit. Other applications are numerous, but
most are solved in a similar fashion.
362 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

Free fall with air resistance

We discussed air resistance at the beginning of this section. The next example shows how to apply this concept for a ball
in vertical motion. Other factors can affect the force of air resistance, such as the size and shape of the object, but we
ignore them here.

EXAMPLE 4.18

A Ball with Air Resistance

A racquetball is hit straight upward with an initial velocity of m/s. The mass of a racquetball is approximately       kg.

Air resistance acts on the ball with a force numerically equal to  where represents the velocity of the ball at time

a. Find the velocity of the ball as a function of time.
b. How long does it take for the ball to reach its maximum height?
c. If the ball is hit from an initial height of meter, how high will it reach?

    Solution                                    and         The initial velocity is  m/s. Therefore the initial-value
a. The mass

     problem is

Dividing the differential equation by                gives

The differential equation is linear. Using the problem-solving strategy for linear differential equations:

Step 1. Rewrite the differential equation as                       This gives        and

Step 2. The integrating factor is
Step 3. Multiply the differential equation by

Step 4. Integrate both sides:

Step 5. Solve for using the initial condition

     Therefore the solution to the initial-value problem is
b. The ball reaches its maximum height when the velocity is equal to zero. The reason is that when the velocity is

     positive, it is rising, and when it is negative, it is falling. Therefore when it is zero, it is neither rising nor falling, and
     is at its maximum height:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 363

Therefore it takes approximately    second to reach maximum height.

c. To find the height of the ball as a function of time, use the fact that the derivative of position is velocity, i.e., if

represents the height at time then         Because we know and the initial height, we can form an

initial-value problem:

Integrating both sides of the differential equation with respect to gives

Solve for by using the initial condition:

Therefore

After      second, the height is given by

                                           meter.

4.18 The weight of a penny is grams (United States Mint, "Coin Specifications," accessed April 9, 2015,

       http://www.usmint.gov/about_the_mint/?action=coin_specifications), and the upper observation deck of

       the Empire State Building is meters above the street. Since the penny is a small and relatively smooth

       object, air resistance acting on the penny is actually quite small. We assume the air resistance is

       numerically equal to         Furthermore, the penny is dropped with no initial velocity imparted to it.

           a. Set up an initial-value problem that represents the falling penny.
           b. Solve the problem for
           c. What is the terminal velocity of the penny (i.e., calculate the limit of the velocity as approaches

                infinity)?

Electrical Circuits

A source of electromotive force (e.g., a battery or generator) produces a flow of current in a closed circuit, and this
current produces a voltage drop across each resistor, inductor, and capacitor in the circuit. Kirchhoff's Loop Rule states
that the sum of the voltage drops across resistors, inductors, and capacitors is equal to the total electromotive force in a
closed circuit. We have the following three results:

 1. The voltage drop across a resistor is given by
364 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

     where is a constant of proportionality called the resistance, and is the current.
2. The voltage drop across an inductor is given by

     where is a constant of proportionality called the inductance, and again denotes the current.
3. The voltage drop across a capacitor is given by

where is a constant of proportionality called the capacitance, and is the instantaneous charge on the capacitor. The
relationship between and is

We use units of volts to measure voltage         amperes to measure current coulombs to measure charge
ohms to measure resistance henrys               to measure inductance and farads to measure capacitance
Consider the circuit in Figure 4.25.

Figure 4.25 A typical electric circuit, containing a voltage generator  capacitor               inductor  and resistor

Applying Kirchhoff's Loop Rule to this circuit, we let   denote the electromotive force supplied by the voltage generator.
Then

Substituting the expressions for                and into this equation, we obtain

                                                                                                               (4.24)

If there is no capacitor in the circuit, then the equation becomes                                             (4.25)

This is a first-order differential equation in The circuit is referred to as an circuit.                  and           Then
Next, suppose there is no inductor in the circuit, but there is a capacitor and a resistor, so
Equation 4.23 can be rewritten as

                                                                                                               (4.26)

which is a first-order linear differential equation. This is referred to as an RC circuit. In either case, we can set up and
solve an initial-value problem.

EXAMPLE 4.19

Finding Current in an RL Electric Circuit                               a resistor of and an inductor of       If the
A circuit has in series an electromotive force given by
initial current is find the current at time

    Solution

We have a resistor and an inductor in the circuit, so we use Equation 4.24. The voltage drop across the resistor is given

by            The voltage drop across the inductor is given by                     The electromotive force becomes

the right-hand side of Equation 4.24. Therefore Equation 4.24 becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 365

Dividing both sides by gives the equation

Since the initial current is 0, this result gives an initial condition of  We can solve this initial-value problem using
the five-step strategy for solving first-order differential equations.

Step 1. Rewrite the differential equation as                               This gives       and

Step 2. The integrating factor is
Step 3. Multiply the differential equation by

Step 4. Integrate both sides:

Step 5. Solve for using the initial condition

Therefore the solution to the initial-value problem is
The first term can be rewritten as a single cosine function. First, multiply and divide by

Next, define to be an acute angle such that    Then                                    and

Therefore the solution can be written as

The second term is called the attenuation term, because it disappears rapidly as t grows larger. The phase shift is given

by and the amplitude of the steady-state current is given by               The graph of this solution appears in Figure 4.26:
366 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

                                                      Figure 4.26

      4.19 A circuit has in series an electromotive force given by              V, a capacitor with capacitance

      and a resistor of If the initial charge is find the charge at time

        SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES

Are the following differential equations linear? Explain your reasoning.

208.                                            209.                      210.

211.                                            212.

Write the following first-order differential equations in standard form.

213.                                            214.                      215.

216.                                            217.

What are the integrating factors for the following differential equations?

218.                                            219.                      220.

221.                                            222.

Solve the following differential equations by using integrating factors.

223.                                            224.                      225.

226.                                            227.                      228.

229.                                            230.                      231.

232.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      4.5 · First-order Linear Equations 367

Solve the following differential equations. Use your calculator to draw a family of solutions. Are there certain initial
conditions that change the behavior of the solution?

233. [T]                            234. [T]                              235. [T]

236. [T]                            237. [T]                              238. [T]

239. [T]                            240. [T]

Solve the following initial-value problems by using integrating factors.

241.                                242.                                  243.

244.                                245.                                  246.

247.                                      248.                                  249.

250.                                251. A falling object of mass         252. Using your expression
                                            can reach terminal                    from the preceding
253. [T] Using your equation                velocity when the drag                problem, what is the
                                            force is proportional to its          terminal velocity? (Hint:
      for terminal velocity, solve          velocity, with                        Examine the limiting
                                            proportionality constant              behavior; does the
      for the distance fallen.                 Set up the differential            velocity approach a
                                            equation and solve for                value?)
      How long does it take to              the velocity given an
                                            initial velocity of           255. Using your expression
      fall        meters if the                                                   from the preceding
                                    254. A more accurate way to                   problem, what is the
      mass is kilograms,                    describe terminal velocity            terminal velocity? (Hint:
                                            is that the drag force is             Examine the limiting
      the acceleration due to               proportional to the                   behavior: Does the
      gravity is m/s2 and the               square of velocity, with a            velocity approach a
                                            proportionality constant              value?)
                                               Set up the differential
      proportionality constant              equation and solve for
                                            the velocity.

      is

256. [T] Using your equation

      for terminal velocity, solve

      for the distance fallen.

      How long does it take to

      fall        meters if the

      mass is kilograms,

      the acceleration due to

      gravity is  and the

      proportionality constant

      is Does it take more or

      less time than your initial

      estimate?

For the following problems, determine how parameter affects the solution.

257. Solve the generic              258. Solve the generic                259. Solve the generic
        equation                            equation                              equation
        How does varying                    How does varying                      How does varying
        change the behavior?                change the behavior?                  change the behavior?
368 4 · Introduction to Differential Equations

260. Solve the generic                          261. Solve  with
        equation
        How does varying                        the initial condition
        change the behavior?
                                                            As approaches

                                                what happens to your

                                                formula?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          4 · Chapter Review 369

Chapter Review

Key Terms

asymptotically semi-stable solution           if it is neither asymptotically stable nor asymptotically unstable

asymptotically stable solution         if there exists      such that for any value                       the solution to the

initial-value problem                           approaches as approaches infinity

asymptotically unstable solution           if there exists  such that for any value                       the solution to

the initial-value problem                               never approaches as approaches infinity

autonomous differential equation an equation in which the right-hand side is a function of alone

carrying capacity the maximum population of an organism that the environment can sustain indefinitely

differential equation an equation involving a function      and one or more of its derivatives

direction field (slope field) a mathematical object used to graphically represent solutions to a first-order differential

equation; at each point in a direction field, a line segment appears whose slope is equal to the slope of a solution to

the differential equation passing through that point

equilibrium solution any solution to the differential equation of the form    where is a constant

Euler's Method a numerical technique used to approximate solutions to an initial-value problem

general solution (or family of solutions) the entire set of solutions to a given differential equation

growth rate the constant         in the exponential growth function

initial population the population at time

initial value(s) a value or set of values that a solution of a differential equation satisfies for a fixed value of the

independent variable

initial velocity the velocity at time

initial-value problem a differential equation together with an initial value or values

integrating factor any function        that is multiplied on both sides of a differential equation to make the side

involving the unknown function equal to the derivative of a product of two functions

linear description of a first-order differential equation that can be written in the form

logistic differential equation a differential equation that incorporates the carrying capacity and growth rate into a

population model

order of a differential equation the highest order of any derivative of the unknown function that appears in the

equation

particular solution member of a family of solutions to a differential equation that satisfies a particular initial condition

phase line a visual representation of the behavior of solutions to an autonomous differential equation subject to

various initial conditions

separable differential equation any equation that can be written in the form

separation of variables a method used to solve a separable differential equation

solution curve a curve graphed in a direction field that corresponds to the solution to the initial-value problem passing

through a given point in the direction field

solution to a differential equation a function              that satisfies a given differential equation

standard form the form of a first-order linear differential equation obtained by writing the differential equation in the

form

step size the increment that is added to the value at each step in Euler's Method

threshold population the minimum population that is necessary for a species to survive

Key Equations

Euler's Method

Separable differential equation
Solution concentration
Newton's law of cooling
370 4 · Chapter Review

Logistic differential equation and initial-value problem

Solution to the logistic differential equation/initial-value problem

Threshold population model
standard form

integrating factor

Key Concepts

4.1 Basics of Differential Equations

· A differential equation is an equation involving a function                    and one or more of its derivatives. A solution is a

function                that satisfies the differential equation when and its derivatives are substituted into the

equation.

· The order of a differential equation is the highest order of any derivative of the unknown function that appears in

the equation.

· A differential equation coupled with an initial value is called an initial-value problem. To solve an initial-value

problem, first find the general solution to the differential equation, then determine the value of the constant. Initial-

value problems have many applications in science and engineering.

4.2 Direction Fields and Numerical Methods

· A direction field is a mathematical object used to graphically represent solutions to a first-order differential
    equation.

· Euler's Method is a numerical technique that can be used to approximate solutions to a differential equation.

4.3 Separable Equations

· A separable differential equation is any equation that can be written in the form
· The method of separation of variables is used to find the general solution to a separable differential equation.

4.4 The Logistic Equation

· When studying population functions, different assumptions--such as exponential growth, logistic growth, or
    threshold population--lead to different rates of growth.

· The logistic differential equation incorporates the concept of a carrying capacity. This value is a limiting value on the
    population for any given environment.

· The logistic differential equation can be solved for any positive growth rate, initial population, and carrying capacity.

4.5 First-order Linear Equations

· Any first-order linear differential equation can be written in the form
· We can use a five-step problem-solving strategy for solving a first-order linear differential equation that may or may

    not include an initial value.
· Applications of first-order linear differential equations include determining motion of a rising or falling object with

    air resistance and finding current in an electrical circuit.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

262. The differential equation             263. The differential equation        264. You can explicitly solve all
                                       is                         is separable.          first-order differential
                                                                                         equations by separation
        linear.                                                                          or by the method of
                                                                                         integrating factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         4 · Chapter Review 371

265. You can determine the
        behavior of all first-order
        differential equations
        using directional fields or
        Euler's method.

For the following problems, find the general solution to the differential equations.

266.                                 267.                                 268.

269.                                 270.                                 271.

For the following problems, find the solution to the initial value problem.

272.                                 273.                                       274.
                                                                                277.
275.                                       276.

For the following problems, draw the directional field associated with the differential equation, then solve the differential
equation. Draw a sample solution on the directional field.

278.                                 279.            for

For the following problems, use Euler's Method with  steps over the interval                  Then solve the initial-value

problem exactly. How close is your Euler's Method estimate?

280.                                 281.

For the following problems, set up and solve the differential equations.

282. A car drives along a            283. You throw a ball of mass        284. You drop a ball with a
        freeway, accelerating                kilograms into the air with
        according to                         an upward velocity of              mass of kilograms out
        where represents time                m/s. Find exactly the time
        in minutes. Find the                 the ball will remain in the        an airplane window at a
        velocity at any time                 air, assuming that gravity
        assuming the car starts              is given by                        height of     m. How
        with an initial speed of
        mph.                                                                    long does it take for the

                                                                                ball to reach the ground?

285. You drop the same ball of       286. A drug is administered to       287. A      -liter tank contains
        mass kilograms out of                a patient every hours
        the same airplane                    and is cleared at a rate           pure water and a solution
        window at the same                   proportional to the
        height, except this time             amount of drug left in the         of kg salt/L is pumped
        you assume a drag force              body, with proportionality
        proportional to the ball's           constant If the                    into the tank at a rate of
        velocity, using a                    patient needs a baseline
        proportionality constant             level of mg to be in the           L/min and is drained at
        of and the ball reaches              bloodstream at all times,
        terminal velocity. Solve             how large should the               the same rate. Solve for
        for the distance fallen as           dose be?
        a function of time. How                                                 total amount of salt in the
        long does it take the ball
        to reach the ground?                                                    tank at time
372 4 · Chapter Review

288. You boil water to make           289. The human population (in  290. Repeat the previous
        tea. When you pour the                                               problem but use
        water into your teapot,       thousands) of Nevada in                Gompertz growth model.
        the temperature is                                                   Which is more accurate?
        After minutes in your         was roughly               If
                room, the
        temperature of the tea is     the carrying capacity is
                 Solve the equation
        to determine the              estimated at million
        temperatures of the tea
        at time How long must         individuals, and assuming
        you wait until the tea is at
        a drinkable temperature       a growth rate of per

                                      year, develop a logistic

                                      growth model and solve

                                      for the population in

                                      Nevada at any time (use

                                      as time = 0). What

                                      population does your

                                      model predict for

                                      How close is your

                                      prediction to the true

                                      value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                         5 · Introduction 373

5  SEQUENCES AND SERIES

Figure 5.1 The Koch snowflake is constructed by using an iterative process. Starting with an equilateral triangle, at each
step of the process the middle third of each line segment is removed and replaced with an equilateral triangle pointing
outward.

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Sequences
  5.2 Infinite Series
  5.3 The Divergence and Integral Tests
  5.4 Comparison Tests
  5.5 Alternating Series
  5.6 Ratio and Root Tests

      Introduction

The Koch snowflake is constructed from an infinite number of nonoverlapping equilateral triangles. Consequently, we
can express its area as a sum of infinitely many terms. How do we add an infinite number of terms? Can a sum of an
infinite number of terms be finite? To answer these questions, we need to introduce the concept of an infinite series, a
sum with infinitely many terms. Having defined the necessary tools, we will be able to calculate the area of the Koch
snowflake (see Example 5.8).

The topic of infinite series may seem unrelated to differential and integral calculus. In fact, an infinite series whose terms
involve powers of a variable is a powerful tool that we can use to express functions as "infinite polynomials." We can use
infinite series to evaluate complicated functions, approximate definite integrals, and create new functions. In addition,
infinite series are used to solve differential equations that model physical behavior, from tiny electronic circuits to Earth-
orbiting satellites.
374 5 · Sequences and Series

5.1 Sequences

Learning Objectives

      5.1.1 Find the formula for the general term of a sequence.
      5.1.2 Calculate the limit of a sequence if it exists.
      5.1.3 Determine the convergence or divergence of a given sequence.

In this section, we introduce sequences and define what it means for a sequence to converge or diverge. We show how
to find limits of sequences that converge, often by using the properties of limits for functions discussed earlier. We close
this section with the Monotone Convergence Theorem, a tool we can use to prove that certain types of sequences
converge.

Terminology of Sequences

To work with this new topic, we need some new terms and definitions. First, an infinite sequence is an ordered list of
numbers of the form

Each of the numbers in the sequence is called a term. The symbol         is called the index variable for the sequence. We use
the notation

                                                                       

to denote this sequence. A similar notation is used for sets, but a sequence is an ordered list, whereas a set is not
ordered. Because a particular number exists for each positive integer we can also define a sequence as a function
whose domain is the set of positive integers.

Let's consider the infinite, ordered list

This is a sequence in which the first, second, and third terms are given by                    and  You can probably
see that the terms in this sequence have the following pattern:

Assuming this pattern continues, we can write the  term in the sequence by the explicit formula     Using this
notation, we can write this sequence as             

Alternatively, we can describe this sequence in a different way. Since each term is twice the previous term, this sequence

can be defined recursively by expressing the term in terms of the previous term                In particular, we can define

this sequence as the sequence    where             and for all           each term is defined by the recurrence

relation

Definition

An infinite sequence             is an ordered list of numbers of the form

The subscript is called the index variable of the sequence. Each number is a term of the sequence. Sometimes

sequences are defined by explicit formulas, in which case                   for some function       defined over the positive

integers. In other cases, sequences are defined by using a recurrence relation. In a recurrence relation, one term (or

more) of the sequence is given explicitly, and subsequent terms are defined in terms of earlier terms in the sequence.

Note that the index does not have to start at      but could start with other integers. For example, a sequence given by
                                                   in which case the sequence would be
the explicit formula             could start at

Similarly, for a sequence defined by a recurrence relation, the term may be given explicitly, and the terms for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.1 · Sequences 375

may be defined in terms of  Since a sequence  has exactly one value for each positive integer it can be

described as a function whose domain is the set of positive integers. As a result, it makes sense to discuss the graph of a

sequence. The graph of a sequence  consists of all points           for all positive integers Figure 5.2 shows the

graph of

                                        Figure 5.2 The plotted points are a graph of the sequence
Two types of sequences occur often and are given special names: arithmetic sequences and geometric sequences. In an
arithmetic sequence, the difference between every pair of consecutive terms is the same. For example, consider the
sequence

You can see that the difference between every consecutive pair of terms is Assuming that this pattern continues, this
sequence is an arithmetic sequence. It can be described by using the recurrence relation

Note that

Thus the sequence can also be described using the explicit formula

In general, an arithmetic sequence is any sequence of the form
In a geometric sequence, the ratio of every pair of consecutive terms is the same. For example, consider the sequence

We see that the ratio of any term to the preceding term is  Assuming this pattern continues, this sequence is a
geometric sequence. It can be defined recursively as

Alternatively, since
376 5 · Sequences and Series

we see that the sequence can be described by using the explicit formula

The sequence    that we discussed earlier is a geometric sequence, where the ratio of any term to the previous term

is In general, a geometric sequence is any sequence of the form

EXAMPLE 5.1

Finding Explicit Formulas                                              term of the sequence.
For each of the following sequences, find an explicit formula for the

 a.
b.

    Solution

a. First, note that the sequence is alternating from negative to positive. The odd terms in the sequence are negative,

    and the even terms are positive. Therefore, the term includes a factor of  Next, consider the sequence of

    numerators                   and the sequence of denominators        We can see that both of these sequences

    are arithmetic sequences. The term in the sequence of numerators is and the term in the sequence of

    denominators is              Therefore, the sequence can be described by the explicit formula

b. The sequence of numerators                is a geometric sequence. The numerator of the           term is The
                                                                                                     term is
    sequence of denominators                 is an arithmetic sequence. The denominator of the

                                 Therefore, we can describe the sequence by the explicit formula

    5.1 Find an explicit formula for the term of the sequence

EXAMPLE 5.2

Defined by Recurrence Relations
For each of the following recursively defined sequences, find an explicit formula for the sequence.

a.                               for

b.                                    for

    Solution
a. Writing out the first few terms, we have

      In general,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              5.1 · Sequences 377

b. Write out the first few terms:

    From this pattern, we derive the explicit formula

    5.2 Find an explicit formula for the sequence defined recursively such that        and

Limit of a Sequence

A fundamental question that arises regarding infinite sequences is the behavior of the terms as gets larger. Since a

sequence is a function defined on the positive integers, it makes sense to discuss the limit of the terms as   For

example, consider the following four sequences and their different behaviors as   (see Figure 5.3):

a.                                 The terms  become arbitrarily large as         In this case, we say that

     as 

b.                                 The terms           as 

c.                                 The terms alternate but do not approach one single value as  

d.                                 The terms alternate for this sequence as well, but           as 
378 5 · Sequences and Series

Figure 5.3 (a) The terms in the sequence become arbitrarily large as   (b) The terms in the sequence approach as
                                                                        (d) The terms in the sequence alternate
 (c) The terms in the sequence alternate between and as

between positive and negative values but approach as    

From these examples, we see several possibilities for the behavior of the terms of a sequence as   In two of the

sequences, the terms approach a finite number as         In the other two sequences, the terms do not. If the terms of

a sequence approach a finite number as   we say that the sequence is a convergent sequence and the real

number is the limit of the sequence. We can give an informal definition here.

Definition

Given a sequence              if the terms become arbitrarily close to a finite number as becomes sufficiently large,

we say      is a convergent sequence and is the limit of the sequence. In this case, we write

If a sequence                                                                   
                              is not convergent, we say it is a divergent sequence.

From Figure 5.3, we see that the terms in the sequence                are becoming arbitrarily close to as becomes

very large. We conclude that     is a convergent sequence and its limit is In contrast, from Figure 5.3, we see

that the terms in the sequence   are not approaching a finite number as becomes larger. We say that                      is

a divergent sequence.

In the informal definition for the limit of a sequence, we used the terms "arbitrarily close" and "sufficiently large."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.1 · Sequences 379

Although these phrases help illustrate the meaning of a converging sequence, they are somewhat vague. To be more
precise, we now present the more formal definition of limit for a sequence and show these ideas graphically in Figure
5.4.

Definition

A sequence    converges to a real number if for all         there exists an integer such that                      if

The number is the limit of the sequence and we write

                                                

In this case, we say the sequence   is a convergent sequence. If a sequence does not converge, it is a divergent

sequence, and we say the limit does not exist.

We remark that the convergence or divergence of a sequence    depends only on what happens to the terms as

 Therefore, if a finite number of terms               are placed before to create a new sequence

this new sequence will converge if  converges and diverge if  diverges. Further, if the sequence  converges

to this new sequence will also converge to

Figure 5.4 As increases, the terms  become closer to  For values of        the distance between each point

and the line  is less than

As defined above, if a sequence does not converge, it is said to be a divergent sequence. For example, the sequences

and           shown in Figure 5.4 diverge. However, different sequences can diverge in different ways. The

sequence      diverges because the terms alternate between and but do not approach one value as                        

On the other hand, the sequence               diverges because the terms    as  We say the sequence

diverges to infinity and write                     It is important to recognize that this notation does not imply
                                            

the limit of the sequence           exists. The sequence is, in fact, divergent. Writing that the limit is infinity is intended

only to provide more information about why the sequence is divergent. A sequence can also diverge to negative infinity.

For example, the sequence           diverges to negative infinity because   as  We write this as

                     



Because a sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers, we can use properties of limits of
380 5 · Sequences and Series

functions to determine whether a sequence converges. For example, consider a sequence                       and a related function

defined on all positive real numbers such that               for all integers   Since the domain of the sequence is a

subset of the domain of if                     exists, then the sequence converges and has the same limit. For example,
                                            

consider the sequence              and the related function             Since the function defined on all real numbers

satisfies                     as    the sequence             must satisfy       as 

Theorem 5.1

Limit of a Sequence Defined by a Function

Consider a sequence                such that                for all     If there exists a real number such that
                                                                      

then         converges and

                                                             

We can use this theorem to evaluate                  for                For example, consider the sequence         and the related

                                                   

exponential function                          Since                     we conclude that the sequence         converges and its
                                                          

limit is Similarly, for any real number such that                               and therefore the sequence         converges.

                                                                        

On the other hand, if             then               and therefore the limit of the sequence           is If               and
                                             
                                                                                                                   

therefore we cannot apply this theorem. However, in this case, just as the function grows without bound as                  

the terms in the sequence become arbitrarily large as                    and we conclude that the sequence         diverges to

infinity if

We summarize these results regarding the geometric sequence

                                                             

Later in this section we consider the case when

We now consider slightly more complicated sequences. For example, consider the sequence                            The

terms in this sequence are more complicated than other sequences we have discussed, but luckily the limit of this

sequence is determined by the limits of the two sequences                  and             As we describe in the following

algebraic limit laws, since                   and           both converge to the sequence                     converges to

             Just as we were able to evaluate a limit involving an algebraic combination of functions and by looking at

the limits of and (see Introduction to Limits (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/2-introduction)), we

are able to evaluate the limit of a sequence whose terms are algebraic combinations of and by evaluating the limits

of    and

Theorem 5.2

Algebraic Limit Laws

Given sequences               and             and any real number if there exist constants and such that           and

                                                                                                                 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             5.1 · Sequences 381

                    then
      

 i.                                   
                                        

ii.                                 provided
         

iii.
         

iv.

                             

                           

  v.                                                 and each

                           

Proof

We prove part iii.

Let   Since                         there exists a constant positive integer such that              for all       Since
                                                                                        be the larger of     and
                         

                  there exists a constant such that                    for all  Let
    

Therefore, for all



The algebraic limit laws allow us to evaluate limits for many sequences. For example, consider the sequence              As

shown earlier,               Similarly, for any positive integer we can conclude that
                       

                                                     

In the next example, we make use of this fact along with the limit laws to evaluate limits for other sequences.

EXAMPLE 5.3

Determining Convergence and Finding Limits
For each of the following sequences, determine whether or not the sequence converges. If it converges, find its limit.

a.

b.

c.
d.

    Solution                        Using this fact, we conclude that
a. We know that

                                                                       
382 5 · Sequences and Series

Therefore,

                                                       

     The sequence converges and its limit is
b. By factoring out of the numerator and denominator and using the limit laws above, we have

                                                

                                                
                                                   

                                                                               

                                                                           

                                                                                 

                                                                             

     The sequence converges and its limit is  defined on all real numbers          Since   and   as
c. Consider the related function

          apply L'Hôpital's rule and write

                                    

                                        

                                    

We conclude that the sequence diverges.

d. Consider the function                      defined on all real numbers        This function has the indeterminate

form  as                       Let

                                                

Now taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation, we obtain

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.1 · Sequences 383

                                                                    

Since the function          is continuous on its domain, we can interchange the limit and the natural logarithm.
Therefore,                                                  

Using properties of logarithms, we write

                                                                      

Since the right-hand side of this equation has the indeterminate form            rewrite it as a fraction to apply

L'Hôpital's rule. Write

                                                                      

Since the right-hand side is now in the indeterminate form            we are able to apply L'Hôpital's rule. We conclude
that

                                                                      

Therefore,           and               Therefore, since                          we can conclude that the sequence
                                                                  

              converges to

5.3 Consider the sequence                    Determine whether or not the sequence converges. If it
           converges, find its limit.

Recall that if is a continuous function at a value then                      as  This idea applies to sequences as well.
                                                                      Then               This property often enables us
Suppose a sequence        and a function is continuous at
                                                                                         From Example 5.3a. we know
to find limits for complicated sequences. For example, consider the sequence

the sequence         Since is a continuous function at

                                                                    

Theorem 5.3

Continuous Functions Defined on Convergent Sequences

Consider a sequence  and suppose there exists a real number such that the sequence  converges to

Suppose is a continuous function at Then there exists an integer such that is defined at all values for

and the sequence            converges to     (Figure 5.5).
384 5 · Sequences and Series

Proof

Let      Since is continuous at there exists                such that                            if  Since the sequence
                                                                                 Therefore, for all                    which
     converges to there exists such that                        for all  converges to

implies                          We conclude that the sequence



Figure 5.5 Because is a continuous function as the inputs                  approach the outputs
                                   approach

EXAMPLE 5.4

Limits Involving Continuous Functions Defined on Convergent Sequences

Determine whether the sequence                     converges. If it converges, find its limit.

     Solution

Since the sequence               converges to and       is continuous at   we can conclude that the sequence

               converges and

                                                   

     5.4 Determine if the sequence                      converges. If it converges, find its limit.

Another theorem involving limits of sequences is an extension of the Squeeze Theorem for limits discussed in
Introduction to Limits (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/2-introduction).

Theorem 5.4

Squeeze Theorem for Sequences

Consider sequences                  and  Suppose there exists an integer such that

If there exists a real number such that

                                                                         

then     converges and                   (Figure 5.6).
                                  

Proof

Let      Since the sequence         converges to there exists an integer such that                           for all
                                                                                                             By assumption,
Similarly, since    converges to there exists an integer such that                     for all       and We must show

there exists an integer such that                  for all      Let be the largest of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5.1 · Sequences 385

that          for all            For all

Therefore,                       and we conclude that   for all                and we conclude that the sequence
converges to



Figure 5.6 Each term satisfies                 and the sequences  and          converge to the same limit, so the

sequence      must converge to the same limit as well.

EXAMPLE 5.5

Using the Squeeze Theorem
Use the Squeeze Theorem to find the limit of each of the following sequences.

a.
b.

    Solution                 for all integers we have
a. Since

     Since    and                we conclude that                 as well.
b. Since

      for all positive integers           and           we can conclude that

      5.5 Find
                           

Using the idea from Example 5.5b. we conclude that      for any real number such that             If              the

sequence      diverges because the terms oscillate and become arbitrarily large in magnitude. If  the sequence

              diverges, as discussed earlier. Here is a summary of the properties for geometric sequences.

                                                                                                                  (5.1)

                                                                                                                  (5.2)

                                                         (5.3)

                                                                                                                                        (5.4)
386 5 · Sequences and Series

Bounded Sequences

We now turn our attention to one of the most important theorems involving sequences: the Monotone Convergence
Theorem. Before stating the theorem, we need to introduce some terminology and motivation. We begin by defining
what it means for a sequence to be bounded.

Definition

A sequence         is bounded above if there exists a real number such that

for all positive integers

A sequence         is bounded below if there exists a real number  such that

for all positive integers

A sequence         is a bounded sequence if it is bounded above and bounded below.

If a sequence is not bounded, it is an unbounded sequence.

For example, the sequence        is bounded above because          for all positive integers It is also bounded below

because        for all positive integers n. Therefore,        is a bounded sequence. On the other hand, consider the

sequence       Because           for all  the sequence is bounded below. However, the sequence is not bounded

above. Therefore,             is an unbounded sequence.

We now discuss the relationship between boundedness and convergence. Suppose a sequence         is unbounded. Then

it is not bounded above, or not bounded below, or both. In either case, there are terms that are arbitrarily large in

magnitude as gets larger. As a result, the sequence           cannot converge. Therefore, being bounded is a necessary

condition for a sequence to converge.

Theorem 5.5

Convergent Sequences Are Bounded

If a sequence                 converges, then it is bounded.

Note that a sequence being bounded is not a sufficient condition for a sequence to converge. For example, the sequence
            is bounded, but the sequence diverges because the sequence oscillates between and and never

approaches a finite number. We now discuss a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for a bounded sequence to
converge.

Consider a bounded sequence            Suppose the sequence   is increasing. That is,           Since the

sequence is increasing, the terms are not oscillating. Therefore, there are two possibilities. The sequence could diverge

to infinity, or it could converge. However, since the sequence is bounded, it is bounded above and the sequence cannot

diverge to infinity. We conclude that     converges. For example, consider the sequence

Since this sequence is increasing and bounded above, it converges. Next, consider the sequence

Even though the sequence is not increasing for all values of we see that                        Therefore, starting

with the eighth term,            the sequence is increasing. In this case, we say the sequence is eventually increasing.

Since the sequence is bounded above, it converges. It is also true that if a sequence is decreasing (or eventually

decreasing) and bounded below, it also converges.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.1 · Sequences 387

Definition

A sequence      is increasing for all  if

A sequence      is decreasing for all  if

A sequence      is a monotone sequence for all   if it is increasing for all  or decreasing for all

We now have the necessary definitions to state the Monotone Convergence Theorem, which gives a sufficient condition
for convergence of a sequence.

Theorem 5.6

Monotone Convergence Theorem

If  is a bounded sequence and there exists a positive integer  such that      is monotone for all    then

    converges.

The proof of this theorem is beyond the scope of this text. Instead, we provide a graph to show intuitively why this
theorem makes sense (Figure 5.7).

             Figure 5.7 Since the sequence       is increasing and bounded above, it must converge.

In the following example, we show how the Monotone Convergence Theorem can be used to prove convergence of a
sequence.

EXAMPLE 5.6

Using the Monotone Convergence Theorem
For each of the following sequences, use the Monotone Convergence Theorem to show the sequence converges and find
its limit.

a.

b.  defined recursively such that

    Solution
a. Writing out the first few terms, we see that

    At first, the terms increase. However, after the third term, the terms decrease. In fact, the terms decrease for all
             We can show this as follows.
388 5 · Sequences and Series

Therefore, the sequence is decreasing for all       Further, the sequence is bounded below by because

for all positive integers Therefore, by the Monotone Convergence Theorem, the sequence converges.

To find the limit, we use the fact that the sequence converges and let             Now note this important
                                                                            

observation. Consider                Since
                                   

the only difference between the sequences           and     is that     omits the first term. Since a finite

number of terms does not affect the convergence of a sequence,

                                                            

Combining this fact with the equation

and taking the limit of both sides of the equation

                                                            

     we can conclude that
b. Writing out the first several terms,

we can conjecture that the sequence is decreasing and bounded below by  To show that the sequence is bounded
below by we can show that

To show this, first rewrite

Since           and is defined as a sum of positive terms,      Similarly, all terms  Therefore,

if and only if

Rewriting the inequality                 as                 and using the fact that

because the square of any real number is nonnegative, we can conclude that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.1 · Sequences 389

To show that the sequence is decreasing, we must show that             for all       Since      it follows that

Dividing both sides by     we obtain

Using the definition of      we conclude that

Since  is bounded below and decreasing, by the Monotone Convergence Theorem, it converges.

To find the limit, let       Then using the recurrence relation and the fact that                 we have

                                                                                                

                                                      

and therefore

Multiplying both sides of this equation by we arrive at the equation

Solving this equation for  we conclude that           which implies         Since all the terms are positive, the
limit

5.6 Consider the sequence             defined recursively such that                  Use the Monotone

       Convergence Theorem to show that this sequence converges and find its limit.

STUDENT PROJECT                                                      where             and for

Fibonacci Numbers
The Fibonacci numbers are defined recursively by the sequence

Here we look at properties of the Fibonacci numbers.

1. Write out the first twenty Fibonacci numbers.

2. Find a closed formula for the Fibonacci sequence by using the following steps.

a. Consider the recursively defined sequence          where          and             Show that this sequence

       can be described by the closed formula         for all

b. Using the result from part a. as motivation, look for a solution of the equation

       of the form           Determine what two values for will allow       to satisfy this equation.
                                                                                        Use the initial conditions
c. Consider the two solutions from part b.: and Let
390 5 · Sequences and Series

                and to determine the values for the constants and and write the closed formula
    3. Use the answer in 2 c. to show that

                                                                            

    The number                     is known as the golden ratio (Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9).

    Figure 5.8 The seeds in a sunflower exhibit spiral patterns curving to the left and to the right. The number of
    spirals in each direction is always a Fibonacci number--always. (credit: modification of work by Esdras Calderan,
    Wikimedia Commons)

    Figure 5.9 The proportion of the golden ratio appears in many famous examples of art and architecture. The
    ancient Greek temple known as the Parthenon appears to have these proportions, and the ratio appears again in
    many of the smaller details. (credit: modification of work by TravelingOtter, Flickr)

        SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES

Find the first six terms of each of the following sequences, starting with

1.              for                2.         for                   3.           and

                                                                            for

4.              and                5. Find an explicit formula for  6. Find a formula for the

                              for      where       and                      term of the arithmetic

                                              for                           sequence whose first term is

                                                                                 such that

                                                                                      for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  5.1 · Sequences 391

7. Find a formula for the          8. Find a formula for the            9. Find a formula for the
    term of the arithmetic             term of the geometric                term of the geometric
    sequence whose first term is       sequence whose first term is         sequence whose first term is
                 such that                        such that                            such that
                          for
                                       for                                                     for

10. Find an explicit formula for the               11. Find an explicit formula for
      term of the sequence whose first
      several terms are                            the term of the

      (Hint: First add one to each term.)          sequence satisfying

                                                   and                  for

Find a formula for the general term of each of the following sequences.

12.                                13.

     (Hint: Find where

     takes these values)

Find a function          that identifies the term of the following recursively defined sequences, as

14.            and             for 15.             and  for 16.                      and
                                                                                                    for

17.            and                 18.             and

                          for              for

Plot the first      terms of each sequence. State whether the graphical evidence suggests that the sequence converges or
diverges.
                          and for  20. [T]              and 21. [T]                                      and for
19. [T]                                  for

22. [T]
      and for

Suppose that                                  and       for all Evaluate each of the following limits, or state that
                               

the limit does not exist, or state that there is not enough information to determine whether the limit exists.

23.                                24.                                  25.
                                                                                  

26.
          

Find the limit of each of the following sequences, using L'Hôpital's rule when appropriate.

27.                                28.                                  29.

30.         (Hint:
392 5 · Sequences and Series

For each of the following sequences, whose terms are indicated, state whether the sequence is bounded and
whether it is eventually monotone, increasing, or decreasing.

31.                              32.                              33.

34.                              35.                              36.

37.                              38. Determine whether the        39. Determine whether the

                                      sequence defined as              sequence defined as

                                      follows has a limit. If it       follows has a limit. If it

                                      does, find the limit.            does, find the limit.

                                                 etc.

Use the Squeeze Theorem to find the limit of each of the following sequences.

40.                              41.                              42.

43.

For the following sequences, plot the first  terms of the sequence and state whether the graphical evidence suggests
that the sequence converges or diverges.

44. [T]                          45. [T]

Determine the limit of the sequence or show that the sequence diverges. If it converges, find its limit.

46.                              47.                              48.

49.                              50.                              51.

52.                              53.

Newton's method seeks to approximate a solution              that starts with an initial approximation    and successively
                                                                                                             If the
defines a sequence                    For the given choice of and write out the formula for

sequence appears to converge, give an exact formula for the solution then identify the limit accurate to four decimal
places and the smallest such that agrees with up to four decimal places.

54. [T]                          55. [T]                          56. [T]

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            5.1 · Sequences 393

57. [T]                                     58. [T] Suppose you start with             59. [T] A lake initially contains
                                                  one liter of vinegar and                           fish. Suppose that in
                                                  repeatedly remove
                                                  replace with water, mix,                   the absence of predators
                                                  and repeat.                                or other causes of removal,
                                                   a. Find a formula for the                 the fish population
                                                         concentration after                 increases by each
                                                         steps.                              month. However, factoring
                                                   b. After how many steps                   in all causes, fish are
                                                         does the mixture                    lost each month.
                                                         contain less than                    a. Explain why the fish
                                                         vinegar?
                                                                                                    population after
                                                                                                    months is modeled by

                                                                                                 with
                                                                                            b. How many fish will be in

                                                                                                 the pond after one
                                                                                                 year?

60. [T] A bank account earns                61. [T] A student takes out a                   62. [T] Consider a series

interest compounded monthly.                college loan of                            at   combining geometric

Suppose that                  is initially  an annual percentage rate                       growth and arithmetic

deposited into the account, but             of compounded                                   decrease. Let              Fix

that is withdrawn each                      monthly.                                            and                    Set

month.                                      a. If the student makes                                        Find a

a. Show that the amount in the              payments of                                per  formula for    in terms

         account after months is            month, how much does                            of  and and a

                                            the student owe after                           relationship between and

                                            months?                                         such that converges.

b. How much money will be in                b. After how many months
     the account after year?
                                            will the loan be paid off?
c. Is the amount increasing or
     decreasing?

d. Suppose that instead of
     a fixed amount dollars is
     withdrawn each month. Find
     a value of such that the
     amount in the account after
     each month remains

e. What happens if is greater
     than this amount?

63. [T] The binary                          64. [T] To find an
                                                  approximation for set
representation
                                                                        and, in
                        of a                      general,
                                                  Finally, set
number between and
                                                                                 Find
can be defined as follows.                        the first ten terms of
                                                  and compare the values to
Let          if               and

         if                   Let

                    Let            if

             and              if

                 Let

                    and in

general,

and                 if

and                 if

                    Find the

binary expansion of
394 5 · Sequences and Series

For the following two exercises, assume that you have access to a computer program or Internet source that can

generate a list of zeros and ones of any desired length. Pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs) play an important

role in simulating random noise in physical systems by creating sequences of zeros and ones that appear like the result

of flipping a coin repeatedly. One of the simplest types of PRNGs recursively defines a random-looking sequence of

integers                      by fixing two special integers and and letting  be the remainder after dividing

into then creates a bit sequence of zeros and ones whose term is equal to one if is odd and equal to zero if

is even. If the bits are pseudorandom, then the behavior of their average     should be similar

to behavior of averages of truly randomly generated bits.

65. [T] Starting with                      66. [T] Find the first  digits
                        and
                                    using  of using either a

      ten different starting               computer program or
      values of compute
      sequences of bits up to              Internet resource. Create a

                     and compare           bit sequence by letting
      their averages to ten such
      sequences generated by a             if the digit of
      random bit generator.
                                           is odd and              if the

                                           digit of is even. Compute

                                           the average value of

                                           and the average value of

                                                                            Does the
                                                         sequence appear
                                                         random? Do the
                                                         differences between
                                                         successive elements of
                                                         appear random?

5.2 Infinite Series

Learning Objectives

      5.2.1 Explain the meaning of the sum of an infinite series.
      5.2.2 Calculate the sum of a geometric series.
      5.2.3 Evaluate a telescoping series.

We have seen that a sequence is an ordered set of terms. If you add these terms together, you get a series. In this
section we define an infinite series and show how series are related to sequences. We also define what it means for a
series to converge or diverge. We introduce one of the most important types of series: the geometric series. We will use
geometric series in the next chapter to write certain functions as polynomials with an infinite number of terms. This
process is important because it allows us to evaluate, differentiate, and integrate complicated functions by using
polynomials that are easier to handle. We also discuss the harmonic series, arguably the most interesting divergent
series because it just fails to converge.

Sums and Series

An infinite series is a sum of infinitely many terms and is written in the form

                                                                 

But what does this mean? We cannot add an infinite number of terms in the same way we can add a finite number of
terms. Instead, the value of an infinite series is defined in terms of the limit of partial sums. A partial sum of an infinite
series is a finite sum of the form

To see how we use partial sums to evaluate infinite series, consider the following example. Suppose oil is seeping into a

lake such that  gallons enters the lake the first week. During the second week, an additional gallons of oil

enters the lake. The third week, more gallons enters the lake. Assume this pattern continues such that each week

half as much oil enters the lake as did the previous week. If this continues forever, what can we say about the amount of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   5.2 · Infinite Series 395

oil in the lake? Will the amount of oil continue to get arbitrarily large, or is it possible that it approaches some finite
amount? To answer this question, we look at the amount of oil in the lake after weeks. Letting denote the amount
of oil in the lake (measured in thousands of gallons) after weeks, we see that

Looking at this pattern, we see that the amount of oil in the lake (in thousands of gallons) after weeks is

We are interested in what happens as                     Symbolically, the amount of oil in the lake as                  is given by the infinite
series

                                                      

At the same time, as       the amount of oil in the lake can be calculated by evaluating                                Therefore, the

                                                                                                                      

behavior of the infinite series can be determined by looking at the behavior of the sequence of partial sums                            If the

sequence of partial sums  converges, we say that the infinite series converges, and its sum is given by                                 If

                                                                                                                        

the sequence   diverges, we say the infinite series diverges. We now turn our attention to determining the limit of
this sequence

First, simplifying some of these partial sums, we see that

Plotting some of these values in Figure 5.10, it appears that the sequence  could be approaching 2.

Figure 5.10 The graph shows the sequence of partial sums    It appears that the sequence is approaching the value

Let's look for more convincing evidence. In the following table, we list the values of for several values of
396 5 · Sequences and Series

These data supply more evidence suggesting that the sequence           converges to Later we will provide an analytic

argument that can be used to prove that                            For now, we rely on the numerical and graphical data to convince
                                                             

ourselves that the sequence of partial sums does actually converge to  Since this sequence of partial sums converges
to we say the infinite series converges to and write

                                                                 

Returning to the question about the oil in the lake, since this infinite series converges to we conclude that the amount

of oil in the lake will get arbitrarily close to               gallons as the amount of time gets sufficiently large.

This series is an example of a geometric series. We discuss geometric series in more detail later in this section. First, we
summarize what it means for an infinite series to converge.

Definition

An infinite series is an expression of the form
                                                               

For each positive integer the sum

is called the partial sum of the infinite series. The partial sums form a sequence  If the sequence of partial

sums converges to a real number the infinite series converges. If we can describe the convergence of a series to

we call the sum of the series, and we write

                                                                   

If the sequence of partial sums diverges, we have the divergence of a series.

Note that the index for a series need not begin with                    but can begin with any value. For example, the series
                                                                   

can also be written as

                                                                     

Often it is convenient for the index to begin at so if for some reason it begins at a different value, we can reindex by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.2 · Infinite Series 397

making a change of variables. For example, consider the series
                                                                                

By introducing the variable        so that        we can rewrite the series as
                                              

  EXAMPLE 5.7

Evaluating Limits of Sequences of Partial Sums
For each of the following series, use the sequence of partial sums to determine whether the series converges or
diverges.

       
 a.

       
b.

       
 c.

    Solution                       satisfies
a. The sequence of partial sums

Notice that each term added is greater than As a result, we see that

From this pattern we can see that             for every integer Therefore,        is unbounded and consequently,

                                            

diverges. Therefore, the infinite series      diverges.

b. The sequence of partial sums    satisfies

From this pattern we can see the sequence of partial sums is
398 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                             

Since this sequence diverges, the infinite series              diverges.

c. The sequence of partial sums        satisfies

From this pattern, we can see that the partial sum is given by the explicit formula

Since                   we conclude that the sequence of partial sums converges, and therefore the infinite series
converges to     We have

                                                                

                                                               converges or diverges.
5.7 Determine whether the series

The Harmonic Series                                                                                               (5.5)

A useful series to know about is the harmonic series. The harmonic series is defined as

                                                                

This series is interesting because it diverges, but it diverges very slowly. By this we mean that the terms in the sequence

of partial sums               approach infinity, but do so very slowly. We will show that the series diverges, but first we illustrate

the slow growth of the terms in the sequence                 in the following table.

Even after                    terms, the partial sum is still relatively small. From this table, it is not clear that this series actually

diverges. However, we can show analytically that the sequence of partial sums diverges, and therefore the series

diverges.

To show that the sequence of partial sums diverges, we show that the sequence of partial sums is unbounded. We begin
by writing the first several partial sums:

Notice that for the last two terms in

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           5.2 · Infinite Series 399

Therefore, we conclude that
Using the same idea for we see that

From this pattern, we see that                                                 and    More generally, it can be

shown that                for all          Since                            we conclude that the sequence  is unbounded and

therefore diverges. In the previous section, we stated that convergent sequences are bounded. Consequently, since
        is unbounded, it diverges. Thus, the harmonic series diverges.

Algebraic Properties of Convergent Series

Since the sum of a convergent infinite series is defined as a limit of a sequence, the algebraic properties for series listed
below follow directly from the algebraic properties for sequences.

Theorem 5.7

Algebraic Properties of Convergent Series

                       

Let          and                be convergent series. Then the following algebraic properties hold.

                                                                                    
i. The series                   converges and
                                                                                      (Sum Rule)

                                                                                    
ii. The series                  converges and
                                                                                      (Difference Rule)

iii. For any real number                                                            
                          the series              converges and                               (Constant Multiple Rule)

  EXAMPLE 5.8

Using Algebraic Properties of Convergent Series
Evaluate

                                                                

     Solution
We showed earlier that

                                                                         

and
400 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                                                

Since both of those series converge, we can apply the properties of Algebraic Properties of Convergent Series to evaluate
                                                                

Using the sum rule, write                                                                          
                                         

Then, using the constant multiple rule and the sums above, we can conclude that

                                                                                                     

                                     
       5.8 Evaluate

Geometric Series

A geometric series is any series that we can write in the form
                                                                                                 

                                                                                                       (5.6)

Because the ratio of each term in this series to the previous term is r, the number r is called the ratio. We refer to a as the
initial term because it is the first term in the series. For example, the series

                                                           

is a geometric series with initial term                   and ratio

In general, when does a geometric series converge? Consider the geometric series

                                                                                  

when  Its sequence of partial sums                        is given by

Consider the case when                     In that case,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   5.2 · Infinite Series 401

Since       we know     as              Therefore, the sequence of partial sums is unbounded and thus diverges.

Consequently, the infinite series diverges for                   For  to find the limit of  multiply Equation 5.6 by

Doing so, we see that

All the other terms cancel out.
Therefore,

From our discussion in the previous section, we know that the geometric sequence               if  and that diverges

if      or  Therefore, for                                            and we have

                                                               

If          diverges, and therefore

                                                               

    Definition

    A geometric series is a series of the form
                                                             

    If      the series converges, and

                                                               

                                                                                                                      (5.7)

    If      the series diverges.

Geometric series sometimes appear in slightly different forms. For example, sometimes the index begins at a value

other than  or the exponent involves a linear expression for other than                     As long as we can rewrite the series

in the form given by Equation 5.5, it is a geometric series. For example, consider the series

                                                                 

To see that this is a geometric series, we write out the first several terms:
                                                    
402 5 · Sequences and Series            and the ratio is            Therefore, the series can be written as
                                                            
       We see that the initial term is

Since         this series converges, and its sum is given by
                                                 

  EXAMPLE 5.9

Determining Convergence or Divergence of a Geometric Series
Determine whether each of the following geometric series converges or diverges, and if it converges, find its sum.

            
 a.

            
b.

     Solution
 a. Writing out the first several terms in the series, we have

                                             

The initial term                 and the ratio          Since       the series converges to

b. Writing this series as

                                                               

we can see that this is a geometric series where                    Therefore, the series diverges.

                                                               converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
5.9 Determine whether the series

We now turn our attention to a nice application of geometric series. We show how they can be used to write repeating
decimals as fractions of integers.

EXAMPLE 5.10

Writing Repeating Decimals as Fractions of Integers

Use a geometric series to write         as a fraction of integers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5.2 · Infinite Series 403

     Solution         first we write
Since

Ignoring the term 3, the rest of this expression is a geometric series with initial term          and ratio
Therefore, the sum of this series is

Thus,

5.10           Write  as a fraction of integers.

EXAMPLE 5.11

Chapter Opener: Finding the Area of the Koch Snowflake

Define a sequence of figures  recursively as follows (Figure 5.11). Let be an equilateral triangle with sides of

length For            let be the curve created by removing the middle third of each side of               and replacing it with

an equilateral triangle pointing outward. The limiting figure as       is known as Koch's snowflake.

               Figure 5.11 The first four figures,                    in the construction of the Koch snowflake.

a. Find the length of the perimeter of              Evaluate          to find the length of the perimeter of Koch's snowflake.
b. Find the area of figure Evaluate                                 

                                                           to find the area of Koch's snowflake.
                                                    

Solution

a. Let denote the number of sides of figure Since is a triangle,                          Let denote the length of each

side of Since is an equilateral triangle with sides of length         we now need to determine and

Since is created by removing the middle third of each side and replacing that line segment with two line

segments, for each side of we get four sides in Therefore, the number of sides for is

Since the length of each of these new line segments is                the length of the line segments in  the length of the
line segments for is given by
404 5 · Sequences and Series

Similarly, for since the middle third of each side of    is removed and replaced with two line segments, the
number of sides in is given by

Since the length of each of these sides is  the length of the sides of           the length of each side of figure is
given by

More generally, since is created by removing the middle third of each side of    and replacing that line

segment with two line segments of length    in the shape of an equilateral triangle, we know that

and         Therefore, the number of sides of figure is

and the length of each side is

Therefore, to calculate the perimeter of we multiply the number of sides         and the length of each side We
conclude that the perimeter of is given by

Therefore, the length of the perimeter of Koch's snowflake is

                                                                       

                                                                               

b. Let denote the area of each new triangle created when forming For             is the area of the original

equilateral triangle. Therefore,            For          since the lengths of the sides of the new triangle are

the length of the sides of        we have

Therefore,                       Since a new triangle is formed on each side of

Writing out the first few terms             we see that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.2 · Infinite Series 405

More generally,

Factoring out of each term inside the inner parentheses, we rewrite our expression as

The expression                              is a geometric sum. As shown earlier, this sum satisfies

Substituting this expression into the expression above and simplifying, we conclude that

Therefore, the area of Koch's snowflake is

                                              

Analysis

The Koch snowflake is interesting because it has finite area, yet infinite perimeter. Although at first this may seem

impossible, recall that you have seen similar examples earlier in the text. For example, consider the region bounded by

the curve  and the -axis on the interval  Since the improper integral

                                            

converges, the area of this region is finite, even though the perimeter is infinite.

Telescoping Series                  We discussed this series in Example 5.7, showing that the series converges by writing

                            
Consider the series

out the first several partial sums          and noticing that they are all of the form            Here we use a

different technique to show that this series converges. By using partial fractions, we can write

Therefore, the series can be written as
                                         

Writing out the first several terms in the sequence of partial sums  we see that
406 5 · Sequences and Series

In general,

We notice that the middle terms cancel each other out, leaving only the first and last terms. In a sense, the series

collapses like a spyglass with tubes that disappear into each other to shorten the telescope. For this reason, we call a

series that has this property a telescoping series. For this series, since           and                      as 

the sequence of partial sums converges to and therefore the series converges to

Definition

A telescoping series is a series in which most of the terms cancel in each of the partial sums, leaving only some of
the first terms and some of the last terms.

For example, any series of the form
                                             

is a telescoping series. We can see this by writing out some of the partial sums. In particular, we see that

In general, the kth partial sum of this series is

Since the kth partial sum can be simplified to the difference of these two terms, the sequence of partial sums        will

converge if and only if the sequence           converges. Moreover, if the sequence  converges to some finite number

then the sequence of partial sums converges to       and therefore

                                                   

In the next example, we show how to use these ideas to analyze a telescoping series of this form.

  EXAMPLE 5.12

Evaluating a Telescoping Series
Determine whether the telescoping series

                                                               

converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.

     Solution
By writing out terms in the sequence of partial sums, we can see that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.2 · Infinite Series 407

In general,

Since        as  and                            is a continuous function,                 Therefore, we conclude
that
                 The telescoping series converges and the sum is given by

                                  

                                                                 converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
5.11 Determine whether

STUDENT PROJECT

Euler's Constant
                                                               

We have shown that the harmonic series                           diverges. Here we investigate the behavior of the partial sums

as            In particular, we show that they behave like the natural logarithm function by showing that there exists

a constant such that

                                                                           

This constant is known as Euler's constant.

1. Let                          Evaluate for various values of

2. For as defined in part 1. show that the sequence                       converges by using the following steps.

       a. Show that the sequence                is monotone decreasing. (Hint: Show that

       b. Show that the sequence                is bounded below by zero. (Hint: Express as a definite integral.)

       c. Use the Monotone Convergence Theorem to conclude that the sequence              converges. The limit is

             Euler's constant.

3. Now estimate how far is from for a given integer Prove that for                                          by using the
     following steps.
      a. Show that
      b. Use the result from part a. to show that for any integer

       c. For any integers and such that                         express   as a telescoping sum by writing
408 5 · Sequences and Series

                      Use the result from part b. combined with this telescoping sum to conclude that
                 d. Apply the limit to both sides of the inequality in part c. to conclude that
                 e. Estimate to an accuracy of within

        SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES

Using sigma notation, write the following expressions as infinite series.

67.                                       68.                              69.

70.

Compute the first four partial sums                for the series having  term      starting with      as follows.
                                                                          73.
71.                                       72.

74.

In the following exercises, compute the general term     of the series with the given partial sum      If the sequence of
partial sums converges, find its limit                                        77.

75.                                       76.

78.

For each of the following series, use the sequence of partial sums to determine whether the series converges or
diverges.

                                                                                                       (Hint:
79.                                       80.                              81.

                                                                                Use a partial fraction
                                                                                decomposition like that for
                                                                                 

                      (Hint: Follow
82.

                               
     the reasoning for

                                                   that  and              Find the sum of the indicated series.
Suppose that                     that
                                                                                   
                                                                           85.
83.                                       84.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              5.2 · Infinite Series 409

       
86.

State whether the given series converges and explain why.

                   (Hint:                            (Hint: Rewrite 89.
87.                                  88.

      Rewrite using a change of           using a change of index.)
      index.)

90.                                  91.                                                      92.

                                                                                              State whether the series converges and if it
For as follows, write the sum as a geometric series of the form

does, find the value of

93.            and                   94.        and                                           95.        and
      for
                 and                      for                                                      for
96.                     for

Use the identity             
                                     to express the function as a geometric series in the indicated term.

97.        in                        98.        in                                            99.        in

100.           in

Evaluate the following telescoping series or state whether the series diverges.

                                                                                                       
101.                                 102.                                                     103.

         
104.

Express the following series as a telescoping sum and evaluate its nth partial sum.

                                                     (Hint:                                            
105.                                 106.                                                     107.

                                          Factor denominator and
                                          use partial fractions.)

                             (Hint:
108.

      Look at
410 5 · Sequences and Series

A general telescoping series is one in which all but the first few terms cancel out after summing a given number of
successive terms.

109. Let                                110.

        in which              as  Find        in which                                           
         
                                                                          as  Find

111. Suppose that

where                         as    Find a condition on the coefficients

                  that make this a general telescoping series.

                                                                                   114. Find a formula for
112. Evaluate                           113. Evaluate                                       

(Hint:                                                                                                          where is

                                                                                   a positive integer.

115. [T] Define a sequence             116. [T] Suppose that equal uniform

                                        rectangular blocks are stacked one

                                  Use   on top of the other, allowing for some

the graph of to verify                  overhang. Archimedes' law of the

that is increasing. Plot                lever implies that the stack of

for                           and       blocks is stable as long as the center

state whether it appears                of mass of the top      blocks lies

that the sequence                       at the edge of the bottom block. Let

converges.                              denote the position of the edge of

                                        the bottom block, and think of its

                                        position as relative to the center of

                                        the next-to-bottom block. This

                                        implies that                        or

                                                           Use this expression to
                                        compute the maximum overhang
                                        (the position of the edge of the top
                                        block over the edge of the bottom
                                        block.) See the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     5.2 · Infinite Series 411

Each of the following infinite series converges to the given multiple of or

In each case, find the minimum value of such that the partial sum of the series accurately approximates the left-
hand side to the given number of decimal places, and give the desired approximate value. Up to decimals place,

               

117. [T]                                118. [T]
        error
                                                                   

119. [T]                                error
                           
                                                     120. [T]
                                                                        

error                                               error

121. [T] A fair coin is one that        122. [T] Find the probability          123. [T] Find the probability
        has probability of                      that a fair coin is flipped a          that a fair coin will come
        coming up heads when                    multiple of three times                up heads for the second
        flipped.                                before coming up heads.                time after an even
         a. What is the probability                                                    number of flips.
              that a fair coin will
              come up tails times                                              126. [T] A person deposits
              in a row?                                                                at the beginning of each
         b. Find the probability                                                       quarter into a bank
              that a coin comes up                                                     account that earns
              heads for the first time                                                 annual interest
              on the last of an even                                                   compounded quarterly
              number of coin flips.                                                    (four times a year).
                                                                                        a. Show that the interest
124. [T] Find a series that             125. [T] The expected number                         accumulated after
        expresses the probability                                                            quarters is
        that a fair coin will come      of times that a fair coin
        up heads for the second                                                         b. Find the first eight
        time on a multiple of           will come up heads is                                terms of the sequence.
        three flips.
                                        defined as the sum over                         c. How much interest has
                                                                                             accumulated after
                                                    of times the                             years?

                                        probability that the coin

                                        will come up heads

                                        exactly times in a row,

                                        or          Compute the

                                        expected number of

                                        consecutive times that a

                                        fair coin will come up

                                        heads.
412 5 · Sequences and Series

127. [T] Suppose that the             128. [T] A certain drug is           129. Suppose that          is a
                                              effective for an average
amount of a drug in a                         patient only if there is at  sequence of numbers.
                                              least mg per kg in the
patient's system                              patient's system, while it   Explain why the sequence
                                              is safe only if there is at
diminishes by a                               most mg per kg in an         of partial sums of is
                                              average patient's system.
multiplicative factor                         Suppose that the amount      increasing.
                                              in a patient's system
each hour. Suppose that a                     diminishes by a
                                              multiplicative factor of
new dose is administered                      each hour after a dose is
                                              administered. Find the
every hours. Find an                          maximum interval of
                                              hours between doses,
expression that gives the                     and corresponding dose
                                              range (in mg/kg) for this
amount  in the                                    that will enable use of
                                              the drug to be both safe
patient's system after                        and effective in the long
                                              term.
hours for each in terms

of the dosage and the

ratio (Hint: Write

        where

        and sum over

values from the different

doses administered.)

130. [T] Suppose that is a            131. [T] Suppose that                132. [T] A version of von
        sequence of positive
        numbers and the                     and that, for                  Bertalanffy growth can be
        sequence of partial
        sums of is bounded            given numbers          and           used to estimate the age
                                    
                                            one defines                    of an individual in a
        above. Explain why
                                                             and           homogeneous species
        converges. Does the
        conclusion remain true if                            Does          from its length if the
        we remove the hypothesis
                                      converge? If so, to                  annual increase in year

                                      what? (Hint: First argue                   satisfies

                                      that  for all and                                               with

                                      is increasing.)                      as the length at year

                                                                                 as a limiting length,

                                                                           and as a relative growth

                                                                           constant. If

                                                                                 and

                                                                           numerically estimate the

                                                                           smallest value of such

                                                                           that          Note that

                                                                                                      Find

                                                                           the corresponding

                                                                           when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 413

                       

133. [T] Suppose that    is      134. [T] Find the length of the dashed zig1-35. [T] Find the total length of the dashed

                                      zag path in the following figure.     path in the following figure.

a convergent series of
positive terms. Explain

                 

why
           

136. [T] The Sierpinski triangle is obtaine1d37. [T] The Sierpinski gasket is obtained

from a triangle by deleting the       by dividing the unit square into nine

middle fourth as indicated in the first equal sub-squares, removing the

step, by deleting the middle fourths  middle square, then doing the same

of the remaining three congruent      at each stage to the remaining sub-

triangles in the second step, and in  squares. The figure shows the

general deleting the middle fourths   remaining set after four iterations.

of the remaining triangles in each    Compute the total area removed

successive step. Assuming that the    after stages, and compute the

original triangle is shown in the     length the total perimeter of the

figure, find the areas of the         remaining set after stages.

remaining parts of the original

triangle after steps and find the

total length of all of the boundary

triangles after steps.

5.3 The Divergence and Integral Tests

Learning Objectives

      5.3.1 Use the divergence test to determine whether a series converges or diverges.
      5.3.2 Use the integral test to determine the convergence of a series.
      5.3.3 Estimate the value of a series by finding bounds on its remainder term.

In the previous section, we determined the convergence or divergence of several series by explicitly calculating the limit

of the sequence of partial sums    In practice, explicitly calculating this limit can be difficult or impossible. Luckily,

several tests exist that allow us to determine convergence or divergence for many types of series. In this section, we

discuss two of these tests: the divergence test and the integral test. We will examine several other tests in the rest of this

chapter and then summarize how and when to use them.

Divergence Test

          

A series    being convergent is equivalent to the convergence of the sequence of partial sums ( ) as       
414 5 · Sequences and Series

To verify this, notice that from the algebraic properties,

                                                                                    

               

Therefore, if    converges, the term                     as               An important consequence of this fact is the following

statement:

                                                                                                                                     (5.8)

                                                                         

This test is known as the divergence test because it provides a way of proving that a series diverges.

Theorem 5.8

Divergence Test
                                                                                  

If               or              does not exist, then the series                    diverges.
      
                              

It is important to note that the converse of this theorem is not true. That is, if                               we cannot make any
                                                                                                               

                                                         For example,                                                           diverges.
conclusion about the convergence of                                                   but the harmonic series

In this section and the remaining sections of this chapter, we show many more examples of such series. Consequently,

although we can use the divergence test to show that a series diverges, we cannot use it to prove that a series

converges. Specifically, if        the divergence test is inconclusive.

EXAMPLE 5.13

Using the divergence test
For each of the following series, apply the divergence test. If the divergence test proves that the series diverges, state so.
Otherwise, indicate that the divergence test is inconclusive.

            
 a.

            
b.

            
 c.

    Solution                       by the divergence test, we can conclude that
a. Since                                                             

     diverges.                the divergence test is inconclusive.
b. Since                             by the divergence test, the series

c. Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 415

                                                         

     diverges.

                                                                                              
     5.12 What does the divergence test tell us about the series

Integral Test

In the previous section, we proved that the harmonic series diverges by looking at the sequence of partial sums

and showing that                     for all positive integers In this section we use a different technique to prove the

divergence of the harmonic series. This technique is important because it is used to prove the divergence or
convergence of many other series. This test, called the integral test, compares an infinite sum to an improper integral.
It is important to note that this test can only be applied when we are considering a series whose terms are all positive.

To illustrate how the integral test works, use the harmonic series as an example. In Figure 5.12, we depict the harmonic

series by sketching a sequence of rectangles with areas                                         along with the function   From the

graph, we see that

Therefore, for each the partial sum satisfies

Since                we see that the sequence of partial sums                                   is unbounded. Therefore,  diverges, and,
            

                          

consequently, the series             also diverges.

Figure 5.12 The sum of the areas of the rectangles is greater than the area between the curve                             and the -axis

for           Since the area bounded by the curve is infinite (as calculated by an improper integral), the sum of the areas of

the rectangles is also infinite.

                                     We show how an integral can be used to prove that this series converges. In Figure
Now consider the series

5.13, we sketch a sequence of rectangles with areas            along with the function                                    From the graph
we see that
416 5 · Sequences and Series

Therefore, for each the partial sum satisfies

We conclude that the sequence of partial sums       is bounded. We also see that    is an increasing sequence:

Since       is increasing and bounded, by the Monotone Convergence Theorem, it converges. Therefore, the series
        converges.

Figure 5.13 The sum of the areas of the rectangles is less than the sum of the area of the first rectangle and the area

between the curve                and the -axis for  Since the area bounded by the curve is finite, the sum of the

areas of the rectangles is also finite.

                                                                                                                                             is a series
We can extend this idea to prove convergence or divergence for many different series. Suppose                                                for all

with positive terms such that there exists a continuous, positive, decreasing function where
positive integers. Then, as in Figure 5.14(a), for any integer the partial sum satisfies

                                                                                  

                                 converges, then the sequence of partial sums  is bounded. Since                                             is an increasing
Therefore, if

sequence, if it is also a bounded sequence, then by the Monotone Convergence Theorem, it converges. We conclude that

                                               

if      converges, then the series                  also converges. On the other hand, from Figure 5.14(b), for any

integer the partial sum satisfies

If                             then                                                                                                             
                                         is an unbounded sequence and therefore diverges. As a result, the series

                                         

also diverges. We conclude that if             diverges, then  diverges.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 417

Figure 5.14 (a) If we can inscribe rectangles inside a region bounded by a curve                               and the -axis, and the area

bounded by those curves for                   is finite, then the sum of the areas of the rectangles is also finite. (b) If a set of

rectangles circumscribes the region bounded by             and the axis for       and the region has infinite area, then

the sum of the areas of the rectangles is also infinite.

Theorem 5.9

Integral Test  is a series with positive terms  Suppose there exists a function and a positive integer such that
             
                                                 
Suppose                                                            

the following three conditions are satisfied:

i. is continuous,

ii. is decreasing, and

iii.           for all integers

      Then

      both converge or both diverge (see Figure 5.14).

                                                                                                               it does not imply that the value
Although convergence of                         implies convergence of the related series

of the integral and the series are the same. They may be different, and often are. For example,
                                                        

is a geometric series with initial term         and ratio  which converges to

                                                satisfies
However, the related integral                           

                                              

                                                                                                             
418 5 · Sequences and Series

EXAMPLE 5.14

Using the Integral Test
For each of the following series, use the integral test to determine whether the series converges or diverges. Assume
that all conditions for the integral test are met.

       
 a.

           
b.

    Solution
a. Compare

                                    

We have                                                                        
                                
                                  converges, and therefore so does the series
                                                                    
Thus the integral

b. Compare

                                    
                                                                  

Since                                                                      
                                                                
                                                                     
the integral
                                    diverges, and therefore
                                                                 

diverges.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 419

                                                                                                     converges or diverges.
    5.13 Use the integral test to determine whether the series

The p-Series                         and the series          
                                                                         are both examples of a type of series called a p-series.
                                   
The harmonic series                                                 

    Definition

    For any real number the series

    is called a p-series.

We know the p-series converges if        and diverges if       What about other values of In general, it is difficult, if

not impossible, to compute the exact value of most -series. However, we can use the tests presented thus far to prove

whether a -series converges or diverges.

If  then                    and if       then                Therefore, by the divergence test,

                                                           

If  then                             is a positive, continuous, decreasing function. Therefore, for  we use the integral test,

comparing                                                           
                                                                                        

We have already considered the case when                     Here we consider the case when          For this case,
                                                                                                                               (5.9)
                                                                                                   

Because

                                                                              

we conclude that           converges if                         

                                                                               
Therefore,
In summary,                                              and diverges if

                                                         
420 5 · Sequences and Series

EXAMPLE 5.15

Testing for Convergence of p-series
For each of the following series, determine whether it converges or diverges.

            
 a.

            
b.

Solution

a. This is a p-series with                      so the series converges.

b. Since                      the series diverges.

                                                      converge or diverge?
      5.14 Does the series

Estimating the Value of a Series

                                 

Suppose we know that a series                   converges and we want to estimate the sum of that series. Certainly we can

approximate that sum using any finite sum                   where is any positive integer. The question we address here is, for a

                                 how good is the approximation                         More specifically, if we let
convergent series

                                                            

be the remainder when the sum of an infinite series is approximated by the               partial sum, how large is         For some
types of series, we are able to use the ideas from the integral test to estimate

Theorem 5.10

Remainder Estimate from the Integral Test
                   

Suppose                       is a convergent series with positive terms. Suppose there exists a function  satisfying the

following three conditions:

i. is continuous,

ii. is decreasing, and

iii.          for all integers

                                                            For all positive integers
Let be the Nth partial sum of

                                                            

                                                                                       

                                                                          
In other words, the remainder                                                           satisfies the following estimate:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 421

                                                                                                                         (5.10)

This is known as the remainder estimate.

We illustrate Remainder Estimate from the Integral Test in Figure 5.15. In particular, by representing the remainder

                    as the sum of areas of rectangles, we see that the area of those rectangles is

                                                                         

bounded above by    and bounded below by                                     In other words,

                                                                             

and
                                                                                                        

We conclude that

                                                                           

Since
                                                                       

where is the partial sum, we conclude that

                                                                         

                                                                                                          

Figure 5.15 Given a continuous, positive, decreasing function              and a sequence of positive terms such that
for all positive integers (a) the areas                                               
                                                                                                       or (b) the areas

                    
                                     Therefore, the integral is either an overestimate or an underestimate of

the error.
422 5 · Sequences and Series

  EXAMPLE 5.16

Estimating the Value of a Series
                                 

Consider the series

a. Calculate                       and estimate the error.

                                                                                                 

b. Determine the least value of necessary such that will estimate                                    to within

    Solution
a. Using a calculating utility, we have

      By the remainder estimate, we know
                                                                                       

      We have
                                 

                                                                                               

      Therefore, the error is

b. Find such that                  In part a. we showed that                                     Therefore, the remainder          as

      long as                      That is, we need           Solving this inequality for we see that we need

                       To ensure that the remainder is within the desired amount, we need to round up to the nearest integer.
      Therefore, the minimum necessary value is

                                   calculate and estimate the error
      5.15 For

      SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES

For each of the following series, if the divergence test applies, either state that                  does not exist or find    If

                                                                                                                             

the divergence test does not apply, state why.

138.                               139.                                                  140.

141.                               142.                                                  143.

144.                               145.                                                  146.

147.                               148.                                                  149.

150.                               151.

Access for free at openstax.org
State whether the given -series converges.                                                         5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 423

                                                                                                          where
152.                        153.                              154.                                 

                                                                                                         guarantees that
155.                        156.                              157.                                  error

Use the integral test to determine whether the following sums converge.

                                                                       
158.                        159.                              160.

                                                                       
161.                        162.                              163.

         
164.

Express the following sums as -series and determine whether each converges.

                 (Hint:                     (Hint:                     
165.                        166.                              167.

                        .)                             .)

         
168.

Use the estimate            
                                        to find a bound for the remainder

169.                        170.                              171.

172.

                                                                                                 
[T] Find the minimum value of such that the remainder estimate

                  accurate to within the given error.
estimates

173.             error      174.                       error  175.

176.              error     177.                       error
424 5 · Sequences and Series

In the following exercises, find a value of such that is smaller than the desired error. Compute the corresponding

sum        and compare it to the given estimate of the infinite series.

178.       error                      179.       error                   180.       error
                                                                                  

181.       error                      182.              error                       183. Find the limit as   of
                                                                                            Compare to
                                                                                                            (Hint:

184. Find the limit as            of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.3 · The Divergence and Integral Tests 425

The next few exercises are intended to give a sense of applications in which partial sums of the harmonic series arise.

185. In certain applications of        186. [T] Complete sampling with      187. [T] The simplest way to
        probability, such as the so-                                                shuffle cards is to take the
        called Watterson estimator     replacement, sometimes called                top card and insert it at a
        for predicting mutation rates                                               random place in the deck,
        in population genetics, it is  the coupon collector's problem, is           called top random
        important to have an accurate                                               insertion, and then
        estimate of the number         phrased as follows: Suppose you              repeat. We will consider a
                                                                                    deck to be randomly
                                       have unique items in a bin. At               shuffled once enough top
                                                                                    random insertions have
                                       each step, an item is chosen at              been made that the card
                                                                                    originally at the bottom
                                       random, identified, and put back             has reached the top and
                                                                                    then been randomly
                                       in the bin. The problem asks what            inserted. If the deck has
                                                                                    cards, then the probability
Recall that                   is       is the expected number of steps              that the insertion will be
                                                                                    below the card initially at
decreasing. Compute                          that it takes to draw each             the bottom (call this card
                                                                                        is Thus the
             to four decimal           unique item at least once. It turns          expected number of top
                                                                                    random insertions before
                                       out that                       .                is no longer at the
                                                                                    bottom is n. Once one
places. (Hint:                                                           .          card is below there are
                                                                                    two places below and
                                       Find             for                         the probability that a
                                                                  .                 randomly inserted card
                .)                                                                  will fall below is
                                                                                    The expected number of
                                                                                    top random insertions
                                                                                    before this happens is
                                                                                          The two cards below
                                                                                       are now in random
                                                                                    order. Continuing this
                                                                                    way, find a formula for
                                                                                    the expected number of
                                                                                    top random insertions
                                                                                    needed to consider the
                                                                                    deck to be randomly
                                                                                    shuffled.

188. Suppose a scooter can             189. Show that for the            190. [T] Use the remainder
                                               remainder estimate to             estimate and integration
travel km on a full                                                              by parts to approximate
                                             apply on  it is                      
tank of fuel. Assuming that                                                                  within an error

fuel can be transferred                sufficient that   be                      smaller than
                                       decreasing on
from one scooter to                                      but

another but can only be

carried in the tank, present             need not be decreasing

a procedure that will                  on 

enable one of the scooters

to travel       km,

where
426 5 · Sequences and Series

                                  192. [T] Suppose a computer                     193. [T] A fast computer can
191. Does                                 can sum one million                             sum one million terms
                                          terms per second of the                         per second of the
        converge if is large                                                              divergent series
        enough? If so, for which          divergent series
                                                                                                         Use the
                                          Use the integral test to
                                          approximate how many                            integral test to
                                          seconds it will take to add                     approximate how many
                                          up enough terms for the                         seconds it will take to add
                                          partial sum to exceed                           up enough terms for the
                                                                                          partial sum to exceed

5.4 Comparison Tests

Learning Objectives

      5.4.1 Use the comparison test to test a series for convergence.
      5.4.2 Use the limit comparison test to determine convergence of a series.

We have seen that the integral test allows us to determine the convergence or divergence of a series by comparing it to
a related improper integral. In this section, we show how to use comparison tests to determine the convergence or
divergence of a series by comparing it to a series whose convergence or divergence is known. Typically these tests are
used to determine convergence of series that are similar to geometric series or p-series.

Comparison Test

In the preceding two sections, we discussed two large classes of series: geometric series and p-series. We know exactly
when these series converge and when they diverge. Here we show how to use the convergence or divergence of these
series to prove convergence or divergence for other series, using a method called the comparison test.

For example, consider the series

                                                                             

This series looks similar to the convergent series
                                                                                

Since the terms in each of the series are positive, the sequence of partial sums for each series is monotone increasing.
Furthermore, since

for all positive integers the     partial sum                                     satisfies
                                               of                                            

(See Figure 5.16(a) and Table 5.1.) Since the series on the right converges, the sequence      is bounded above. We

conclude that  is a monotone increasing sequence that is bounded above. Therefore, by the Monotone

Convergence Theorem,             converges, and thus

                                                      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       5.4 · Comparison Tests 427

converges.
Similarly, consider the series

                                                                            

This series looks similar to the divergent series
                                                                                

The sequence of partial sums for each series is monotone increasing and

for every positive integer Therefore, the  partial sum                                      satisfies
                                                                                  of

                                                                                  diverges to infinity, the sequence of partial sums
(See Figure 5.16(b) and Table 5.2.) Since the series

           is unbounded. Consequently,     is an unbounded sequence, and therefore diverges. We conclude that

                                                                            

diverges.

Figure 5.16 (a) Each of the partial sums for the given series is less than the corresponding partial sum for the converging
               (b) Each of the partial sums for the given series is greater than the corresponding partial sum for the

diverging harmonic series.
428 5 · Sequences and Series

              Table 5.1 Comparing a series with a p-series (p = 2)

             Table 5.2 Comparing a series with the harmonic series

Theorem 5.11

Comparison Test                        such that            for all                                                              
                                       such that            for all                          If       converges, then
  i. Suppose there exists an integer
      converges.                                                                                                               
                                                                                             If       diverges, then
 ii. Suppose there exists an integer
      diverges.

Proof

We prove part i. The proof of part ii. is the contrapositive of part i. Let                  be the sequence of partial sums associated

              and let            
with                                       Since the terms

Therefore, the sequence of partial sums is increasing. Further, since                        for all  then
                                                                                           

Therefore, for all

Since                            is a finite number, we conclude that the sequence                    is bounded above. Therefore,       is

an increasing sequence that is bounded above. By the Monotone Convergence Theorem, we conclude that

                                     

converges, and therefore the series    converges.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       5.4 · Comparison Tests 429

                                                                                                                       it is necessary to find a
To use the comparison test to determine the convergence or divergence of a series

suitable series with which to compare it. Since we know the convergence properties of geometric series and p-series,

these series are often used. If there exists an integer such that for all                 each term is less than each

                                                             

corresponding term of a known convergent series, then                        converges. Similarly, if there exists an integer such that

for all  each term                                                                                                                      diverges.
                             is greater than each corresponding term of a known divergent series, then

EXAMPLE 5.17

Using the Comparison Test
For each of the following series, use the comparison test to determine whether the series converges or diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

          
 c.

    Solution                             is a p-series with                  it converges. Further,
                             Since

a. Compare to

                                                                                          converges.
for every positive integer Therefore, we can conclude that

                                         is a geometric series with                       and                          it converges. Also,
b. Compare to                Since

                                                                             converges.
for every positive integer Therefore, we see that

                             Since
c. Compare to

for every integer                                                                         diverges.
                             and         diverges, we have that

                                                                                          converges or diverges.
5.16 Use the comparison test to determine if the series

Limit Comparison Test

The comparison test works nicely if we can find a comparable series satisfying the hypothesis of the test. However,
430 5 · Sequences and Series

       sometimes finding an appropriate series can be difficult. Consider the series
                                                                                    

It is natural to compare this series with the convergent series
                                                                                

However, this series does not satisfy the hypothesis necessary to use the comparison test because

for all integers                                                                                                               instead we
                  Although we could look for a different series with which to compare

show how we can use the limit comparison test to compare

                                                                                    

                                                                                                                               with positive
Let us examine the idea behind the limit comparison test. Consider two series                                      and

terms             and evaluate

                                                                                  
If

then, for     sufficiently large,                                
                                            Therefore, either both series converge or both series diverge. For the series
                                      we see that
                       and

                                                                       
Since             converges, we conclude that               

converges.
The limit comparison test can be used in two other cases. Suppose

                                                            

In this case,     is a bounded sequence. As a result, there exists a constant                                      such that   Therefore, if

           converges, then            converges. On the other hand, suppose

                                                                     

                                                            

In this case,     is an unbounded sequence. Therefore, for every constant there exists an integer such that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       5.4 · Comparison Tests 431

     for all                                                                      diverges as well.
                        Therefore, if                diverges, then

Theorem 5.12

Limit Comparison Test

Let            for all

 i. If                            then          and                  both converge or both diverge.
                                     
                                                                       converges.
ii. If                    and           converges, then
            
                         and                                           diverges.
iii. If                                   diverges, then
            

Note that if                            diverges, the limit comparison test gives no information. Similarly, if                   
                        and
                                                                                                                              and
and                                                                                                    

               converges, the test also provides no information. For example, consider the two series

                                                     and               respectively. Since                          
           These series are both p-series with                                                       the series

diverges. On the other hand, since                                     converges. However, suppose we attempted to apply
                                                the series

the limit comparison test, using the convergent                      
                                                                                as our comparison series. First, we see that

                                                                                   

Similarly, we see that

                                                                                

Therefore, if                           converges, we do not gain any information on the convergence or divergence of
 
                         when

  EXAMPLE 5.18

Using the Limit Comparison Test
For each of the following series, use the limit comparison test to determine whether the series converges or diverges. If
the test does not apply, say so.

          
 a.
432 5 · Sequences and Series

                                               Calculate
b.

         
c.

    Solution
                                          

a. Compare this series to

                                                                                       
                                                                                  
     By the limit comparison test, since                                                    diverges.
                                                            diverges, then                    

b. Compare this series to                      We see that

                                                                                

Therefore,
                                                                     

                                                                                converges.
     Since                    converges, we conclude that
c. Since
                                               We see that
                   compare with

                                                                                         

In order to evaluate                        evaluate the limit as              of the real-valued function  These two limits are
                                

equal, and making this change allows us to use L'Hôpital's rule. We obtain

                                                                                

Therefore,                         and, consequently,
                                                                       

Since the limit is but             
                                            diverges, the limit comparison test does not provide any information.

Compare with                       instead. In this case,

                                                                                                  

                                                                                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      5.4 · Comparison Tests 433

Since the limit is  but               converges, the test still does not provide any information.

                                                                                                                  we see that
So now we try a series between the two we already tried. Choosing the series

                                                                                                    

As above, in order to evaluate                      evaluate the limit as     of the real-valued function                      Using
                                              

L'Hôpital's rule,

                                                                           

                                                                                                          converges.
Since the limit is and                          converges, we can conclude that

                                                                                                                  converges or diverges.
5.17 Use the limit comparison test to determine whether the series

SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES

Use the comparison test to determine whether the following series converge.

              where                                 where                              
194.                                  195.                                 196.

197.                                                                                   
                                      198.                                 199.

200.                                                                                
                                      201.                                 202.

203.                                                                                   
                                      204.                                 205.

206.

Use the limit comparison test to determine whether each of the following series converges or diverges.

                                                                                       
207.                                  208.                                 209.

                                                                                       
210.                                  211.                                 212.

                                                                                       
213.                                  214.                                 215.

                                                                                       
216.                                  217.                                 218.
434 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                                                        
219.                                      220.                              221.

                                                  (Hint:                    (Hint:                      so

                                                                            224. For which does the
222. Does                                 223. Does                                              

        converge if is large                      converge if is large              series
        enough? If so, for which                  enough? If so, for which
                                                                                    converge?

225. For which                does the    226. For which         does the   227. For which           does the
                                                                                                 

        series                                    series                            series

        converge?                                 converge?                         converge?

228. Find all values of and                                                 230. Explain why, for each       at least
                                          229. Does                                 one of

        such that                                 converge or diverge?
                                                  Explain.
        converges.
                                                                            is larger than Use this relation

                                                                            to test convergence of
                                                                                

231. Suppose that                  and                                                       
                                          232. Does                         233. Does

        and that              and                 converge? (Hint: Write            converge? (Hint: Use
                                                           as a power of                          to compare to a

                              
converge. Prove that

converges and

                                        

                                          235. Show that if      and        236. Suppose that           for
234. Does
                                                                                                   
        converge? (Hint: Compare
            to                              converges, then                 all and that

                                                                            converges. Suppose that
                                                    converges. If               is an arbitrary

                                                                            sequence of zeros and
                                                    converges, does                          

                                                                            ones. Does

                                                                            necessarily converge?
                                                  necessarily

                                          converge?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5.4 · Comparison Tests 435

237. Suppose that          for   238. Complete the details of        239. Show that if    and
                                         the following argument: If
                                                                     
                                                  converges to a
all and that                                                             converges, then
                                         finite sum then
diverges. Suppose that                                               
is an arbitrary sequence                 and                                          converges.
of zeros and ones with
infinitely many terms            Why does this lead to a
equal to one. Does               contradiction?
 

             necessarily

diverge?

240. Suppose that                241. Let be an infinite             242. Let be an infinite
                                         sequence of zeros and
in the comparison test,                  ones. What is the largest   sequence of digits,
                                         possible value of
where              and                                               meaning takes values

Prove that if                                                        in                 What is

converges, then                                                      the largest possible value

converges.                                                               

                                                                     of                 that

243. Explain why, if       then  244. [T] Evelyn has a perfect       converges?
        cannot be written                balancing scale, an
                                         unlimited number of          245. [T] Robert wants to know
                                         weights, and one each of              his body mass to arbitrary
                                                                               precision. He has a big
                                         and so on weights. She                balancing scale that
                                         wishes to weigh a                     works perfectly, an
                                         meteorite of unspecified              unlimited collection of
                                         origin to arbitrary                           weights, and nine
                                         precision. Assuming the               each of
                                         scale is big enough, can                                          and
                                         she do it? What does this             so on weights. Assuming
                                         have to do with infinite              the scale is big enough,
                                         series?                               can he do this? What does
                                                                               this have to do with
                                                                               infinite series?
436 5 · Sequences and Series

                              is half     247. In view of the previous         248. Suppose that a sequence
246. The series                                   exercise, it may be
                                                  surprising that a
                                                  subseries of the harmonic    of numbers         has
                                                  series in which about one
the harmonic series and                           in every five terms is       the property that
hence diverges. It is                             deleted might converge.
obtained from the                                 A depleted harmonic          and
harmonic series by                                series is a series obtained
deleting all terms in                                                          where
which is odd. Let                                                              Can you determine
be fixed. Show, more
generally, that deleting all                                                                
terms where
for some integer also                                                          whether
results in a divergent
series.                                   from  by removing                    converges? (Hint: is
                                                                               monotone.)

                                          any term if a given
                                          digit, say appears in the
                                          decimal expansion of
                                          Argue that this depleted
                                          harmonic series
                                          converges by answering
                                          the following questions.
                                           a. How many whole

                                                numbers have
                                                digits?
                                          b. How many
                                                whole numbers
                                                do not contain as
                                                one or more of their
                                                digits?
                                           c. What is the smallest

                                                          number
                                          d. Explain why the

                                                deleted harmonic
                                                series is bounded by
                                                 

                                                               
                                          e. Show that

                                          converges.

249. Suppose that a sequence of numbers          has the
                                                where
property that                    and

                                                         

                              Can you determine whether

converges? (Hint:

etc. Look at                     and use

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             5.5 · Alternating Series 437

5.5 Alternating Series

Learning Objectives

      5.5.1 Use the alternating series test to test an alternating series for convergence.
      5.5.2 Estimate the sum of an alternating series.
      5.5.3 Explain the meaning of absolute convergence and conditional convergence.

So far in this chapter, we have primarily discussed series with positive terms. In this section we introduce alternating
series--those series whose terms alternate in sign. We will show in a later chapter that these series often arise when
studying power series. After defining alternating series, we introduce the alternating series test to determine whether
such a series converges.

The Alternating Series Test

A series whose terms alternate between positive and negative values is an alternating series. For example, the series

                                                          (5.11)

and                                                                                                               (5.12)
                                                           

are both alternating series.

  Definition

  Any series whose terms alternate between positive and negative values is called an alternating series. An alternating
  series can be written in the form

                                                          (5.13)

or                                                                                                                (5.14)
                                                       

Where       for all positive integers n.

Series (1), shown in Equation 5.11, is a geometric series. Since             the series converges. Series (2), shown in

Equation 5.12, is called the alternating harmonic series. We will show that whereas the harmonic series diverges, the

alternating harmonic series converges.

To prove this, we look at the sequence of partial sums       (Figure 5.17).

Proof

Consider the odd terms  for               Since

Therefore,  is a decreasing sequence. Also,

Therefore,  is bounded below. Since                          is a decreasing sequence that is bounded below, by the Monotone

Convergence Theorem,    converges. Similarly, the even terms                 form an increasing sequence that is
438 5 · Sequences and Series

       bounded above because
       and

Therefore, by the Monotone Convergence Theorem, the sequence      also converges. Since

we know that

                                                                

Letting                   and using the fact that               we conclude that              Since the odd terms and
                                                                                            

the even terms in the sequence of partial sums converge to the same limit it can be shown that the sequence of
partial sums converges to and therefore the alternating harmonic series converges to

It can also be shown that        and we can write

                                       

Figure 5.17 For the alternating harmonic series, the odd terms  in the sequence of partial sums are decreasing

and bounded below. The even terms are increasing and bounded above.



More generally, any alternating series of form (3) (Equation 5.13) or (4) (Equation 5.14) converges as long as

              and                (Figure 5.18). The proof is similar to the proof for the alternating harmonic series.

Figure 5.18 For an alternating series              in which                the odd terms      in the

sequence of partial sums are decreasing and bounded below. The even terms  are increasing and bounded above.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   5.5 · Alternating Series 439

Theorem 5.13

Alternating Series Test
An alternating series of the form

                                                                  

converges if  for all          and

  i.
 ii.

          

This is known as the alternating series test.

We remark that this theorem is true more generally as long as there exists some integer such that                   for

all

EXAMPLE 5.19

Convergence of Alternating Series
For each of the following alternating series, determine whether the series converges or diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

     Solution
 a. Since

     the series converges.

b. Since                   as   we cannot apply the alternating series test. Instead, we use the nth term test for

     divergence. Since

        
     the series diverges.

                                                                  converges or diverges.
     5.18 Determine whether the series

Remainder of an Alternating Series

It is difficult to explicitly calculate the sum of most alternating series, so typically the sum is approximated by using a
partial sum. When doing so, we are interested in the amount of error in our approximation. Consider an alternating
series

                                                                           

satisfying the hypotheses of the alternating series test. Let denote the sum of this series and    be the

corresponding sequence of partial sums. From Figure 5.18, we see that for any integer     the remainder

satisfies
440 5 · Sequences and Series

Theorem 5.14

Remainders in Alternating Series
Consider an alternating series of the form

                                                                   

that satisfies the hypotheses of the alternating series test. Let    denote the sum of the series and                        denote the
                                                                       satisfies
partial sum. For any integer     the remainder

In other words, if the conditions of the alternating series test apply, then the error in approximating the infinite series by
the partial sum is in magnitude at most the size of the next term

  EXAMPLE 5.20

Estimating the Remainder of an Alternating Series
Consider the alternating series

                                                                            

Use the remainder estimate to determine a bound on the error         if we approximate the sum of the series by the
partial sum

     Solution
From the theorem stated above,

5.19 Find a bound for when approximating                             by

Absolute and Conditional Convergence

                                                      

Consider a series             and the related series    Here we discuss possibilities for the relationship between the

                                                                                                                             The series whose
convergence of these two series. For example, consider the alternating harmonic series

                                                                                                                             
terms are the absolute value of these terms is the harmonic series, since                                                              Since the alternating

harmonic series converges, but the harmonic series diverges, we say the alternating harmonic series exhibits conditional
convergence.

                                                        The series whose terms are the absolute values of the terms of this
By comparison, consider the series

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.5 · Alternating Series 441

                                                                                                                     exhibits absolute
series is the series         Since both of these series converge, we say the series                                exhibits conditional

convergence.

Definition

                                                                                                               
A series              exhibits absolute convergence if                         converges. A series

                                                                    diverges.
convergence if               converges but

As shown by the alternating harmonic series, a series                          may converge, but                   may diverge. In the
                                                                  
                                                                                                       converges.
following theorem, however, we show that if                           converges, then

Theorem 5.15

Absolute Convergence Implies Convergence

                                               converges.
If                converges, then

Proof

                    

Suppose that                 converges. We show this by using the fact that                        or            and therefore

                      or           Therefore,                                  Consequently, by the comparison test, since


            converges, the series

                                                                    

converges. By using the algebraic properties for convergent series, we conclude that

                                                                               

converges.


  EXAMPLE 5.21

Absolute versus Conditional Convergence
For each of the following series, determine whether the series converges absolutely, converges conditionally, or
diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

     Solution
 a. We can see that
442 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                                   

diverges by using the limit comparison test with the harmonic series.
                                                                      

Thus, applying Theorem 5.13, the series cannot converge absolutely. Moreover, because of the alternating series
test, we can see that the series converges.

                                                                 converges conditionally.
We can conclude that

b. Noting that                   to determine whether the series converges absolutely, compare
                                                                          

                                                                                                                      converges, and
with the series                      Since                     converges, by the comparison test,

                                 converges absolutely.
therefore

                                                                     converges absolutely, converges conditionally,
5.20 Determine whether the series

             or diverges.

To see the difference between absolute and conditional convergence, look at what happens when we rearrange the

                                                                 We show that we can rearrange the terms so that the new
terms of the alternating harmonic series

series diverges. Certainly if we rearrange the terms of a finite sum, the sum does not change. When we work with an
infinite sum, however, interesting things can happen.

Begin by adding enough of the positive terms to produce a sum that is larger than some real number                    For

example, let                  and find an integer such that

                                                                 diverges to infinity.) Then subtract                 Then add more positive
(We can do this because the series

terms until the sum reaches 100. That is, find another integer       such that

Then subtract Continuing in this way, we have found a way of rearranging the terms in the alternating harmonic
series so that the sequence of partial sums for the rearranged series is unbounded and therefore diverges.

The terms in the alternating harmonic series can also be rearranged so that the new series converges to a different

value. In Example 5.22, we show how to rearrange the terms to create a new series that converges to                   We point

out that the alternating harmonic series can be rearranged to create a series that converges to any real number

however, the proof of that fact is beyond the scope of this text.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.5 · Alternating Series 443

                                      that converges conditionally can be rearranged so that the new series diverges or
In general, any series

converges to a different real number. A series that converges absolutely does not have this property. For any series

           that converges absolutely, the value of           is the same for any rearrangement of the terms. This result is

known as the Riemann Rearrangement Theorem, which is beyond the scope of this book.

EXAMPLE 5.22

Rearranging Series
Use the fact that

to rearrange the terms in the alternating harmonic series so the sum of the rearranged series is

     Solution
Let

                                                  

                    by the algebraic properties of convergent series,
Since

                                                                                                  

                                      such that for all               and                                    Then
Now introduce the series

                                      

                                                                                                                                           
Then using the algebraic limit properties of convergent series, since                               and      converge, the series

converges and

                                                             

Now adding the corresponding terms, and                  we see that
                        

We notice that the series on the right side of the equal sign is a rearrangement of the alternating harmonic series. Since
444 5 · Sequences and Series

        
                                           we conclude that

Therefore, we have found a rearrangement of the alternating harmonic series having the desired property.

SECTION 5.5 EXERCISES

State whether each of the following series converges absolutely, conditionally, or not at all.

                                                                                            
250.                             251.                                           252.

                                                                                            
253.                             254.                                           255.

                                                                                            
256.                             257.                                           258.

                                                                                            
259.                             260.                                           261.

                                                                                            
262.                             263.                                           264.

                                                                                            
265.                             266.                                           267.

                                                                                            
268.                             269.                                           270.

        (Hint:                           (Hint:                            for                (Hint: Rationalize the
        for large                        large
                                                                                              numerator.)
                                                     
271.                                     272.

(Hint: Find common
denominator then rationalize
numerator.)

                                                                         
273.                                                         274.

        (Hint: Use Mean Value Theorem.)

                                                                                            
275.                             276.                                           277.

                                             
278.                             279.

In each of the following problems, use the estimate                      to find a value of that guarantees that the sum of
                                                                 differs from the infinite sum by at most the given error.

the first terms of the alternating series

Calculate the partial sum for this

280. [T]           error         281. [T]                                       282. [T]        error
                                         error

283. [T]           error         284. [T]                                  error 285. [T]       error

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         5.5 · Alternating Series 445

For the following exercises, indicate whether each of the following statements is true or false. If the statement is false,
provide an example in which it is false.

286. If        is decreasing         287. If           is decreasing,    288. If       and
        and                                                                                      
                          then                                                   then
                                             then                                 

                                           converges absolutely.

      converges absolutely.                                                    converges.

289. If      is decreasing           290. If           is decreasing     291. Let               if       and
        and                                                                       
                                                                                            if          (Also,
                                             and
                                                                                                    and

                                                                                                    If

                                           converges conditionally                     converges
      converges then                       but not absolutely, then

      converges.                               does not tend to zero.

                                                                               conditionally but not

                                                                               absolutely, then neither

                                                                                                

                                                                                       nor

                                                                               converge.

292. Suppose that is a               293. Suppose that is a
        sequence of positive real            sequence such that
                                              

        numbers and that                                  converges for

      converges.                           every possible sequence
      Suppose that is an                       of zeros and ones.
      arbitrary sequence of                         
      ones and minus ones.
                                           Does         converge
               

      Does       necessarily               absolutely?

      converge?

The following series do not satisfy the hypotheses of the alternating series test as stated.

In each case, state which hypothesis is not satisfied. State whether the series converges absolutely.

                                           

294.                                 295.                                296.

297.                                                    298. Show that the alternating series

                                                        does
                                                        not converge. What hypothesis of the
                                                        alternating series test is not met?
446 5 · Sequences and Series

299. Suppose that                   300. Show that the alternating      301. The formula
        converges absolutely.               series
        Show that the series                                                   will be derived in the next
        consisting of the positive          does not converge. What            chapter. Use the remainder
        terms also converges.               hypothesis of the
                                            alternating series test is                            to find a bound
302. The formula                            not met?                           for the error in estimating
                                                                               by the fifth partial sum
                                            303. How many terms in
                                                                               for        and

will be derived in the next         are needed to approximate
chapter. Use the remainder                 accurate to an error of at

                   to find a bound  most
for the error in estimating
by the fifth partial sum

for                           and

304. How many terms in              305. Sometimes the alternating
                                                      
are needed to approximate
       accurate to an error of at           series

most                                converges to a certain
                                    fraction of an absolutely

                                                              

                                    convergent series                   at a

                                    faster rate. Given that
                                     

                                                        find

                                                                  
                                    Which of the series

                                                       gives a
                                    and

                                    better estimation of                using
                                           terms?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.5 · Alternating Series 447

The following alternating series converge to given multiples of Find the value of predicted by the remainder
estimate such that the partial sum of the series accurately approximates the left-hand side to within the given error.
Find the minimum for which the error bound holds, and give the desired approximate value in each case. Up to
decimals places,

                                                             308. [T] The series
306. [T]              error 307. [T]                                  

                                           error                                  plays an

                                                             important role in signal
                                                             processing. Show that
                                                              

                                                             converges whenever
                                                                            (Hint: Use the

                                                             formula for the sine of a
                                                             sum of angles.)

309. [T] If           what is                                310. [T] Plot the series

                                                                                  for

                                                                    Explain why

                                                                                  diverges

                                                             when                 How does

                                                             the series behave for

                                                             other
448 5 · Sequences and Series

311. [T] Plot the series            312. [T] Plot the series             313. [T] The alternating
                                                                                 harmonic series
                              for                                 for            converges because of
                                                                                 cancellation among its
                       and comment                         and describe          terms. Its sum is known
        on its behavior                     its graph.                           because the cancellation
                                                                                 can be described
                                                                                 explicitly. A random
                                                                                 harmonic series is one of
                                                                                               

                                                                         the form                 where

                                                                          is a randomly

                                                                         generated sequence of

                                                                            in which the values

                                                                          are equally likely to

                                                                         occur. Use a random

                                                                         number generator to

                                                                         produce         random

                                                                            and plot the partial

                                                                         sums                     of

                                                                         your random harmonic

                                                                         sequence for             to

                                                                                        Compare to a plot

                                                                         of the first             partial

                                                                         sums of the harmonic

                                                                         series.

                                 can be           315. [T] The Euler transform rewrites
314. [T] Estimates of                                            
                                                                                  as
accelerated by writing its partial sums
as                                                               

and recalling that

                                    converges to  For the alternating harmonic series,

                                                  it takes the form

one as   Compare the estimate                                             

of      using the sums                   with                                         
                                                  Compute partial sums of
the estimate using

                                                  until they approximate                accurate

                                                  to within              How many terms

                                                  are needed? Compare this answer to

                                                  the number of terms of the

                                                  alternating harmonic series are

                                                  needed to estimate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 449

316. [T] In the text it was stated

that a conditionally

convergent series can be

rearranged to converge to

any number. Here is a

slightly simpler, but similar,

fact. If               is such that

                  as  but

        

            diverges, then, given

any number there is a

sequence of                 such

          

that                   Show

this for               as follows.

        a. Recursively define by

                   if

          and          otherwise.

        b. Explain why eventually

                       and for any

          larger than this

        c. Explain why this implies

          that         as 

5.6 Ratio and Root Tests

Learning Objectives

      5.6.1 Use the ratio test to determine absolute convergence of a series.
      5.6.2 Use the root test to determine absolute convergence of a series.
      5.6.3 Describe a strategy for testing the convergence of a given series.

In this section, we prove the last two series convergence tests: the ratio test and the root test. These tests are particularly
nice because they do not require us to find a comparable series. The ratio test will be especially useful in the discussion
of power series in the next chapter.

Throughout this chapter, we have seen that no single convergence test works for all series. Therefore, at the end of this
section we discuss a strategy for choosing which convergence test to use for a given series.

Ratio Test

                   

Consider a series      From our earlier discussion and examples, we know that                               is not a sufficient condition
                                                                                                          

for the series to converge. Not only do we need    but we need                  quickly enough. For example, consider the
                                                                                                                 
                                  

series            and the series     We know that  and          However, only the series                    converges.

                   diverges because the terms in the sequence  do not approach zero fast enough as             Here
The series

we introduce the ratio test, which provides a way of measuring how fast the terms of a series approach zero.
450 5 · Sequences and Series

Theorem 5.16

Ratio Test    be a series with nonzero terms. Let
         

Let

                                                                            

 i. If                              converges absolutely.
                     then         
ii. If
iii. If       or  then                     diverges.

              the test does not provide any information.

Proof         be a series with nonzero terms.

      

Let

We begin with the proof of part i. In this case,                              Since       there exists such that
                                                                          

              Let                   By the definition of limit of a sequence, there exists some integer such that

Therefore,

and, thus,

Since         the geometric series

converges. Given the inequalities above, we can apply the comparison test and conclude that the series

converges. Therefore, since

                                                                              

where                                                                                     converges.
              is a finite sum and              converges, we conclude that

For part ii.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 451

Since       there exists such that                                   By the definition of the limit of a sequence, there
                                                    Let

exists an integer such that

Therefore,

and, thus,

Since       the geometric series

diverges. Applying the comparison test, we conclude that the series

                                                  diverges.
diverges, and therefore the series

For part iii. we show that the test does not provide any information if  by considering the                  
any real number                                                                                                           For

                                                                  

However, we know that if     the                             diverges, whereas    converges if



The ratio test is particularly useful for series whose terms contain factorials or exponentials, where the ratio of terms
simplifies the expression. The ratio test is convenient because it does not require us to find a comparative series. The
drawback is that the test sometimes does not provide any information regarding convergence.

EXAMPLE 5.23

Using the Ratio Test
For each of the following series, use the ratio test to determine whether the series converges or diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

       

 c.
452 5 · Sequences and Series

    Solution
a. From the ratio test, we can see that

Since                                                                                 
                                                                          
Since              the series converges.        
                                                                                   
b. We can see that                              

     Since         the series diverges.
c. Since

we see that
                                                                    

Since              the series converges.

                                                                                         converges or diverges.
5.21 Use the ratio test to determine whether the series

Root Test

The approach of the root test is similar to that of the ratio test. Consider a series      such that                                             for

                                                                                                                                     

                                                                                                                                   

some real number Then for sufficiently large,                             Therefore, we can approximate                              by writing

                                                                                                                                     converges
The expression on the right-hand side is a geometric series. As in the ratio test, the series

absolutely if                 and the series diverges if              If  the test does not provide any information. For example,

                   

for any p-series,             we see that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 453

                                                                    

To evaluate this limit, we use the natural logarithm function. Doing so, we see that

                                                                                      
                                             and therefore
Using L'Hôpital's rule, it follows that                             for all However, we know that the p-series only

converges if   and diverges if

Theorem 5.17

Root Test

Consider the series               Let

                                                                  

 i. If                              converges absolutely.
                     then         
ii. If
iii. If       or  then                     diverges.

               the test does not provide any information.

The root test is useful for series whose terms involve exponentials. In particular, for a series whose terms  satisfy

         then          and we need only evaluate
                                                                

  EXAMPLE 5.24

Using the Root Test
For each of the following series, use the root test to determine whether the series converges or diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

     Solution
 a. To apply the root test, we compute

                                                                              

     Since     the series converges absolutely.
b. We have                                     

                                                                            

                                                                  

Since  the series diverges.
454 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                                                         converges or diverges.
5.22 Use the root test to determine whether the series

Choosing a Convergence Test

At this point, we have a long list of convergence tests. However, not all tests can be used for all series. When given a
series, we must determine which test is the best to use. Here is a strategy for finding the best test to apply.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Choosing a Convergence Test for a Series
                         

Consider a series                In the steps below, we outline a strategy for determining whether the series converges.

           a familiar series? For example, is it the harmonic series (which diverges) or the alternating harmonic
1. Is

series (which converges)? Is it a                 or geometric series? If so, check the power or the ratio to

determine if the series converges.

2. Is it an alternating series? Are we interested in absolute convergence or just convergence? If we are just

interested in whether the series converges, apply the alternating series test. If we are interested in absolute

                                                                                         

convergence, proceed to step considering the series of absolute values

3. Is the series similar to a           or geometric series? If so, try the comparison test or limit comparison test.

4. Do the terms in the series contain a factorial or power? If the terms are powers such that                    try the root

test first. Otherwise, try the ratio test first.

5. Use the divergence test. If this test does not provide any information, try the integral test.

MEDIA

Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_series2) for more information on testing series for convergence,
plus general information on sequences and series.

EXAMPLE 5.25

Using Convergence Tests
For each of the following series, determine which convergence test is the best to use and explain why. Then determine if
the series converges or diverges. If the series is an alternating series, determine whether it converges absolutely,
converges conditionally, or diverges.

          
 a.

          
b.

          
 c.

          
d.

Solution

a. Step 1. The series is not a     or geometric series.

Step 2. The series is not alternating.

Step 3. For large values of we approximate the series by the expression

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 455

                                                                                                                                                Using
Therefore, it seems reasonable to apply the comparison test or limit comparison test using the series

the limit comparison test, we see that

                                                                      

                           diverges, this series diverges as well.
Since the series

b. Step 1.The series is not a familiar series.
     Step 2. The series is alternating. Since we are interested in absolute convergence, consider the series
                                                                              

Step 3. The series is not similar to a p-series or geometric series.
Step 4. Since each term contains a factorial, apply the ratio test. We see that

                                                                              

     Therefore, this series converges, and we conclude that the original series converges absolutely, and thus converges.
c. Step 1. The series is not a familiar series.

     Step 2. It is not an alternating series.
     Step 3. There is no obvious series with which to compare this series.
     Step 4. There is no factorial. There is a power, but it is not an ideal situation for the root test.
     Step 5. To apply the divergence test, we calculate that

                                                                         

                                                                                

     Therefore, by the divergence test, the series diverges.
d. Step 1. This series is not a familiar series.

     Step 2. It is not an alternating series.
     Step 3. There is no obvious series with which to compare this series.
     Step 4. Since each term is a power of we can apply the root test. Since

                                                                    

by the root test, we conclude that the series converges.

                                        determine which convergence test is the best to use and explain why.
5.23 For the series

In Table 5.3, we summarize the convergence tests and when each can be applied. Note that while the comparison test,
456 5 · Sequences and Series

                                                                                                                                 has negative terms,
limit comparison test, and integral test require the series                          to have nonnegative terms, if

                                               to test for absolute convergence.
these tests can be applied to

            Series or Test                             Conclusions                          Comments

Divergence Test                                If             the test is                 This test cannot prove convergence of a
                                                                                          series.

For any series                   evaluate      inconclusive.

                                               If             the series
                                                     

                                               diverges.

Geometric Series                               If         the series                      Any geometric series can be reindexed to
                                                                                          be written in the form
                                               converges to                               where is the initial term and is the
                                                                                          ratio.

                                               If         the series diverges.

p-Series                                       If      the series converges. For            we have the harmonic series
    
                                                                                          

                                               If      the series diverges.

Comparison Test                                If         for all                    and  Typically used for a series similar to a
                                                                                          geometric or -series. It can sometimes
            with nonnegative terms,                       converges, then                 be difficult to find an appropriate series.
For                                                

compare with a known series                               converges.
    

                                               If         for all                    and
                                                   
                                                          diverges, then
                                                   
                                                          diverges.

Limit Comparison Test                          If is a real number and                    Typically used for a series similar to a
                                                                                          geometric or -series. Often easier to
            with positive terms,                       then                          and  apply than the comparison test.
For

compare with a series                      by      
                                                            both converge or

evaluating                                     both diverge.

                                                                                   

                                               If      and

                                                                          
                                               converges, then

                                               converges.

Table 5.3 Summary of Convergence Tests

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 457

           Series or Test                      Conclusions                                      Comments

                                         If  and                           Limited to those series for which the
                                                                           corresponding function can be easily
                                                                           integrated.
                                         diverges, then
                                         diverges.

Integral Test                                                       

If there exists a positive, continuous,                 and

decreasing function such that            both converge or both
                                         diverge.
           for all        evaluate



Alternating Series                       If          for all          and  Only applies to alternating series.
                                                                           Often used for series involving factorials
                                               then the series             or exponentials.

                                         converges.                        Often used for series where

Ratio Test                               If             the series
                        
                          with nonzero   converges absolutely.
For any series
terms, let                               If              the series
                                         diverges.
         

                                         If    the test is

                                         inconclusive.

Root Test                                If             the series

For any series            let            converges absolutely.

                                         If              the series
                                         diverges.

                                         If    the test is

                                         inconclusive.

Table 5.3 Summary of Convergence Tests

STUDENT PROJECT

Series Converging to and
Dozens of series exist that converge to or an algebraic expression containing Here we look at several examples
and compare their rates of convergence. By rate of convergence, we mean the number of terms necessary for a
partial sum to be within a certain amount of the actual value. The series representations of in the first two
examples can be explained using Maclaurin series, which are discussed in the next chapter. The third example relies
on material beyond the scope of this text.

 1. The series
                                                             
458 5 · Sequences and Series

      was discovered by Gregory and Leibniz in the late                     This result follows from the Maclaurin series for

                              We will discuss this series in the next chapter.

      a. Prove that this series converges.

      b. Evaluate the partial sums for

      c. Use the remainder estimate for alternating series to get a bound on the error

      d. What is the smallest value of that guarantees                          Evaluate

2. The series
                                                          

      has been attributed to Newton in the late               The proof of this result uses the Maclaurin series for

      a. Prove that the series converges.

      b. Evaluate the partial sums for

      c. Compare to for                                       and discuss the number of correct decimal places.

3. The series
                                                                          

      was discovered by Ramanujan in the early                William Gosper, Jr., used this series to calculate to an accuracy

      of more than million digits in the                      At the time, that was a world record. Since that time, this series

      and others by Ramanujan have led mathematicians to find many other series representations for and

      a. Prove that this series converges.

      b. Evaluate the first term in this series. Compare this number with the value of from a calculating utility. To

           how many decimal places do these two numbers agree? What if we add the first two terms in the series?

      c. Investigate the life of Srinivasa Ramanujan                        and write a brief summary. Ramanujan is one of

           the most fascinating stories in the history of mathematics. He was basically self-taught, with no formal

           training in mathematics, yet he contributed in highly original ways to many advanced areas of mathematics.

        SECTION 5.6 EXERCISES                                 converges, where is given in the following problems. State if the

                                                                                           319.
Use the ratio test to determine whether                                                             
ratio test is inconclusive.
                                                                                           322.
317.                             318.
                                                                                                    
                                                                                           325.

320.                             321.

                                          
323.                             324.

                                          
326.                             327.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 459

                                                             converges, where is as follows.
Use the root test to determine whether                                                     330.
                                                                                           333.
328.                                  329.                                                 336.

331.                                  332.

334.                                  335.

For this exercise, let n start at 2.
337.

                                                                                                                                                                
In the following exercises, use either the ratio test or the root test as appropriate to determine whether the series

with given terms converges, or state if the test is inconclusive.

338.                                  339.                                                340.

341.                                  342.                                                      343.

                                            (Hint: Compare to

344.                                                         converges, or state if the ratio test is inconclusive.

                                                         
Use the ratio test to determine whether

                                               
345.                                  346.

                                                                                          converges.
Use the root and limit comparison tests to determine whether

347.       where

           (Hint: Find limit of

In the following exercises, use an appropriate test to determine whether the series converges.

                                                                                                   
348.                                  349.                                                350.

                                      352.                   (Hint:                       353.
351.
460 5 · Sequences and Series       355.                    where          356.

       354.

357.                               358.                    (Hint:                    359.                                           (Hint:

The following series converge by the ratio test. Use summation by parts,
                                                                                              to find the sum of the given series.

             (Hint: Take                      where                                
360.                               361.                                   362.

        and                              (Hint: Take       and

         
363.

The kth term of each of the following series has a factor  Find the range of for which the ratio test implies that the
series converges.
                                                                                   
                                                                          366.
364.                               365.

                                   368. Does there exist a                369. Let           For which
367.                                       number such that
                                            
                                                                                real numbers does
                                                      converges?
                                                                                

                                                                                           converge?

370. Suppose that                  371. Suppose that                      372. Suppose that

                                                                                             for all

                        For which                           For which                           where is a
      values of                          values of                              fixed real number. For
                                                                                which values of is
                 must                                      is                    

                                                                                           guaranteed to

      converge?                          guaranteed to converge?

                                                                                converge?

373. For which values of           374. Suppose that                      375. Let           where
                                                                 for all
                                                                                is the greatest integer
        if any, does                       Can you conclude that
                                                                                less than or equal to

                                                    converges?                  Determine whether

      converge? (Hint:                                                          

                                                                                     converges and

                                                                                justify your answer.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               5.6 · Ratio and Root Tests 461

The following advanced exercises use a generalized ratio test to determine convergence of some series that arise in

particular applications when tests in this chapter, including the ratio and root test, are not powerful enough to determine

their convergence. The test states that if                              then  converges, while if              then
                                                                                                            

diverges.

376. Let                                                      377. Let

Explain why the ratio test cannot                             Show that         For which
                                      
                                                                        does the generalized ratio test imply
determine convergence of
                                                                              

                                                              convergence of    (Hint: Write

Use the fact that      is

increasing to estimate                                        as a product of factors each smaller than
                                      

378. Let         Show
        that
              as 
462 5 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

                                                                                                         is said to converge absolutely
absolute convergence if the series                             converges, the series

                                                                                                   where             is called an alternating
alternating series a series of the form                                    or

series

alternating series test for an alternating series of either form, if                               for all integers  and                 then an

alternating series converges

arithmetic sequence a sequence in which the difference between every pair of consecutive terms is the same is called

an arithmetic sequence

bounded above a sequence            is bounded above if there exists a constant such that                            for all positive

integers

bounded below a sequence            is bounded below if there exists a constant such that                            for all positive

integers

bounded sequence a sequence         is bounded if there exists a constant such that                                  for all positive

integers

comparison test if                  for all                                                               converges; if                    for all
                                                               and         converges, then

                                                               diverges
        and                       diverges, then

                                                                                                          diverges, the series                 is
conditional convergence if the series                          converges, but the series

said to converge conditionally

convergence of a series a series converges if the sequence of partial sums for that series converges

convergent sequence a convergent sequence is a sequence                              for which there exists a real number   such that

is arbitrarily close to as long as is sufficiently large

divergence of a series a series diverges if the sequence of partial sums for that series diverges

                                                               

divergence test if                  then the series                        diverges
                                

divergent sequence a sequence that is not convergent is divergent

explicit formula a sequence may be defined by an explicit formula such that

geometric sequence a sequence                in which the ratio                      is the same for all positive integers  is called a

geometric sequence

geometric series a geometric series is a series that can be written in the form

                                                             

harmonic series the harmonic series takes the form
                                                                      

index variable the subscript used to define the terms in a sequence is called the index
infinite series an infinite series is an expression of the form

                                                                                                  

                                  

integral test  for a series         with positive terms                    if there exists a continuous, decreasing function such
    that
               for all positive integers then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         5 · Chapter Review 463

                                                             
                                                                              

    either both converge or both diverge            for all       If                                                       both
limit comparison test suppose                                                               then         and
                                                                                                                               
converge or both diverge; if                                                                       converges. If
                                                      and           converges, then                                      

                                                    diverges
and             diverges, then

limit of a sequence the real number to which a sequence converges is called the limit of the sequence
monotone sequence an increasing or decreasing sequence

                                                

p-series a series of the form

                                                                  

partial sum the partial sum of the infinite series                              is the finite sum

                                       with nonzero terms, let                          if         the series converges
ratio test for a series

                                                                          

absolutely; if          the series diverges; if               the test is inconclusive

recurrence relation a recurrence relation is a relationship in which a term in a sequence is defined in terms of

earlier terms in the sequence
                                                  

remainder estimate for a series                       with positive terms and a continuous, decreasing function such that

                                                                                

            for all positive integers the remainder                                                satisfies the following estimate:

                                                                                  

root test for a series                 let                    if                the series converges absolutely; if        the series

                                                    

diverges; if    the test is inconclusive

sequence an ordered list of numbers of the form                           is a sequence

telescoping series a telescoping series is one in which most of the terms cancel in each of the partial sums

term the number in the sequence                     is called the term of the sequence

unbounded sequence a sequence that is not bounded is called unbounded

Key Equations

                                            
Harmonic series

                                            
Sum of a geometric series
464 5 · Chapter Review                                                                  

  Divergence test                                                                  

                                                                                               
  p-series

                                                                          
  Remainder estimate from the integral test

                                   
  Alternating series 

Key Concepts

5.1 Sequences

· To determine the convergence of a sequence given by an explicit formula                                 we use the properties of limits

for functions.

· If  and            are convergent sequences that converge to and respectively, and is any real number, then

the sequence           converges to    the sequences                                    converge to       the sequence

converges to         and the sequence                                converges to       provided

· If a sequence is bounded and monotone, then it converges, but not all convergent sequences are monotone.

· If a sequence is unbounded, it diverges, but not all divergent sequences are unbounded.

· The geometric sequence         converges if and only if                          or

5.2 Infinite Series

· Given the infinite series
                                                                   

and the corresponding sequence of partial sums                              where

the series converges if and only if the sequence                            converges.
                                    

· The geometric series               converges if                           and diverges if          For

                                                                     

· The harmonic series

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            5 · Chapter Review 465

                                                         

    diverges.
                                 

· A series of the form

is a telescoping series. The partial sum of this series is given by                        The series will converge if and

only if        exists. In that case,
             

                                                 

                                                                                     

5.3 The Divergence and Integral Tests

· If                                             diverges.
               then the series

· If                                         may converge or diverge.
               the series

            

· If           is a series with positive terms           and is a continuous, decreasing function such that                  for all

positive integers then                                    
                                                                           

                                                                        

either both converge or both diverge. Furthermore, if                                converges, then the        partial sum
                                                                                                              
                                                                                   
approximation                is accurate up to an error               where

                                   converges if          and diverges if
· The p-series

5.4 Comparison Tests

· The comparison tests are used to determine convergence or divergence of series with positive terms.

                                                                      is often compared to a geometric or p-series.
· When using the comparison tests, a series

5.5 Alternating Series

                                                   if                 for all and      as   the alternating series
· For an alternating series

converges.

                                                 converges.
· If           converges, then

5.6 Ratio and Root Tests

  · For the ratio test, we consider

                                                                      
466 5 · Chapter Review

                              

      If          the series     converges absolutely. If  the series diverges. If         the test does not provide any

    information. This test is useful for series whose terms involve factorials.
· For the root test, we consider

                                                           

                              

      If          the series     converges absolutely. If  the series diverges. If         the test does not provide any

      information. The root test is useful for series whose terms involve powers.

· For a series that is similar to a geometric series or              consider one of the comparison tests.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

379. If                          380. If                                                   converges,
                    then                                   then       381. If

        converges.                       diverges.                                       
                                                                                 then
                                                                                           converges.

                    converges,
382. If

                
        then

      converges.

Is the sequence bounded, monotone, and convergent or divergent? If it is convergent, find the limit.

383.                             384.                                 385.

386.                             387.

Is the series convergent or divergent?

                                                                               
388.                             389.                                 390.

                                          
391.                             392.

Is the series convergent or divergent? If convergent, is it absolutely convergent?

                                                                               
393.                             394.                                 395.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        5 · Chapter Review 467

                                          
396.                             397.

Evaluate                                                               400. A legend from India tells
                                 399.

398.

                                                                       that a mathematician

                                                                       invented chess for a king.

                                                                       The king enjoyed the

                                                                       game so much he allowed

                                                                       the mathematician to

                                                                       demand any payment.

                                                                       The mathematician asked

                                                                       for one grain of rice for

                                                                       the first square on the

                                                                       chessboard, two grains of

                                                                       rice for the second square

                                                                       on the chessboard, four

                                                                       grains of rice for the third

                                                                       square on the

                                                                       chessboard, and so on.

                                                                       Find an exact expression

                                                                       for the total payment (in

                                                                       grains of rice) requested

                                                                       by the mathematician.

                                                                       Assuming there are

                                                                                     grains of rice in

                                                                       pound, and                pounds

                                                                       in ton, how many tons

                                                                       of rice did the

                                                                       mathematician attempt to

                                                                       receive?

The following problems consider a simple population model of the housefly, which can be exhibited by the recursive

formula             where is the population of houseflies at generation and is the average number of offspring

per housefly who survive to the next generation. Assume a starting population

401. Find       if               402. Find an expression for           403. If       and
                                                          in terms of          find
                                                                                     and
                                         and What does it                                      
           and                           physically represent?

404. For what values of will
        the series converge and
        diverge? What does the
        series converge to?
468 5 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                                           6 · Introduction 469

6  POWER SERIES

Figure 6.1 If you win a lottery, do you get more money by taking a lump-sum payment or by accepting fixed payments
over time? (credit: modification of work by Robert Huffstutter, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Power Series and Functions
  6.2 Properties of Power Series
  6.3 Taylor and Maclaurin Series
  6.4 Working with Taylor Series

      Introduction

When winning a lottery, sometimes an individual has an option of receiving winnings in one lump-sum payment or
receiving smaller payments over fixed time intervals. For example, you might have the option of receiving 20 million
dollars today or receiving 1.5 million dollars each year for the next 20 years. Which is the better deal? Certainly 1.5
million dollars over 20 years is equivalent to 30 million dollars. However, receiving the 20 million dollars today would
allow you to invest the money.

Alternatively, what if you were guaranteed to receive 1 million dollars every year indefinitely (extending to your heirs) or
receive 20 million dollars today. Which would be the better deal? To answer these questions, you need to know how to
use infinite series to calculate the value of periodic payments over time in terms of today's dollars (see Example 6.7).

                                           is known as a power series. Since the terms contain the variable x, power series
An infinite series of the form

can be used to define functions. They can be used to represent given functions, but they are also important because they
allow us to write functions that cannot be expressed any other way than as "infinite polynomials." In addition, power
series can be easily differentiated and integrated, thus being useful in solving differential equations and integrating
complicated functions. An infinite series can also be truncated, resulting in a finite polynomial that we can use to
470 6 · Power Series

       approximate functional values. Power series have applications in a variety of fields, including physics, chemistry, biology,
       and economics. As we will see in this chapter, representing functions using power series allows us to solve mathematical
       problems that cannot be solved with other techniques.

    6.1 Power Series and Functions

      Learning Objectives

             6.1.1 Identify a power series and provide examples of them.
             6.1.2 Determine the radius of convergence and interval of convergence of a power series.
             6.1.3 Use a power series to represent a function.

       A power series is a type of series with terms involving a variable. More specifically, if the variable is x, then all the terms
       of the series involve powers of x. As a result, a power series can be thought of as an infinite polynomial. Power series are
       used to represent common functions and also to define new functions. In this section we define power series and show
       how to determine when a power series converges and when it diverges. We also show how to represent certain
       functions using power series.

     Form of a Power Series

       A series of the form

                                                                     

where x is a variable and the coefficients cn are constants, is known as a power series. The series
                                                                                              

is an example of a power series. Since this series is a geometric series with ratio  we know that it converges if
           and diverges if                                                                                                 (6.1)

  Definition

  A series of the form
                                                              

is a power series centered at      A series of the form
                                 
                                                                                                     (6.2)

is a power series centered at

To make this definition precise, we stipulate that             and  even when        and             respectively.

The series

                                                             

and
                                                           

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           6.1 · Power Series and Functions 471

are both power series centered at              The series
                                             

is a power series centered at

Convergence of a Power Series

Since the terms in a power series involve a variable x, the series may converge for certain values of x and diverge for

other values of x. For a power series centered at                  the value of the series at              is given by Therefore, a power

series always converges at its center. Some power series converge only at that value of x. Most power series, however,

converge for more than one value of x. In that case, the power series either converges for all real numbers x or

                                                                                  

converges for all x in a finite interval. For example, the geometric series         converges for all x in the interval

but diverges for all x outside that interval. We now summarize these three possibilities for a general power series.

Theorem 6.1

Convergence of a Power Series                  The series satisfies exactly one of the following properties:
                                      

Consider the power series

     i. The series converges at                and diverges for all

     ii. The series converges for all real numbers x.

iii. There exists a real number                such that the series converges if                           and diverges if  At

       the values x where                      the series may converge or diverge.

Proof                                                          (For a series centered at a value of a other than zero, the result
                                                                    
Suppose that the power series is centered at

follows by letting         and considering the series                            We must first prove the following fact:

If there exists a real number                                                                              converges absolutely for all x
                                               such that           converges, then the series

such that

       

Since        converges, the nth term                           as     Therefore, there exists an integer N such that               for

all        Writing

we conclude that, for all

The series
                                                                               
472 6 · Power Series

                                                                                                 

is a geometric series that converges if     Therefore, by the comparison test, we conclude that                   also

converges for                                                                                                                                   
                           Since we can add a finite number of terms to a convergent series, we conclude that

converges for
With this result, we can now prove the theorem. Consider the series

                                                                               

and let S be the set of real numbers for which the series converges. Suppose that the set        Then the series falls

under case i. Suppose that the set S is the set of all real numbers. Then the series falls under case ii. Suppose that

  and S is not the set of real numbers. Then there exists a real number                     such that the series does not

converge. Thus, the series cannot converge for any x such that                            Therefore, the set S must be a bounded set,

which means that it must have a smallest upper bound. (This fact follows from the Least Upper Bound Property for the

real numbers, which is beyond the scope of this text and is covered in real analysis courses.) Call that smallest upper

bound R. Since             the number       Therefore, the series converges for all x such that                 and the series

falls into case iii.



                           falls into case iii. of Convergence of a Power Series, then the series converges for all x such that
If a series

                 for some         and diverges for all x such that                        The series may converge or diverge at the
values x where                                                                                        converges is known as the interval of

                                 The set of values x for which the series

convergence. Since the series diverges for all values x where                             the length of the interval is 2R, and therefore,
                                                                                                                                         

the radius of the interval is R. The value R is called the radius of convergence. For example, since the series

converges for all values x in the interval  and diverges for all values x such that         the interval of

convergence of this series is           Since the length of the interval is 2, the radius of convergence is 1.

Definition

                                            The set of real numbers x where the series converges is the interval of
Consider the power series

convergence. If there exists a real number  such that the series converges for                   and diverges for

                      then R is the radius of convergence. If the series converges only at  we say the radius of

convergence is             If the series converges for all real numbers x, we say the radius of convergence is                                    

(Figure 6.2).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.1 · Power Series and Functions 473

                                   graph (a) shows a radius of convergence at   graph (b) shows a radius of
Figure 6.2 For a series

convergence at   and graph (c) shows a radius of convergence at R. For graph (c) we note that the series may or

may not converge at the endpoints  and

To determine the interval of convergence for a power series, we typically apply the ratio test. In Example 6.1, we show
the three different possibilities illustrated in Figure 6.2.

EXAMPLE 6.1

Finding the Interval and Radius of Convergence
For each of the following series, find the interval and radius of convergence.

       
 a.

      
b.

      
c.

    Solution
a. To check for convergence, apply the ratio test. We have
474 6 · Power Series

                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
                                                              

                                                                  

for all values of x. Therefore, the series converges for all real numbers x. The interval of convergence is  

and the radius of convergence is            

b. Apply the ratio test. For         we see that

                                                              

                                                              

                                                                      

                                                              

Therefore, the series diverges for all            Since the series is centered at     it must converge there, so the

series converges only for            The interval of convergence is the single value      and the radius of convergence

is

c. In order to apply the ratio test, consider

                                                            

                                                            
                                                            

The ratio             if             Since        implies that                       the series converges absolutely if

                      The ratio  if               Therefore, the series diverges if   or  The ratio test is

inconclusive if           The ratio         if and only if      or      We need to test these values of x separately. For

    the series is given by

                                               

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.1 · Power Series and Functions 475

Since this is the alternating harmonic series, it converges. Thus, the series converges at           For                 the
series is given by

                                                          

This is the harmonic series, which is divergent. Therefore, the power series diverges at             We conclude that the

interval of convergence is        and the radius of convergence is

                                                                                            
6.1 Find the interval and radius of convergence for the series

Representing Functions as Power Series

Being able to represent a function by an "infinite polynomial" is a powerful tool. Polynomial functions are the easiest
functions to analyze, since they only involve the basic arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division. If we can represent a complicated function by an infinite polynomial, we can use the polynomial representation
to differentiate or integrate it. In addition, we can use a truncated version of the polynomial expression to approximate
values of the function. So, the question is, when can we represent a function by a power series?

Consider again the geometric series

                                                                                                  (6.3)

Recall that the geometric series

converges if and only if          In that case, it converges to  Therefore, if                the series in Example 6.3

converges to       and we write

As a result, we are able to represent the function               by the power series

We now show graphically how this series provides a representation for the function            by comparing the graph
of f with the graphs of several of the partial sums of this infinite series.

EXAMPLE 6.2

Graphing a Function and Partial Sums of its Power Series

Sketch a graph of           and the graphs of the corresponding partial sums                         for                 on the

interval      Comment on the approximation as N increases.

     Solution                                                    becomes a better approximation for       for x in
From the graph in Figure 6.3 you see that as N increases,
the interval
476 6 · Power Series

Figure 6.3 The graph shows a function and three approximations of it by partial sums of a power series.

6.2 Sketch a graph of                       and the corresponding partial sums                               for  on
           the interval

Next we consider functions involving an expression similar to the sum of a geometric series and show how to represent
these functions using power series.

EXAMPLE 6.3

Representing a Function with a Power Series                               Find the interval of convergence.
Use a power series to represent each of the following functions
 a.

b.

    Solution
a. You should recognize this function f as the sum of a geometric series, because

Using the fact that, for         is the sum of the geometric series
                                             

we see that, for
                                                                        

Since this series converges if and only if  the interval of convergence is         and we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6.1 · Power Series and Functions 477

b. This function is not in the exact form of a sum of a geometric series. However, with a little algebraic manipulation,
     we can relate f to a geometric series. By factoring 4 out of the two terms in the denominator, we obtain

Therefore, we have

                                                       

The series converges as long as    (note that when                                 the series does not converge). Solving this
                                                                            and
inequality, we conclude that the interval of convergence is
                                                                          

for

6.3 Represent the function         using a power series and find the interval of convergence.

In the remaining sections of this chapter, we will show ways of deriving power series representations for many other
functions, and how we can make use of these representations to evaluate, differentiate, and integrate various functions.

          SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, state whether each statement is true, or give an example to show that it is false.

           converges, then         converges at                             3. Given any sequence
1. If                       2.                                                  there is always some
          as                                                                    possibly very small, such
                                 for any real numbers                                   

                                                                            that  converges on
478 6 · Power Series

                      has radius of                                                            
4. If                                  5. Suppose that                6. Suppose that

convergence           and if           converges at               At        converges at         At

                      for all n, then  which of the following               which of the following

the radius of convergence of           points might the series              points must the series also

                                       diverge? Use the fact that if        converge? Use the fact that

          is greater than or                         converges at           if                   converges

equal to R.                            x, then it converges at any          at x, then it converges at
                                       point closer to c than x.            any point closer to c than x.
                                        a.                                   a.
                                       b.                                   b.
                                        c.                                   c.
                                       d.                                   d.
                                        e.                                   e.

                                        f.                                   f.

In the following exercises, suppose that             as  Find the radius of convergence for each series.

                                                                                     
7.                                     8.                                       9.

                                                                             
10.                                    11.                            12.

In the following exercises, find the radius of convergence R and interval of convergence for         with the given
coefficients

                                                                             
13.                                    14.                            15.

                                                                             
16.                                    17.                            18.

                                                                             
19.                                    20.                            21.

       
22.

In the following exercises, find the radius of convergence of each series.

                                                                             
23.                                    24.                            25.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.1 · Power Series and Functions 479

                                            where                          
26.                                27.                              28.

In the following exercises, use the ratio test to determine the radius of convergence of each series.

                                                                           
29.                                30.                              31.

       
32.

In the following exercises, given that                                       find the power series for each function
                                                    with convergence in

with the given center a, and identify its interval of convergence.

33.                  (Hint:        34.                              35.

36.                                37.                              38.

39.                                40.                              41.

42.

Use the next exercise to find the radius of convergence of the given series in the subsequent exercises.

43. Explain why, if                                                        
                                   44.                              45.

                     then

     whenever          and,

     therefore, the radius of

                     

     convergence of            is

                                                                    48. Suppose that
46.                                47.                                                

                                                                                        such that

                                                                                   if n is even. Explain
                                                                         why
480 6 · Power Series

49. Suppose that                       50. Suppose that                            51. Suppose that
                                                                                                     

                      such that                             converges                                  converges

          if n is odd. Explain            on          Find the                     on              Find the
why
                                          interval of convergence of               interval of convergence of

                                                    

In the following exercises, suppose that                    satisfies                       where      for each n. State whether
                                                                           

each series converges on the full interval          or if there is not enough information to draw a conclusion. Use the
comparison test when appropriate.

                                                                                          
52.                                    53.                                         54.

                      (Hint: Let       56. Suppose that      is a                  57. [T] Plot the graphs of
55.                                                                                      and of the partial sums

                                          polynomial of degree N.                                           for

            if        for some            Find the radius and interval
n, otherwise
                                          of convergence of

                                            

                                                                                                       on the

                                                                                   interval

                                                                                   Comment on the

                                                                                   approximation of            by

                                                                                            near       and near

                                                                                            as N increases.

58. [T] Plot the graphs of             59. [T] Plot the graphs of the              60. [T] Plot the graphs of the
                       and of the                                                        partial sums

                                          partial sums

partial sums                                                                                           for

                                          for                on the

for                   on the              interval                                                     on the

interval                                  Comment on the behavior                  interval

Comment on the behavior                   of the sums near                         Comment on the behavior

of the sums near                          and near         as N                    of the sums near

and near              as N                increases.                               and near            as N

increases.                                                                         increases.

61. [T] Plot the graphs of the         62. [T] Plot the graphs of the
      partial sums                           partial sums

                                                                              for

for                   on the                          on the interval

interval                                              Comment on

Comment on how these                      how these plots

plots approximate                  as     approximate        as N

N increases.                              increases.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.2 · Properties of Power Series 481

6.2 Properties of Power Series

Learning Objectives

      6.2.1 Combine power series by addition or subtraction.
      6.2.2 Create a new power series by multiplication by a power of the variable or a constant, or by substitution.
      6.2.3 Multiply two power series together.
      6.2.4 Differentiate and integrate power series term-by-term.

In the preceding section on power series and functions we showed how to represent certain functions using power

series. In this section we discuss how power series can be combined, differentiated, or integrated to create new power

series. This capability is particularly useful for a couple of reasons. First, it allows us to find power series representations

for certain elementary functions, by writing those functions in terms of functions with known power series. For example,

given the power series representation for                    we can find a power series representation for

Second, being able to create power series allows us to define new functions that cannot be written in terms of
elementary functions. This capability is particularly useful for solving differential equations for which there is no solution
in terms of elementary functions.

Combining Power Series

If we have two power series with the same interval of convergence, we can add or subtract the two series to create a

new power series, also with the same interval of convergence. Similarly, we can multiply a power series by a power of x

or evaluate a power series at for a positive integer m to create a new power series. Being able to do this allows us to

find power series representations for certain functions by using power series representations of other functions. For

example, since we know the power series representation for                                    we can find power series representations for

related functions, such as

In Combining Power Series we state results regarding addition or subtraction of power series, composition of a power

series, and multiplication of a power series by a power of the variable. For simplicity, we state the theorem for power

series centered at    Similar results hold for power series centered at

Theorem 6.2

Combining Power Series                                            converge to the functions f and g, respectively, on a
                                                    and

Suppose that the two power series

common interval I.                                  converges to  on I.
                                

  i. The power series

ii. For any integer                                                                           converges to  on I.
                                  and any real number b, the power series

iii. For any integer                                                                          converges to  for all x such that
                                  and any real number b, the series

is in I.

Proof                                                                                                       converge to the functions f
                                                                  Suppose that                and
                                                  

We prove i. in the case of the series

and g, respectively, on the interval I. Let x be a point in I and let               and       denote the Nth partial sums of the
482 6 · Power Series

                                 respectively. Then the sequence              converges to                and the sequence
series                and

converges to                                                                       is
                      Furthermore, the Nth partial sum of

Because

                                                                                       

                                              converges to
we conclude that the series



We examine products of power series in a later theorem. First, we show several applications of Combining Power Series
and how to find the interval of convergence of a power series given the interval of convergence of a related power
series.

EXAMPLE 6.4

Combining Power Series                                                                                             
                                                                                         and suppose that

Suppose that                   is a power series whose interval of convergence is                                           is a power

series whose interval of convergence is
                                                                       

 a. Find the interval of convergence of the series

                                                                      
b. Find the interval of convergence of the series

    Solution                                                                                                         the interval of
a. Since the interval            is a common interval of convergence of the series                        and

                                          

convergence of the series                     is

                      is a power series centered at zero with radius of convergence 1, it converges for all x in the interval
b. Since

                By Combining Power Series, the series

                                                                            

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6.2 · Properties of Power Series 483

     converges if 3x is in the interval   Therefore, the series converges for all x in the interval

                                         has an interval of convergence of  Find the interval of convergence of
     6.4 Suppose that

                 

In the next example, we show how to use Combining Power Series and the power series for a function f to construct

power series for functions related to f. Specifically, we consider functions related to the function  and we use

the fact that

                                                                

for

EXAMPLE 6.5

Constructing Power Series from Known Power Series

Use the power series representation for                           combined with Combining Power Series to construct a power series

for each of the following functions. Find the interval of convergence of the power series.

a.

b.

     Solution

a. First write  as

     Using the power series representation for                    and parts ii. and iii. of Combining Power Series, we find that
                                                                       
     a power series representation for f is given by
                                                              

     Since the interval of convergence of the series for          is        the interval of convergence for this new series is

     the set of real numbers x such that  Therefore, the interval of convergence is

b. To find the power series representation, use partial fractions to write                  as the sum of two fractions.

     We have

     First, using part ii. of Combining Power Series, we obtain
484 6 · Power Series

                                                                                        

Then, using parts ii. and iii. of Combining Power Series, we have
                                                                         

Since we are combining these two power series, the interval of convergence of the difference must be the smaller of
these two intervals. Using this fact and part i. of Combining Power Series, we have

                                                                               

where the interval of convergence is

6.5 Use the series for                on              to construct a series for             Determine the interval of
           convergence.

In Example 6.5, we showed how to find power series for certain functions. In Example 6.6 we show how to do the
opposite: given a power series, determine which function it represents.

EXAMPLE 6.6

Finding the Function Represented by a Given Power Series
                                      

Consider the power series        Find the function f represented by this series. Determine the interval of convergence

of the series.

     Solution
Writing the given series as

                                                                                          

we can recognize this series as the power series for

Since this is a geometric series, the series converges if and only if                       Therefore, the interval of convergence is

                                                                                            Determine its interval of convergence.
6.6 Find the function represented by the power series

Recall the questions posed in the chapter opener about which is the better way of receiving payouts from lottery
winnings. We now revisit those questions and show how to use series to compare values of payments over time with a
lump sum payment today. We will compute how much future payments are worth in terms of today's dollars, assuming

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 6.2 · Properties of Power Series 485

we have the ability to invest winnings and earn interest. The value of future payments in terms of today's dollars is
known as the present value of those payments.

  EXAMPLE 6.7
Chapter Opener: Present Value of Future Winnings

          Figure 6.4 (credit: modification of work by Robert Huffstutter, Flickr)

Suppose you win the lottery and are given the following three options: (1) Receive 20 million dollars today; (2) receive 1.5
million dollars per year over the next 20 years; or (3) receive 1 million dollars per year indefinitely (being passed on to
your heirs). Which is the best deal, assuming that the annual interest rate is 5%? We answer this by working through the
following sequence of questions.

a. How much is the 1.5 million dollars received annually over the course of 20 years worth in terms of today's dollars,
     assuming an annual interest rate of 5%?

b. Use the answer to part a. to find a general formula for the present value of payments of C dollars received each year
     over the next n years, assuming an average annual interest rate r.

c. Find a formula for the present value if annual payments of C dollars continue indefinitely, assuming an average
     annual interest rate r.

d. Use the answer to part c. to determine the present value of 1 million dollars paid annually indefinitely.
e. Use your answers to parts a. and d. to determine which of the three options is best.

Solution

a. Consider the payment of 1.5 million dollars made at the end of the first year. If you were able to receive that

payment today instead of one year from now, you could invest that money and earn 5% interest. Therefore, the

present value of that money P1 satisfies                                 We conclude that

Similarly, consider the payment of 1.5 million dollars made at the end of the second year. If you were able to receive

that payment today, you could invest that money for two years, earning 5% interest, compounded annually.

Therefore, the present value of that money P2 satisfies                            We conclude that

The value of the future payments today is the sum of the present values  of each of those annual
payments. The present value Pk satisfies
486 6 · Power Series

     Therefore,

b. Using the result from part a. we see that the present value P of C dollars paid annually over the course of n years,
     assuming an annual interest rate r, is given by

c. Using the result from part b. we see that the present value of an annuity that continues indefinitely is given by the
     infinite series
                                                                                

     We can view the present value as a power series in r, which converges as long as  Since  this series

     converges. Rewriting the series as
                                                                                     

     we recognize this series as the power series for

     We conclude that the present value of this annuity is

d. From the result to part c. we conclude that the present value P of                  paid out every year

     indefinitely, assuming an annual interest rate         is given by

 e. From part a. we see that receiving $1.5 million dollars over the course of 20 years is worth $18.693 million dollars in
      today's dollars. From part d. we see that receiving $1 million dollars per year indefinitely is worth $20 million dollars
      in today's dollars. Therefore, either receiving a lump-sum payment of $20 million dollars today or receiving $1
      million dollars indefinitely have the same present value.

Multiplication of Power Series

We can also create new power series by multiplying power series. Being able to multiply two power series provides
another way of finding power series representations for functions.
The way we multiply them is similar to how we multiply polynomials. For example, suppose we want to multiply

                                                              

and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.2 · Properties of Power Series 487

                                                         

It appears that the product should satisfy

                              

                                                                                                           

In Multiplying Power Series, we state the main result regarding multiplying power series, showing that if              and


           converge on a common interval I, then we can multiply the series in this way, and the resulting series also

converges on the interval I.

Theorem 6.3

Multiplying Power Series                                     converge to f and g, respectively, on a common interval I. Let
                                              and

Suppose that the power series

Then

                                                                                      

and
                                                       

                                                                                               
The series          is known as the Cauchy product of the series                        and

We omit the proof of this theorem, as it is beyond the level of this text and is typically covered in a more advanced
course. We now provide an example of this theorem by finding the power series representation for

using the power series representations for
488 6 · Power Series

         EXAMPLE 6.8
       Multiplying Power Series
       Multiply the power series representation

                                                                                   

for  with the power series representation

                                           

for  to construct a power series for                                                 on the interval

     Solution
We need to multiply

Writing out the first several terms, we see that the product is given by

Since the series for             and  both converge on the interval                                   the series for the product also

converges on the interval

     6.7 Multiply the series          
                                              by itself to construct a series for

Differentiating and Integrating Power Series

                         

Consider a power series                                                              that converges on some interval I, and let  be the function

defined by this series. Here we address two questions about
  · Is differentiable, and if so, how do we determine the derivative
  · How do we evaluate the indefinite integral

We know that, for a polynomial with a finite number of terms, we can evaluate the derivative by differentiating each term
separately. Similarly, we can evaluate the indefinite integral by integrating each term separately. Here we show that we
can do the same thing for convergent power series. That is, if

                                                                   

converges on some interval I, then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      6.2 · Properties of Power Series 489

and

converges on I. As noted below, behavior at the endpoints of the interval must be investigated individually.

Evaluating the derivative and indefinite integral in this way is called term-by-term differentiation of a power series

and term-by-term integration of a power series, respectively. The ability to differentiate and integrate power series

term-by-term also allows us to use known power series representations to find power series representations for other

functions. For example, given the power series for            we can differentiate term-by-term to find the power

series for        Similarly, using the power series for                               we can integrate term-by-term to find the

power series for                 an antiderivative of g. We show how to do this in Example 6.9 and Example 6.10.

First, we state Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series, which provides the main result regarding

differentiation and integration of power series.

Theorem 6.4

Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series
                                            

Suppose that the power series                              converges on the interval  for some  Let f be the

function defined by the series
                                                         

for               Then f is differentiable on the interval     and we can find by differentiating the series
term-by-term:                                               

for               Also, to find  we can integrate the series term-by-term. The resulting series converges on

                  and we have

                                                           

  for

The proof of this result is beyond the scope of the text and is omitted. Note that although Term-by-Term Differentiation
and Integration for Power Series guarantees the same radius of convergence when a power series is differentiated or
integrated term-by-term, it says nothing about what happens at the endpoints. It is possible that the differentiated and
integrated power series have different behavior at the endpoints than does the original series. We see this behavior in
the next examples.
490 6 · Power Series

         EXAMPLE 6.9
       Differentiating Power Series
        a. Use the power series representation

                                                                                       

for           to find a power series representation for

on the interval                  Determine whether the resulting series converges at the endpoints.
                                                                                 

b. Use the result of part a. to evaluate the sum of the series

    Solution     is the derivative of                    we can find a power series representation for g by
a. Since

differentiating the power series for f term-by-term. The result is

                                         

                                         

for           Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series does not guarantee anything about the

behavior of this series at the endpoints. Testing the endpoints by using the divergence test, we find that the series

diverges at both endpoints       Note that this is the same result found in Example 6.8.

b. From part a. we know that

                                       

Therefore,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           6.2 · Properties of Power Series 491

                                                                  

                                                                  term-by-term to find a power series representation for
    6.8 Differentiate the series

                         on the interval

EXAMPLE 6.10

Integrating Power Series
For each of the following functions f, find a power series representation for f by integrating the power series for and
find its interval of convergence.

a.
b.

    Solution  the derivative is                                 We know that
a. For

                                                                

    for       To find a power series for                          we integrate the series term-by-term.

    Since     is an antiderivative of                           it remains to solve for the constant C. Since   we

    have      Therefore, a power series representation for                    is

                                                                

    for       Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series does not guarantee anything about the

    behavior of this power series at the endpoints. However, checking the endpoints, we find that at           the series is

    the alternating harmonic series, which converges. Also, at          the series is the harmonic series, which diverges.

    It is important to note that, even though this series converges at        Term-by-Term Differentiation and

    Integration for Power Series does not guarantee that the series actually converges to  In fact, the series does
492 6 · Power Series

     converge to           but showing this fact requires more advanced techniques. (Abel's theorem, covered in more

     advanced texts, deals with this more technical point.) The interval of convergence is

b. The derivative of                 is                   We know that

                                                          

     for              To find a power series for            we integrate this series term-by-term.

     Since                 we have       Therefore, a power series representation for               is

                                                          

     for              Again, Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series does not guarantee anything

     about the convergence of this series at the endpoints. However, checking the endpoints and using the alternating

     series test, we find that the series converges at    and           As discussed in part a., using Abel's theorem, it

     can be shown that the series actually converges to        and      at                  and     respectively. Thus,

     the interval of convergence is

                                                        

     6.9 Integrate the power series                                     term-by-term to evaluate

Up to this point, we have shown several techniques for finding power series representations for functions. However, how
do we know that these power series are unique? That is, given a function f and a power series for f at a, is it possible that
there is a different power series for f at a that we could have found if we had used a different technique? The answer to
this question is no. This fact should not seem surprising if we think of power series as polynomials with an infinite
number of terms. Intuitively, if

for all values x in some open interval I about zero, then the coefficients cn should equal dn for   We now state this
result formally in Uniqueness of Power Series.

Theorem 6.5

Uniqueness of Power Series

                           

Let                   and                be two convergent power series such that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.2 · Properties of Power Series 493

                                                                           

  for all x in an open interval containing a. Then    for all

Proof

Let

Then               By Term-by-Term Differentiation and Integration for Power Series, we can differentiate both series

term-by-term. Therefore,

and thus,                           Similarly,

implies that                     and therefore,       More generally, for any integer
and consequently,         for all



In this section we have shown how to find power series representations for certain functions using various algebraic
operations, differentiation, or integration. At this point, however, we are still limited as to the functions for which we can
find power series representations. Next, we show how to find power series representations for many more functions by
introducing Taylor series.

         SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES

                                                    

63. If             and              64. If                                 and

                                                    
                              find                                      find

     the power series of                        the power series of
                            and of                                 and of

In the following exercises, use partial fractions to find the power series of each function.

65.                                 66.                                         67.

68.

In the following exercises, express each series as a rational function.

                                                                                       
69.                                 70.                                         71.
494 6 · Power Series

       
72.

The following exercises explore applications of annuities.

73. Calculate the present             74. Calculate the present                     75. Calculate the annual
      values P of an annuity in             values P of annuities in                      payouts C to be given for
      which $10,000 is to be paid           which $9,000 is to be paid                    20 years on annuities
      out annually for a period of          out annually perpetually,                     having present value
      20 years, assuming interest           assuming interest rates of                    $100,000 assuming
      rates of                                                        and                 respective interest rates of
      and                                                                                                            and

76. Calculate the annual              77. Suppose that an annuity                   78. Suppose that an annuity
      payouts C to be given                 has a present value                           has a present value
      perpetually on annuities                                              What
      having present value                  interest rate r would allow                   What interest rate r would
      $100,000 assuming                     for perpetual annual                          allow for perpetual annual
      respective interest rates of          payouts of $50,000?                           payouts of $100,000?
                                 and

In the following exercises, express the sum of each power series in terms of geometric series, and then express the sum
as a rational function.

79.                                        80.
      (Hint: Group powers x3k,
                                                (Hint: Group powers x4k,               etc.)
      and

81.                                             82.
      (Hint: Group powers x3k,
                                      and             (Hint: Group powers

                                                                                  and

In the following exercises, find the power series of          given f and g as defined.

                                                                                              

83.                                        84.                                         85.

                                                Express the coefficients of
                                                               in terms of

                             
86.

In the following exercises, differentiate the given series expansion of f term-by-term to obtain the corresponding series
expansion for the derivative of f.

                                                            

87.                                   88.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        6.2 · Properties of Power Series 495

In the following exercises, integrate the given series expansion of                 term-by-term from zero to x to obtain the
corresponding series expansion for the indefinite integral of                            

                                 

89.                                                              90.

In the following exercises, evaluate each infinite series by identifying it as the value of a derivative or integral of
geometric series.

                                                                                                  

91. Evaluate    as                      92. Evaluate                  as            93. Evaluate        as

                                                                                          where
      where                                  where                                         

              

94. Evaluate                     as

                  where
              

                                                                      use term-by-term differentiation or integration to find power series
In the following exercises, given that

for each function centered at the given point.

95.             centered at             96.                      at                 97.             at

      (Hint:

98.                          at         99.                               at        100.                at

101.                             where       102. [T] Evaluate the power                  103. [T] Subtract the infinite

                                             series expansion                             series of         from

                                                                                                        to get a power

                                                                                          series for

                                                                                          Evaluate at       What

                                             at                       to show that        is the smallest N such that
                                                                                          the Nth partial sum of this
                                             is the sum of the                            series approximates
                                                                                          with an error less than
                                             alternating harmonic                         0.001?

                                             series. Use the alternating

                                             series test to determine

                                             how many terms of the

                                             sum are needed to

                                             estimate                     accurate to

                                             within 0.001, and find such

                                             an approximation.
496 6 · Power Series

In the following exercises, using a substitution if indicated, express each series in terms of elementary functions and find
the radius of convergence of the sum.

                                                                                                    using
104.                                   105.                                     106.

                      using            108.  Show that, up to powers            109. Differentiate the series
107.                                                                                                

                                             x3 and y3,                                                        term-by-

                                             satisfies                             term to show that            is

                                                                                   equal to its derivative.

110. Show that if                      111. [T] Suppose that the                112. [T] Suppose that the
                    
                                               coefficients an of the                   coefficients an of the
                             is a sum                                                             

                                             series            are                 series           are

of even powers, that is,                     defined by the recurrence             defined by the recurrence
          if n is odd, then                  relation                              relation

                        is a sum                                           For     For         and

of odd powers, while if f is                           and                         compute and plot the
a sum of odd powers,                         compute and plot the
then F is a sum of even
powers.                                      sums                      for         sums                         for

113. [T] Given the power series                                on                                     on
        expansion                                                                  115. [T] Recall that
                                       114. [T] Given the power series
                                               expansion
                                                                 

determine how many terms                          use the alternating series test          Assuming an exact value of
                                                                                                       estimate by
N of the sum evaluated at                         to determine how many
                                                                                           evaluating partial sums
                      are needed to               terms N of the sum evaluated                              of the power

approximate                  accurate             at    are needed to                      series expansion
                                                                                                             
to within 1/1000. Evaluate                        approximate

the corresponding partial                         accurate to within 1/1000.
                                                  Evaluate the corresponding
sum

                                                  partial sum                              at         What is the

                                                                                           smallest number N such that
                                                                                                             approximates 

                                                                                           accurately to within 0.001?
                                                                                           How many terms are needed
                                                                                           for accuracy to within
                                                                                           0.00001?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 497

6.3 Taylor and Maclaurin Series

Learning Objectives

      6.3.1 Describe the procedure for finding a Taylor polynomial of a given order for a function.
      6.3.2 Explain the meaning and significance of Taylor's theorem with remainder.
      6.3.3 Estimate the remainder for a Taylor series approximation of a given function.

In the previous two sections we discussed how to find power series representations for certain types of
functions--specifically, functions related to geometric series. Here we discuss power series representations for other
types of functions. In particular, we address the following questions: Which functions can be represented by power series
and how do we find such representations? If we can find a power series representation for a particular function and
the series converges on some interval, how do we prove that the series actually converges to

Overview of Taylor/Maclaurin Series                                 Then the series has the form

Consider a function that has a power series representation at

                                             (6.4)

What should the coefficients be? For now, we ignore issues of convergence, but instead focus on what the series should

be, if one exists. We return to discuss convergence later in this section. If the series Equation 6.4 is a representation for

at  we certainly want the series to equal       at  Evaluating the series at                      we see that

                                            

Thus, the series equals  if the coefficient         In addition, we would like the first derivative of the power

series to equal    at                     Differentiating Equation 6.4 term-by-term, we see that

                                            

Therefore, at      the derivative is

                                            

Therefore, the derivative of the series equals  if the coefficient  Continuing in this way, we look for

coefficients cn such that all the derivatives of the power series Equation 6.4 will agree with all the corresponding

derivatives of at        The second and third derivatives of Equation 6.4 are given by

                                          

and
                                        
498 6 · Power Series

Therefore, at           the second and third derivatives
                                         

and
                                       

equal       and         respectively, if  and                     More generally, we see that if has a power series

representation at       then the coefficients should be given by  That is, the series should be

                      

This power series for is known as the Taylor series for at If     then this series is known as the Maclaurin series
for

Definition

If has derivatives of all orders at       then the Taylor series for the function at is
                   
                                                                                                 (6.5)

The Taylor series for at 0 is known as the Maclaurin series for

Later in this section, we will show examples of finding Taylor series and discuss conditions under which the Taylor series
for a function will converge to that function. Here, we state an important result. Recall from Uniqueness of Power Series
that power series representations are unique. Therefore, if a function has a power series at then it must be the
Taylor series for at

Theorem 6.6

Uniqueness of Taylor Series                               on some open interval containing a, then that power series
If a function has a power series at a that converges to
is the Taylor series for at a.

The proof follows directly from Uniqueness of Power Series.

To determine if a Taylor series converges, we need to look at its sequence of partial sums. These partial sums are finite
polynomials, known as Taylor polynomials.

       MEDIA

      Visit the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive to read brief biographies of Brook Taylor
      (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_BTaylor) and Colin Maclaurin (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_CMaclaurin) and how
      they developed the concepts named after them.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 499

Taylor Polynomials

The nth partial sum of the Taylor series for a function at is known as the nth Taylor polynomial. For example, the 0th,
1st, 2nd, and 3rd partial sums of the Taylor series are given by

respectively. These partial sums are known as the 0th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Taylor polynomials of at respectively. If
         then these polynomials are known as Maclaurin polynomials for We now provide a formal definition of Taylor

and Maclaurin polynomials for a function

Definition

If has n derivatives at      then the nth Taylor polynomial for at is

The nth Taylor polynomial for at 0 is known as the nth Maclaurin polynomial for

We now show how to use this definition to find several Taylor polynomials for              at

EXAMPLE 6.11

Finding Taylor Polynomials

Find the Taylor polynomials       and for              at  Use a graphing utility to compare the graph of

with the graphs of           and

     Solution                                          and its first three derivatives at
To find these Taylor polynomials, we need to evaluate

Therefore,

The graphs of       and the first three Taylor polynomials are shown in Figure 6.5.
500 6 · Power Series

    Figure 6.5 The function           and the Taylor polynomials  and at               are plotted on this graph.

    6.10 Find the Taylor polynomials                 and for      at

We now show how to find Maclaurin polynomials for ex,  and        As stated above, Maclaurin polynomials are

Taylor polynomials centered at zero.

EXAMPLE 6.12

Finding Maclaurin Polynomials

For each of the following functions, find formulas for the Maclaurin polynomials       and Find a formula for the

nth Maclaurin polynomial and write it using sigma notation. Use a graphing utilty to compare the graphs of

and with

a.
b.
c.

    Solution          we know that                                                for all positive integers n. Therefore,
a. Since

    for all positive integers n. Therefore, we have

      The function and the first three Maclaurin polynomials are shown in Figure 6.6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 501

        Figure 6.6 The graph shows the function  and the Maclaurin polynomials    and

b. For         the values of the function and its first four derivatives at    are given as follows:

Since the fourth derivative is  the pattern repeats. That is,                and                      for

Thus, we have

and for
Graphs of the function and its Maclaurin polynomials are shown in Figure 6.7.
502 6 · Power Series

                      Figure 6.7 The graph shows the function  and the Maclaurin polynomials  and

c. For                the values of the function and its first four derivatives at  are given as follows:

Since the fourth derivative is   the pattern repeats. In other words,               and                    for
          Therefore,

and for
Graphs of the function and the Maclaurin polynomials appear in Figure 6.8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 503

Figure 6.8 The function              and the Maclaurin polynomials             and are plotted on this graph.

6.11 Find formulas for the Maclaurin polynomials               and for                   Find a formula for the nth

            Maclaurin polynomial. Write your answer using sigma notation.

Taylor's Theorem with Remainder

Recall that the nth Taylor polynomial for a function at a is the nth partial sum of the Taylor series for at a. Therefore,

to determine if the Taylor series converges, we need to determine whether the sequence of Taylor polynomials

converges. However, not only do we want to know if the sequence of Taylor polynomials converges, we want to know if it

converges to To answer this question, we define the remainder  as

For the sequence of Taylor polynomials to converge to we need the remainder Rn to converge to zero. To determine if
Rn converges to zero, we introduce Taylor's theorem with remainder. Not only is this theorem useful in proving that a
Taylor series converges to its related function, but it will also allow us to quantify how well the nth Taylor polynomial

approximates the function.

Here we look for a bound on   Consider the simplest case:      Let p0 be the 0th Taylor polynomial at a for a

function The remainder R0 satisfies

If is differentiable on an interval I containing a and x, then by the Mean Value Theorem there exists a real number c

between a and x such that            Therefore,

Using the Mean Value Theorem in a similar argument, we can show that if  is n times differentiable on an interval I
containing a and x, then the nth remainder Rn satisfies

for some real number c between a and x. It is important to note that the value c in the numerator above is not the center

a, but rather an unknown value c between a and x. This formula allows us to get a bound on the remainder Rn. If we

happen to know that           is bounded by some real number M on this interval I, then

for all x in the interval I.

We now state Taylor's theorem, which provides the formal relationship between a function and its nth degree Taylor

polynomial  This theorem allows us to bound the error when using a Taylor polynomial to approximate a function

value, and will be important in proving that a Taylor series for converges to
504 6 · Power Series

Theorem 6.7                                    times on an interval I containing the real number a. Let pn be the

Taylor's Theorem with Remainder
Let be a function that can be differentiated
nth Taylor polynomial of at a and let

be the nth remainder. Then for each x in the interval I, there exists a real number c between a and x such that

If there exists a real number M such that                     for all  then

for all x in I.

Proof                 and introduce the function g such that

Fix a point

We claim that g satisfies the criteria of Rolle's theorem. Since g is a polynomial function (in t), it is a differentiable

function. Also, g is zero at     and  because

Therefore, g satisfies Rolle's theorem, and consequently, there exists c between a and x such that         We now
calculate Using the product rule, we note that

Consequently,

Notice that there is a telescoping effect. Therefore,                                               Since
By Rolle's theorem, we conclude that there exists a number c between a and x such that
we conclude that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 505

Adding the first term on the left-hand side to both sides of the equation and dividing both sides of the equation by
                  we conclude that

as desired. From this fact, it follows that if there exists M such that    for all x in I, then



Not only does Taylor's theorem allow us to prove that a Taylor series converges to a function, but it also allows us to

estimate the accuracy of Taylor polynomials in approximating function values. We begin by looking at linear and

quadratic approximations of  at  and determine how accurate these approximations are at estimating

EXAMPLE 6.13

Using Linear and Quadratic Approximations to Estimate Function Values
Consider the function

a. Find the first and second Taylor polynomials for at  Use a graphing utility to compare these polynomials
     with near

b. Use these two polynomials to estimate
c. Use Taylor's theorem to bound the error.

    Solution  the values of the function and its first two derivatives at  are as follows:
a. For

  Thus, the first and second Taylor polynomials at      are given by

  The function and the Taylor polynomials are shown in Figure 6.9.
506 6 · Power Series

       Figure 6.9 The graphs of                    and the linear and quadratic approximations  and

b. Using the first Taylor polynomial at  we can estimate

Using the second Taylor polynomial at              we obtain

c. By Taylor's Theorem with Remainder, there exists a c in the interval        such that the remainder when

approximating         by the first Taylor polynomial satisfies

We do not know the exact value of c, so we find an upper bound on              by determining the maximum value of
                                                                                  on that interval occurs at
on the interval                  Since              the largest value for

Using the fact that                     we obtain

Similarly, to estimate           we use the fact that

Since                            the maximum value of on the interval      is                   Therefore, we have

6.12 Find the first and second Taylor polynomials for                    at    Use these polynomials to estimate

                      Use Taylor's theorem to bound the error.

  EXAMPLE 6.14                                         are given by

Approximating sin x Using Maclaurin Polynomials
From Example 6.12b., the Maclaurin polynomials for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 507

for

a. Use the fifth Maclaurin polynomial for     to approximate                 and bound the error.

b. For what values of x does the fifth Maclaurin polynomial approximate          to within 0.0001?

    Solution
a. The fifth Maclaurin polynomial is

     Using this polynomial, we can estimate as follows:

     To estimate the error, use the fact that the sixth Maclaurin polynomial is       and calculate a bound on
                   By Uniqueness of Taylor Series, the remainder is

     for some c between 0 and  Using the fact that            for all x, we find that the magnitude of the error is at
     most

b. We need to find the values of x such that

     Solving this inequality for x, we have that the fifth Maclaurin polynomial gives an estimate to within 0.0001 as long
     as

     6.13 Use the fourth Maclaurin polynomial for        to approximate

Now that we are able to bound the remainder         we can use this bound to prove that a Taylor series for at a
converges to

Representing Functions with Taylor and Maclaurin Series

We now discuss issues of convergence for Taylor series. We begin by showing how to find a Taylor series for a function,
and how to find its interval of convergence.

EXAMPLE 6.15

Finding a Taylor Series        at          Determine the interval of convergence.
Find the Taylor series for

     Solution

For            the values of the function and its first four derivatives at      are
508 6 · Power Series

That is, we have                   for all                    Therefore, the Taylor series for at          is given by
                                                                                   

To find the interval of convergence, we use the ratio test. We find that

Thus, the series converges if      That is, the series converges for                               Next, we need to check the

endpoints. At         we see that

                                                                            

diverges by the divergence test. Similarly, at                                
                                                          

diverges. Therefore, the interval of convergence is

6.14 Find the Taylor series for                               at          and determine its interval of convergence.

We know that the Taylor series found in this example converges on the interval                     but how do we know it actually

converges to We consider this question in more generality in a moment, but for this example, we can answer this

question by writing

That is,                                                                    Since this is a geometric series, it converges to as
          can be represented by the geometric series

long as               Therefore, the Taylor series found in Example 6.15 does converge to                  on

We now consider the more general question: if a Taylor series for a function converges on some interval, how can we
determine if it actually converges to To answer this question, recall that a series converges to a particular value if and
only if its sequence of partial sums converges to that value. Given a Taylor series for at a, the nth partial sum is given
by the nth Taylor polynomial pn. Therefore, to determine if the Taylor series converges to we need to determine
whether

Since the remainder                                                    
                                                            the Taylor series converges to if and only if

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 509

                                                                             
We now state this theorem formally.

  Theorem 6.8

  Convergence of Taylor Series
  Suppose that has derivatives of all orders on an interval I containing a. Then the Taylor series

                                                                       

converges to  for all x in I if and only if

                                                                           
for all x in I.

With this theorem, we can prove that a Taylor series for at a converges to if we can prove that the remainder

To prove that                          we typically use the bound

from Taylor's theorem with remainder.

In the next example, we find the Maclaurin series for ex and                 and show that these series converge to the

corresponding functions for all real numbers by proving that the remainders    for all real numbers x.

EXAMPLE 6.16

Finding Maclaurin Series
For each of the following functions, find the Maclaurin series and its interval of convergence. Use Taylor's Theorem with
Remainder to prove that the Maclaurin series for converges to on that interval.

 a. ex
b.

     Solution
 a. Using the nth Maclaurin polynomial for ex found in Example 6.12a., we find that the Maclaurin series for ex is given

      by
                                                                                   

To determine the interval of convergence, we use the ratio test. Since

we have

                                                                             

for all x. Therefore, the series converges absolutely for all x, and thus, the interval of convergence is   To
510 6 · Power Series

show that the series converges to ex for all x, we use the fact that                                 for all                and ex is an increasing
                                                                                                                                   is eb. Thus,
function on   Therefore, for any real number b, the maximum value of ex for all

Since we just showed that
                                                                            

converges for all x, by the divergence test, we know that
                                                                        

for any real number x. By combining this fact with the squeeze theorem, the result is
                                                                                                                          

b. Using the nth Maclaurin polynomial for      found in Example 6.12b., we find that the Maclaurin series for                       is

given by

                                               

In order to apply the ratio test, consider

Since
                                                                  

for all x, we obtain the interval of convergence as   To show that the Maclaurin series converges to

look at               For each x there exists a real number c between 0 and x such that

Since                 for all integers n and all real numbers c, we have

for all real numbers x. Using the same idea as in part a., the result is                             for all x, and therefore, the
                                                                                                   

Maclaurin series for             converges to  for all real x.

6.15 Find the Maclaurin series for                                  Use the ratio test to show that the interval of convergence is

                        Show that the Maclaurin series converges to           for all real numbers x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               6.3 · Taylor and Maclaurin Series 511

STUDENT PROJECT

Proving that e is Irrational
In this project, we use the Maclaurin polynomials for ex to prove that e is irrational. The proof relies on supposing

that e is rational and arriving at a contradiction. Therefore, in the following steps, we suppose   for some

integers r and s where

1. Write the Maclaurin polynomials                                 for ex. Evaluate

                                             to estimate e.

2. Let           denote the remainder when using             to estimate ex. Therefore,                    and

                             Assuming that       for integers r and s, evaluate

3. Using the results from part 2, show that for each remainder                                             we can find

      an integer k such that     is an integer for

4. Write down the formula for the nth Maclaurin polynomial       for ex and the corresponding remainder

      Show that              is an integer.

5. Use Taylor's theorem to write down an explicit formula for      Conclude that                    and therefore,

6. Use Taylor's theorem to find an estimate on               Use this estimate combined with the result from part 5 to

      show that                  Conclude that if n is large enough, then                      Therefore,           is an

      integer with magnitude less than 1. Thus,                  But from part 5, we know that                  We have

      arrived at a contradiction, and consequently, the original supposition that e is rational must be false.

        SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, find the Taylor polynomials of degree two approximating the given function centered at the
given point.

116.                         at  117.                        at    118.                         at

119.                     at      120.               at             121.                    at

122.             at              123.             at

In the following exercises, verify that the given choice of n in the remainder estimate                         where M

is the maximum value of          on the interval between a and the indicated point, yields                      Find the

value of the Taylor polynomial pn of at the indicated point. If  is not less than          , determine what it is.

124. [T]                         125. [T]                          126. [T]
127. [T] e2;                     128. [T]                          129. [T]

130. Integrate the               131. Integrate the approximation
        approximation
                                         evaluated at -x2 to
        evaluated at t to                approximate
        approximate

In the following exercises, find the smallest value of n such that the remainder estimate                             where
                                                                                                                on the
M is the maximum value of           on the interval between a and the indicated point, yields

indicated interval.

132.                 on          133.                 on           134.                    on
512 6 · Power Series

135.                  on

In the following exercises, the maximum of the right-hand side of the remainder estimate                                           on
                                                                                                                                             by
                      occurs at a or   Estimate the maximum value of R such that                                               on

plotting this maximum as a function of R.

136. [T] ex approximated by            137. [T]        approximated by 138. [T] approximated by
                                               x,

139. [T]              approximated by

In the following exercises, find the Taylor series of the given function centered at the indicated point.

140. at                                141.               at  142.                                             at

143.       at                          144.        at         145.                                             at

146. at                                147. at                148.                                                 at  (Hint:

                                                                               Differentiate

                                                                    

149.       at                          150.

                                             at           (Note: is the Taylor series of

In the following exercises, compute the Taylor series of each function around

151.                                   152.                   153.

154.                                   155.                   156.

157.                                   158.                   159.

                                                                                                                   is the value of the Maclaurin series
[T] In the following exercises, identify the value of x such that the given series

of         at Approximate the value of             using

                                                                       
160.                                   161.                   162.

         
163.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 513

The following exercises make use of the functions                                  and                           on

164. [T] Plot                   165. [T] Plot                                      166. [T] Plot
                                                                                           on
      on           Compare the        on           Compare the

      maximum difference with         maximum difference with

      the square of the Taylor        the square of the Taylor

      remainder estimate for          remainder estimate for

167. [T] Compare            on  168. [T] Plot                               where        169. (Taylor approximations
                                                                                                 and root finding.) Recall
               to  Compare                                                                       that Newton's method

      this with the Taylor            on           Compare the

      remainder estimate for          maximum error with the Taylor

      the approximation of            remainder estimate.                                approximates solutions of
                                                                                                      near the input
          by

                                                                                         a. If and are inverse

                                                                                                  functions, explain why

                                                                                                  a solution of

                                                                                                  is the value

                                                                                         b. Let       be the

                                                                                                  degree Maclaurin

                                                                                                  polynomial of Use

                                                                                                  Newton's method to

                                                                                                  approximate solutions

                                                                                                  of                 for

                                                                                         c. Explain why the
                                                                                              approximate roots of
                                                                                                                    are
                                                                                              approximate values of

                                                                                   converges in an interval containing then
In the following exercises, use the fact that if

                    to evaluate each limit using Taylor series.

170.                            171.                                               172.

173.

6.4 Working with Taylor Series

Learning Objectives

      6.4.1 Write the terms of the binomial series.
      6.4.2 Recognize the Taylor series expansions of common functions.
      6.4.3 Recognize and apply techniques to find the Taylor series for a function.
      6.4.4 Use Taylor series to solve differential equations.
      6.4.5 Use Taylor series to evaluate nonelementary integrals.

In the preceding section, we defined Taylor series and showed how to find the Taylor series for several common
functions by explicitly calculating the coefficients of the Taylor polynomials. In this section we show how to use those
Taylor series to derive Taylor series for other functions. We then present two common applications of power series. First,
we show how power series can be used to solve differential equations. Second, we show how power series can be used
to evaluate integrals when the antiderivative of the integrand cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions. In
514 6 · Power Series

one example, we consider             an integral that arises frequently in probability theory.

The Binomial Series

Our first goal in this section is to determine the Maclaurin series for the function            for all real numbers

The Maclaurin series for this function is known as the binomial series. We begin by considering the simplest case: is a

nonnegative integer. We recall that, for                               can be written as

The expressions on the right-hand side are known as binomial expansions and the coefficients are known as binomial
coefficients. More generally, for any nonnegative integer the binomial coefficient of in the binomial expansion of

            is given by
                                                                                                                                                                   (6.6)

and

                                                                                                                                                                   (6.7)

For example, using this formula for       we see that

We now consider the case when the exponent is any real number, not necessarily a nonnegative integer. If is not a

nonnegative integer, then                 cannot be written as a finite polynomial. However, we can find a power series

for Specifically, we look for the Maclaurin series for To do this, we find the derivatives of and evaluate them at

We conclude that the coefficients in the binomial series are given by

                                                                                                             (6.8)

We note that if is a nonnegative integer, then the     derivative      is the zero function, and the series

terminates. In addition, if is a nonnegative integer, then Equation 6.8 for the coefficients agrees with Equation 6.6 for

the coefficients, and the formula for the binomial series agrees with Equation 6.7 for the finite binomial expansion. More

generally, to denote the binomial coefficients for any real number we define

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 515

With this notation, we can write the binomial series for        as

                                                                                                                            (6.9)

We now need to determine the interval of convergence for the binomial series Equation 6.9. We apply the ratio test.
Consequently, we consider

Since

                                                       

if and only if       we conclude that the interval of convergence for the binomial series is           The behavior at the

endpoints depends on It can be shown that for             the series converges at both endpoints; for                  the

series converges at          and diverges at           and for            the series diverges at both endpoints. The binomial

series does converge to      in               for all real numbers but proving this fact by showing that the remainder

            is difficult.

Definition

For any real number        the Maclaurin series for                       is the binomial series. It converges to for
and we write                                         

for

We can use this definition to find the binomial series for                and use the series to approximate

EXAMPLE 6.17

Finding Binomial Series                                      to estimate  Use Taylor's theorem to bound the error. Use a
 a. Find the binomial series for                       and
b. Use the third-order Maclaurin polynomial

      graphing utility to compare the graphs of

    Solution    Using the definition for the binomial series, we obtain
a. Here

                                 
516 6 · Power Series

       b. From the result in part a. the third-order Maclaurin polynomial is
             Therefore,

From Taylor's theorem, the error satisfies

for some between       and Since                                and the maximum value of           on the interval
          occurs at      we have

The function and the Maclaurin polynomial are graphed in Figure 6.10.

Figure 6.10 The third-order Maclaurin polynomial                provides a good approximation for                for

near zero.

6.16 Find the binomial series for

Common Functions Expressed as Taylor Series

At this point, we have derived Maclaurin series for exponential, trigonometric, and logarithmic functions, as well as

functions of the form         In Table 6.1, we summarize the results of these series. We remark that the

convergence of the Maclaurin series for           at the endpoint                  and the Maclaurin series for

            at the endpoints  and             relies on a more advanced theorem than we present here. (Refer to

Abel's theorem for a discussion of this more technical point.)

                       Function             Maclaurin Series Interval of Convergence

                                            

                                                                                   

                                  Table 6.1 Maclaurin Series for Common Functions

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 517

                              Function  Maclaurin Series       Interval of Convergence
                                        
                                                                               

                                                                               

                                        

                                        

                                        

              Table 6.1 Maclaurin Series for Common Functions

Earlier in the chapter, we showed how you could combine power series to create new power series. Here we use these
properties, combined with the Maclaurin series in Table 6.1, to create Maclaurin series for other functions.

EXAMPLE 6.18

Deriving Maclaurin Series from Known Series
Find the Maclaurin series of each of the following functions by using one of the series listed in Table 6.1.

a.
b.

    Solution

a. Using the Maclaurin series for       we find that the Maclaurin series for    is given by

                                                        

    This series converges to         for all in the domain of  that is, for all

b. To find the Maclaurin series for     we use the fact that

    Using the Maclaurin series for we see that the term in the Maclaurin series for           is given by

    For even, this term is zero. For odd, this term is  Therefore, the Maclaurin series for   has only odd-
518 6 · Power Series

             order terms and is given by
                                                                     

6.17 Find the Maclaurin series for

We also showed previously in this chapter how power series can be differentiated term by term to create a new power

series. In Example 6.19, we differentiate the binomial series for         term by term to find the binomial series for

Note that we could construct the binomial series for                     directly from the definition, but differentiating the

binomial series for              is an easier calculation.

EXAMPLE 6.19

Differentiating a Series to Find a New Series

Use the binomial series for         to find the binomial series for

     Solution
The two functions are related by

so the binomial series for        is given by

                                                                       

6.18 Find the binomial series for

In this example, we differentiated a known Taylor series to construct a Taylor series for another function. The ability to
differentiate power series term by term makes them a powerful tool for solving differential equations. We now show how
this is accomplished.

Solving Differential Equations with Power Series

Consider the differential equation

Recall that this is a first-order separable equation and its solution is  This equation is easily solved using

techniques discussed earlier in the text. For most differential equations, however, we do not yet have analytical tools to

solve them. Power series are an extremely useful tool for solving many types of differential equations. In this technique,

                                    

we look for a solution of the form                                     and determine what the coefficients would need to be. In the next

example, we consider an initial-value problem involving                  to illustrate the technique.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 519

  EXAMPLE 6.20
Power Series Solution of a Differential Equation
Use power series to solve the initial-value problem

     Solution
Suppose that there exists a power series solution

                                                        

Differentiating this series term by term, we obtain

If y satisfies the differential equation, then

Using Uniqueness of Power Series on the uniqueness of power series representations, we know that these series can
only be equal if their coefficients are equal. Therefore,

Using the initial condition  combined with the power series representation

we find that  We are now ready to solve for the rest of the coefficients. Using the fact that  we have

Therefore,
                                                                 

You might recognize
                                                                                

as the Taylor series for Therefore, the solution is
       6.19 Use power series to solve
520 6 · Power Series

We now consider an example involving a differential equation that we cannot solve using previously discussed methods.
This differential equation

is known as Airy's equation. It has many applications in mathematical physics, such as modeling the diffraction of light.
Here we show how to solve it using power series.

  EXAMPLE 6.21

Power Series Solution of Airy's Equation
Use power series to solve

with the initial conditions         and

     Solution
We look for a solution of the form

                                               

Differentiating this function term by term, we obtain

If y satisfies the equation         then

Using Uniqueness of Power Series on the uniqueness of power series representations, we know that coefficients of the
same degree must be equal. Therefore,

More generally, for                we have             In fact, all coefficients can be written in terms of and To
see this, first note that                Then

For                   we see that

Therefore, the series solution of the differential equation is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 521

The initial condition          implies         Differentiating this series term by term and using the fact that
we conclude that
                       Therefore, the solution of this initial-value problem is

6.20 Use power series to solve                               with the initial condition  and

Evaluating Nonelementary Integrals

Solving differential equations is one common application of power series. We now turn to a second application. We show
how power series can be used to evaluate integrals involving functions whose antiderivatives cannot be expressed using
elementary functions.

One integral that arises often in applications in probability theory is                  Unfortunately, the antiderivative of the

integrand    is not an elementary function. By elementary function, we mean a function that can be written using a

finite number of algebraic combinations or compositions of exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, or power functions.

We remark that the term "elementary function" is not synonymous with noncomplicated function. For example, the

function                                       is an elementary function, although not a particularly simple-looking

function. Any integral of the form             where the antiderivative of cannot be written as an elementary function

is considered a nonelementary integral.

Nonelementary integrals cannot be evaluated using the basic integration techniques discussed earlier. One way to
evaluate such integrals is by expressing the integrand as a power series and integrating term by term. We demonstrate

this technique by considering

EXAMPLE 6.22

Using Taylor Series to Evaluate a Definite Integral

a. Express             as an infinite series.

b. Evaluate            to within an error of

    Solution                        is given by
a. The Maclaurin series for                          

                                                           
Therefore,

b. Using the result from part a. we have
522 6 · Power Series

     The sum of the first four terms is approximately  By the alternating series test, this estimate is accurate to
     within an error of less than

     6.21 Express                 as an infinite series. Evaluate             to within an error of

As mentioned above, the integral              arises often in probability theory. Specifically, it is used when studying data

sets that are normally distributed, meaning the data values lie under a bell-shaped curve. For example, if a set of data

values is normally distributed with mean and standard deviation then the probability that a randomly chosen value

lies between          and        is given by

                                                                                                                (6.10)

(See Figure 6.11.)

Figure 6.11 If data values are normally distributed with mean and standard deviation the probability that a

randomly selected data value is between and is the area under the curve                              between

and

To simplify this integral, we typically let     This quantity is known as the score of a data value. With this
simplification, integral Equation 6.10 becomes

                                                                                                                (6.11)

In Example 6.23, we show how we can use this integral in calculating probabilities.

EXAMPLE 6.23

Using Maclaurin Series to Approximate a Probability                                   and standard deviation
Suppose a set of standardized test scores are normally distributed with mean

Use Equation 6.11 and the first six terms in the Maclaurin series for  to approximate the probability that a

randomly selected test score is between         and    Use the alternating series test to determine how accurate

your approximation is.

Solution

Since                   and we are trying to determine the area under the curve from  to             integral

Equation 6.11 becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 523

The Maclaurin series for  is given by
                                        

                                                          
Therefore,

Using the first five terms, we estimate that the probability is approximately  By the alternating series test, we see
that this estimate is accurate to within

Analysis

If you are familiar with probability theory, you may know that the probability that a data value is within two standard

deviations of the mean is approximately                     Here we calculated the probability that a data value is between the mean

and two standard deviations above the mean, so the estimate should be around   The estimate, combined with the

bound on the accuracy, falls within this range.

6.22 Use the first five terms of the Maclaurin series for   to estimate the probability that a randomly

          selected test score is between and                Use the alternating series test to determine the accuracy of

          this estimate.

Another application in which a nonelementary integral arises involves the period of a pendulum. The integral is

An integral of this form is known as an elliptic integral of the first kind. Elliptic integrals originally arose when trying to
calculate the arc length of an ellipse. We now show how to use power series to approximate this integral.

EXAMPLE 6.24

Period of a Pendulum

The period of a pendulum is the time it takes for a pendulum to make one complete back-and-forth swing. For a

pendulum with length that makes a maximum angle             with the vertical, its period is given by
524 6 · Power Series

where is the acceleration due to gravity and         (see Figure 6.12). (We note that this formula for the period

arises from a non-linearized model of a pendulum. In some cases, for simplification, a linearized model is used and
is approximated by Use the binomial series

                                                   

to estimate the period of this pendulum. Specifically, approximate the period of the pendulum if

 a. you use only the first term in the binomial series, and
b. you use the first two terms in the binomial series.

                      Figure 6.12 This pendulum has length and makes a maximum angle  with the vertical.

     Solution                                        Then we can write the period as
We use the binomial series, replacing with

a. Using just the first term in the integrand, the first-order estimate is

If     is small, then            is small. We claim that when is small, this is a good estimate. To justify this

claim, consider

Since                 this integral is bounded by

Furthermore, it can be shown that each coefficient on the right-hand side is less than and, therefore, that this
expression is bounded by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 525

      which is small for small.

b. For larger values of          we can approximate           by using more terms in the integrand. By using the first two terms

      in the integral, we arrive at the estimate

The applications of Taylor series in this section are intended to highlight their importance. In general, Taylor series are
useful because they allow us to represent known functions using polynomials, thus providing us a tool for approximating
function values and estimating complicated integrals. In addition, they allow us to define new functions as power series,
thus providing us with a powerful tool for solving differential equations.

        SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, use appropriate substitutions to write down the Maclaurin series for the given binomial.

174.                             175.                                       176.

177.

In the following exercises, use the substitution                                  in the binomial expansion to find the
Taylor series of each function with the given center.

178.          at                 179.                     at                180.          at

181.              at     (Hint: 182.                      at                183.      at

184.      at                     185.             at

In the following exercises, use the binomial theorem to estimate each number, computing enough terms to obtain an
estimate accurate to an error of at most

186. [T]          using          187. [T]                     using

In the following exercises, use the binomial approximation                                                     for  to
approximate each number. Compare this value to the value given by a scientific calculator.

188. [T] using           in      189. [T]                            using  190. [T]          using

                                                      in                                  in

191. [T] using           in      192. Integrate the binomial                193. [T] Recall that the graph

                                       approximation of                           of          is an upper
                                       to find an approximation
                                                                                  semicircle of radius
                                       of
                                                                                  Integrate the binomial

                                                                                  approximation of

                                                                                              up to order

                                                                                  from        to           to

                                                                                  estimate
526 6 · Power Series

In the following exercises, use the expansion                                                                          to write the first five
terms (not necessarily a quartic polynomial) of each expression.
                                                                                                    derivative of
194.                                      195.                                     196.                     at

197.                                      198. Use

                                                with                    to approximate
                                                                                     200. Find the
199. Use the approximation

      for                 to approximate

201. Find the th derivative

      at              of

In the following exercises, find the Maclaurin series of each function.

202.                                      203.                                     204.

205.                                      206.                                     207.

208.                      using the       209.                          using the
        identity                                  identity

In the following exercises, find the Maclaurin series of                           by integrating the Maclaurin series of term

by term. If is not strictly defined at zero, you may substitute the value of the Maclaurin series at zero.

                                                                                                      

210.                                                                    211.

                                                                                                    

212.                                                          213.

                                                            
214.

                                                         
215.

                                                                      
216.

                                                         
217.

In the following exercises, compute at least the first three nonzero terms (not necessarily a quadratic polynomial) of the
Maclaurin series of

218.                                                                    219.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 527

220.                                 221.                                        222.

223.                                 224.                                        225.                 (see

                                                                                       expansion for

In the following exercises, find the radius of convergence of the Maclaurin series of each function.

226.                                 227.                                        228.

229.                                 230. Find the Maclaurin series              231. Find the Maclaurin series
                                             of                                          of

232. Differentiate term by           233. [T] Let                                234. Use the identity

      term the Maclaurin series                                                                                     to

      of            and compare the                                                    find the power series

      result with the Maclaurin            and                                         expansion of             at

      series of                                                                        (Hint: Integrate the

                                                                                       Maclaurin series of

                                                                                                  term by term.)

                                           denote the respective

                                           Maclaurin polynomials of

                                           degree        of                 and

                                           degree of         Plot the

                                           errors            for

                                                      and compare

                                           them to

                                           on

                    find the         236. [T] Suppose that                       237. [T] Suppose that a set of
235. If                                             

                                                                 satisfies             standardized test scores

      power series expansions                                                          is normally distributed
      of and
                                                                                       with mean            and

                                                      and                              standard deviation

                                           Show that         for                       Set up an integral

                                           all and that                                that represents the

                                                           Plot the                    probability that a test

                                                                                       score will be between

                                           partial sum     of on                       and and use the
                                           the interval
                                                                                       integral of the degree

                                                                                       Maclaurin polynomial of

                                                                                                  to estimate

                                                                                       this probability.
528 6 · Power Series

238. [T] Suppose that a set of                                                                                       
                                                                                     240. [T] Suppose that
                                          239. [T] Suppose that
standardized test scores
                                                  converges to a function
is normally distributed                                   such that                         converges to a function
                                                                                and                such that
with mean                     and                                         Find a

standard deviation                                formula for and plot
                                                  the partial sum for
                      Set up an integral                                                    and                     Find
                                                              on                            a formula for    and plot
that represents the                                                                         the partial sum
                                                                                                                 for
probability that a test                                                                                on

score will be between

and and use the

integral of the degree

Maclaurin polynomial of

                      to estimate

this probability.

                                                                      
241. Suppose that                         242. Suppose that

converges to a function                   converges to a function

such that                                 such that

where                         and         where                         and

                      Find a formula                 Find a formula

that relates                              that relates

and and compute                           and and compute

The error in approximating the integral              by that of a Taylor approximation                                 is at most

                      In the following exercises, the Taylor remainder estimate                              guarantees that the

integral of the Taylor polynomial of the given order approximates the integral of with an error less than

a. Evaluate the integral of the appropriate Taylor polynomial and verify that it approximates the CAS value with an error
     less than

b. Compare the accuracy of the polynomial integral estimate with the remainder estimate.

243. [T]                                             244. [T]

(You may assume that the absolute value                                 (You may assume that the absolute value of the
of the ninth derivative of is bounded
by                                                                           derivative of  is less than

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6.4 · Working with Taylor Series 529

The following exercises deal with Fresnel integrals.

245. The Fresnel integrals are  246. [T] The Fresnel integrals        247. Estimate                                by
        defined by
                                    are used in design                  approximating                              using the

                                    applications for roadways

                                    and railways and other              binomial approximation

and                                 applications because of

                                    the curvature properties

                                    of the curve with

Compute the power                   coordinates

series of  and                      Plot the curve

and plot the sums                   for                    the

and        of the first             coordinates of which were

          nonzero terms on          computed in the previous

                                    exercise.

248. [T] Use Newton's approximation of the binomial                   249. Use the approximation
        to approximate as follows. The circle centered at
                                                                                                               to
with radius has upper semicircle                           The
                                                                              approximate the period of
sector of this circle bounded by the -axis between                            a pendulum having
                                                                              length meters and
and        and by the line joining                    corresponds             maximum angle

to of the circle and has area This sector is the union                                       where

of a right triangle with height and base              and the
                                                             To find
region below the graph between           and                          Compare this with the
                                                                      small angle estimate
the area of this region you can write

and integrate term by term. Use this approach with the
binomial approximation from the previous exercise to
estimate

250. Suppose that a pendulum    251. Evaluate                         in the approximation

is to have a period of

seconds and a maximum

angle of           Use

                         to         to obtain an improved estimate for

approximate the desired
length of the pendulum.
What length is predicted
by the small angle

estimate
530 6 · Power Series

252. [T] An equivalent formula for the period of a

pendulum with amplitude          is

where is the pendulum length and is the
gravitational acceleration constant. When

              we get

Integrate this approximation to estimate

in terms of and Assuming                   meters

per second squared, find an approximate length

such that                        seconds.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 531

Chapter Review                                       it is given by
                                                                               for
Key Terms

binomial series the Maclaurin series for
                     

interval of convergence the set of real numbers x for which a power series converges

Maclaurin polynomial a Taylor polynomial centered at 0; the nth Taylor polynomial for at 0 is the nth Maclaurin

polynomial for

Maclaurin series a Taylor series for a function at   is known as a Maclaurin series for

nonelementary integral an integral for which the antiderivative of the integrand cannot be expressed as an

elementary function

                                                                                                          

power series a series of the form         is a power series centered at            a series of the form                  is a

power series centered at

radius of convergence if there exists a real number  such that a power series centered at                   converges for

  and diverges for                        then R is the radius of convergence; if the power series only converges at

  the radius of convergence is              if the power series converges for all real numbers x, the radius of

convergence is       

Taylor polynomials the nth Taylor polynomial for at  is

Taylor series a power series at a that converges to a function on some open interval containing a

Taylor's theorem with remainder for a function and the nth Taylor polynomial for at                       the remainder

                       satisfies

for some c between x and a; if there exists an interval I containing a and a real number M such that
for all x in I, then

term-by-term differentiation of a power series a technique for evaluating the derivative of a power series

                                                                                                          

                by evaluating the derivative of each term separately to create the new power series

term-by-term integration of a power series                                                                  by integrating
                                            a technique for integrating a power series

                                                                                 
each term separately to create the new power series
532 6 · Chapter Review

Key Equations

                                                     
  Power series centered at

                                                   
Power series centered at

Taylor series for the              

function at the point

Key Concepts

6.1 Power Series and Functions

· For a power series centered at                       one of the following three properties hold:

i. The power series converges only at                           In this case, we say that the radius of convergence is

ii. The power series converges for all real numbers x. In this case, we say that the radius of convergence is                      

iii. There is a real number R such that the series converges for                              and diverges for            In this
     case, the radius of convergence is R.

· If a power series converges on a finite interval, the series may or may not converge at the endpoints.
· The ratio test may often be used to determine the radius of convergence.

                                   

· The geometric series                                 for      allows us to represent certain functions using geometric series.

6.2 Properties of Power Series

                                                       

· Given two power series             and                        that converge to functions f and g on a common interval I, the sum

and difference of the two series converge to                    respectively, on I. In addition, for any real number b and integer
                                                                                         

the series                           converges to                             and the series        converges to        whenever

bxm is in the interval I.

· Given two power series that converge on an interval                         the Cauchy product of the two power series

converges on the interval

· Given a power series that converges to a function f on an interval                          the series can be differentiated term-by-

term and the resulting series converges to on                                 The series can also be integrated term-by-term and the

resulting series converges to                               on

6.3 Taylor and Maclaurin Series

· Taylor polynomials are used to approximate functions near a value                           Maclaurin polynomials are Taylor

polynomials at

· The nth degree Taylor polynomials for a function are the partial sums of the Taylor series for

· If a function has a power series representation at                          then it is given by its Taylor series at

· A Taylor series for converges to if and only if                             where
                                                                            

· The Taylor series for ex,          and                    converge to the respective functions for all real x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6 · Chapter Review 533

6.4 Working with Taylor Series

· The binomial series is the Maclaurin series for                       It converges for

· Taylor series for functions can often be derived by algebraic operations with a known Taylor series or by

      differentiating or integrating a known Taylor series.

· Power series can be used to solve differential equations.

· Taylor series can be used to help approximate integrals that cannot be evaluated by other means.

Review Exercises

True or False? In the following exercises, justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

253. If the radius of            254. Power series can be used          255. For small values of
        convergence for a power          to show that the
                                         derivative of
                                         (Hint: Recall that
      series  is then                            

      the radius of convergence
                          

      for the series

        is also

256. The radius of
        convergence for the
        Maclaurin series of
                        is

In the following exercises, find the radius of convergence and the interval of convergence for the given series.

                                                                                 
257.                             258.                                   259.

         
260.

In the following exercises, find the power series representation for the given function. Determine the radius of
convergence and the interval of convergence for that series.

261.                             262.

In the following exercises, find the power series for the given function using term-by-term differentiation or integration.

263.                             264.

In the following exercises, evaluate the Taylor series expansion of degree four for the given function at the specified
point. What is the error in the approximation?

265.                             266.

In the following exercises, find the Maclaurin series for the given function.

267.                             268.

In the following exercises, find the Taylor series at the given value.

269.                             270.
534 6 · Chapter Review

In the following exercises, find the Maclaurin series for the given function.

271.                             272.

In the following exercises, find the Maclaurin series for                 by integrating the Maclaurin series of

term by term.                                                        275. Use power series to prove
                                                                             Euler's formula:
273.                             274.

The following exercises consider problems of annuity payments.

276. For annuities with a        277. A lottery winner has an        278. Calculate the necessary
        present value of                 annuity that has a present
        million, calculate the           value of million. What                present value of an
        annual payouts given             interest rate would they
        over years assuming              need to live on perpetual             annuity in order to
        interest rates of                annual payments of
                                                                               support annual payouts

                                                                               of        given over

                                                                               years assuming interest

                                                                               rates of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   7 · Introduction 535

7  PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND POLAR
   COORDINATES

Figure 7.1 The chambered nautilus is a marine animal that lives in the tropical Pacific Ocean. Scientists think they have
existed mostly unchanged for about 500 million years.(credit: modification of work by Jitze Couperus, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Parametric Equations
  7.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves
  7.3 Polar Coordinates
  7.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates
  7.5 Conic Sections

      Introduction

The chambered nautilus is a fascinating creature. This animal feeds on hermit crabs, fish, and other crustaceans. It has a
hard outer shell with many chambers connected in a spiral fashion, and it can retract into its shell to avoid predators.
When part of the shell is cut away, a perfect spiral is revealed, with chambers inside that are somewhat similar to growth
536 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

rings in a tree.

The mathematical function that describes a spiral can be expressed using rectangular (or Cartesian) coordinates.
However, if we change our coordinate system to something that works a bit better with circular patterns, the function
becomes much simpler to describe. The polar coordinate system is well suited for describing curves of this type. How
can we use this coordinate system to describe spirals and other radial figures? (See Example 7.14.)

In this chapter we also study parametric equations, which give us a convenient way to describe curves, or to study the
position of a particle or object in two dimensions as a function of time. We will use parametric equations and polar
coordinates for describing many topics later in this text.

7.1 Parametric Equations

Learning Objectives

      7.1.1 Plot a curve described by parametric equations.
      7.1.2 Convert the parametric equations of a curve into the form
      7.1.3 Recognize the parametric equations of basic curves, such as a line and a circle.
      7.1.4 Recognize the parametric equations of a cycloid.

In this section we examine parametric equations and their graphs. In the two-dimensional coordinate system,

parametric equations are useful for describing curves that are not necessarily functions. The parameter is an

independent variable that both x and y depend on, and as the parameter increases, the values of x and y trace out a path

along a plane curve. For example, if the parameter is t (a common choice), then t might represent time. Then x and y are

defined as functions of time, and                   can describe the position in the plane of a given object as it moves along a

curved path.

Parametric Equations and Their Graphs

Consider the orbit of Earth around the Sun. Our year lasts approximately 365.25 days, but for this discussion we will use
365 days. On January 1 of each year, the physical location of Earth with respect to the Sun is nearly the same, except for
leap years, when the lag introduced by the extra day of orbiting time is built into the calendar. We call January 1 "day 1"
of the year. Then, for example, day 31 is January 31, day 59 is February 28, and so on.

The number of the day in a year can be considered a variable that determines Earth's position in its orbit. As Earth
revolves around the Sun, its physical location changes relative to the Sun. After one full year, we are back where we
started, and a new year begins. According to Kepler's laws of planetary motion, the shape of the orbit is elliptical, with
the Sun at one focus of the ellipse. We study this idea in more detail in Conic Sections.

                                                 Figure 7.2 Earth's orbit around the Sun in one year.
Figure 7.2 depicts Earth's orbit around the Sun during one year. The point labeled is one of the foci of the ellipse; the
other focus is occupied by the Sun. If we superimpose coordinate axes over this graph, then we can assign ordered pairs
to each point on the ellipse (Figure 7.3). Then each x value on the graph is a value of position as a function of time, and
each y value is also a value of position as a function of time. Therefore, each point on the graph corresponds to a value
of Earth's position as a function of time.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        7.1 · Parametric Equations 537

                       Figure 7.3 Coordinate axes superimposed on the orbit of Earth.

We can determine the functions for and      thereby parameterizing the orbit of Earth around the Sun. The

variable is called an independent parameter and, in this context, represents time relative to the beginning of each year.

A curve in the  plane can be represented parametrically. The equations that are used to define the curve are called

parametric equations.

Definition

If x and y are continuous functions of t on an interval I, then the equations

are called parametric equations and t is called the parameter. The set of points  obtained as t varies over the

interval I is called the graph of the parametric equations. The graph of parametric equations is called a parametric

curve or plane curve, and is denoted by C.

Notice in this definition that x and y are used in two ways. The first is as functions of the independent variable t. As t

varies over the interval I, the functions and generate a set of ordered pairs           This set of ordered pairs

generates the graph of the parametric equations. In this second usage, to designate the ordered pairs, x and y are

variables. It is important to distinguish the variables x and y from the functions and

EXAMPLE 7.1

Graphing a Parametrically Defined Curve
Sketch the curves described by the following parametric equations:

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
 a. To create a graph of this curve, first set up a table of values. Since the independent variable in both and is

      t, let t appear in the first column. Then and will appear in the second and third columns of the table.
538 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                    t

                                                    -3 -4 -2

                                                    -2 -3  0

                                                    -1 -2  2

                                                    0 -1   4

                                                    10     6

                                                    21     8

The second and third columns in this table provide a set of points to be plotted. The graph of these points appears
in Figure 7.4. The arrows on the graph indicate the orientation of the graph, that is, the direction that a point
moves on the graph as t varies from -3 to 2.

                            Figure 7.4 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part a.
b. To create a graph of this curve, again set up a table of values.

                                                                           t

                                                    -2 1   -3

                                                    -1 -2 -1

                                                    0 -3   1

                                                    1 -2   3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       7.1 · Parametric Equations 539

                                          t

                                          21                    5

                                          36                    7

The second and third columns in this table give a set of points to be plotted (Figure 7.5). The first point on the graph

(corresponding to     has coordinates        and the last point (corresponding to      has coordinates

As t progresses from -2 to 3, the point on the curve travels along a parabola. The direction the point moves is

again called the orientation and is indicated on the graph.

Figure 7.5 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part b.

c. In this case, use multiples of for t and create another table of values:

                   t                                         t

                   0  4                0                                           2

                                                                             -2

                                                                             0     -4

                      0                4                                     2

                      -2                                                           2

                                       2                                     4     0

                      -4               0
540 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

             The graph of this plane curve appears in the following graph.

                             Figure 7.6 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part c.
      This is the graph of a circle with radius 4 centered at the origin, with a counterclockwise orientation. The starting
      point and ending points of the curve both have coordinates

       7.1 Sketch the curve described by the parametric equations

Eliminating the Parameter

To better understand the graph of a curve represented parametrically, it is useful to rewrite the two equations as a single
equation relating the variables x and y. Then we can apply any previous knowledge of equations of curves in the plane to
identify the curve. For example, the equations describing the plane curve in Example 7.1b. are

Solving the second equation for t gives

This can be substituted into the first equation:

This equation describes x as a function of y. These steps give an example of eliminating the parameter. The graph of this

function is a parabola opening to the right. Recall that the plane curve started at  and ended at  These

terminations were due to the restriction on the parameter t.

EXAMPLE 7.2

Eliminating the Parameter
Eliminate the parameter for each of the plane curves described by the following parametric equations and describe the
resulting graph.

 a.
b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       7.1 · Parametric Equations 541

    Solution
a. To eliminate the parameter, we can solve either of the equations for t. For example, solving the first equation for t

     gives

Note that when we square both sides it is important to observe that  Substituting       this into
yields

This is the equation of a parabola opening upward. There is, however, a domain restriction because of the limits on

the parameter t. When                                   and when                   The graph of this plane

curve follows.

                            Figure 7.7 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part a.
b. Sometimes it is necessary to be a bit creative in eliminating the parameter. The parametric equations for this

     example are

     Solving either equation for t directly is not advisable because sine and cosine are not one-to-one functions. However,
     dividing the first equation by 4 and the second equation by 3 (and suppressing the t) gives us

Now use the Pythagorean identity  and replace the expressions for                  and  with the

equivalent expressions in terms of x and y. This gives
542 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

             This is the equation of a horizontal ellipse centered at the origin, with semimajor axis 4 and semiminor axis 3 as
             shown in the following graph.

                      Figure 7.8 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part b.

As t progresses from to a point on the curve traverses the ellipse once, in a counterclockwise direction. Recall
from the section opener that the orbit of Earth around the Sun is also elliptical. This is a perfect example of using
parameterized curves to model a real-world phenomenon.

7.2 Eliminate the parameter for the plane curve defined by the following parametric equations and describe
            the resulting graph.

So far we have seen the method of eliminating the parameter, assuming we know a set of parametric equations that
describe a plane curve. What if we would like to start with the equation of a curve and determine a pair of parametric
equations for that curve? This is certainly possible, and in fact it is possible to do so in many different ways for a given
curve. The process is known as parameterization of a curve.

EXAMPLE 7.3

Parameterizing a Curve
Find two different pairs of parametric equations to represent the graph of

     Solution                                                     then replacing x with t in the equation for
First, it is always possible to parameterize a curve by defining
This gives the parameterization

Since there is no restriction on the domain in the original graph, there is no restriction on the values of t.

We have complete freedom in the choice for the second parameterization. For example, we can choose

The only thing we need to check is that there are no restrictions imposed on x; that is, the range of is all real

numbers. This is the case for    Now since                        we can substitute  for x. This gives

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        7.1 · Parametric Equations 543

Therefore, a second parameterization of the curve can be written as

       7.3 Find two different sets of parametric equations to represent the graph of

Cycloids and Other Parametric Curves

Imagine going on a bicycle ride through the country. The tires stay in contact with the road and rotate in a predictable
pattern. Now suppose a very determined ant is tired after a long day and wants to get home. So he hangs onto the side
of the tire and gets a free ride. The path that this ant travels down a straight road is called a cycloid (Figure 7.9). A cycloid
generated by a circle (or bicycle wheel) of radius a is given by the parametric equations
To see why this is true, consider the path that the center of the wheel takes. The center moves along the x-axis at a
constant height equal to the radius of the wheel. If the radius is a, then the coordinates of the center can be given by the
equations

for any value of Next, consider the ant, which rotates around the center along a circular path. If the bicycle is moving
from left to right then the wheels are rotating in a clockwise direction. A possible parameterization of the circular motion
of the ant (relative to the center of the wheel) is given by

(The negative sign is needed to reverse the orientation of the curve. If the negative sign were not there, we would have
to imagine the wheel rotating counterclockwise.) Adding these equations together gives the equations for the cycloid.

    Figure 7.9 A wheel traveling along a road without slipping; the point on the edge of the wheel traces out a cycloid.
Now suppose that the bicycle wheel doesn't travel along a straight road but instead moves along the inside of a larger
wheel, as in Figure 7.10. In this graph, the green circle is traveling around the blue circle in a counterclockwise direction.
A point on the edge of the green circle traces out the red graph, which is called a hypocycloid.
544 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                          Figure 7.10 Graph of the hypocycloid described by the parametric equations shown.
The general parametric equations for a hypocycloid are

These equations are a bit more complicated, but the derivation is somewhat similar to the equations for the cycloid. In

this case we assume the radius of the larger circle is a and the radius of the smaller circle is b. Then the center of the

wheel travels along a circle of radius              This fact explains the first term in each equation above. The period of the

second trigonometric function in both and is equal to

The ratio is related to the number of cusps on the graph (cusps are the corners or pointed ends of the graph), as

illustrated in Figure 7.11. This ratio can lead to some very interesting graphs, depending on whether or not the ratio is

rational. Figure 7.10 corresponds to                and  The result is a hypocycloid with four cusps. Figure 7.11 shows some

other possibilities. The last two hypocycloids have irrational values for In these cases the hypocycloids have an infinite

number of cusps, so they never return to their starting point. These are examples of what are known as space-filling
curves.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.1 · Parametric Equations 545

Figure 7.11 Graph of various hypocycloids corresponding to different values of

STUDENT PROJECT

The Witch of Agnesi
Many plane curves in mathematics are named after the people who first investigated them, like the folium of
Descartes or the spiral of Archimedes. However, perhaps the strangest name for a curve is the witch of Agnesi. Why a
witch?

Maria Gaetana Agnesi (1718-1799) was one of the few recognized women mathematicians of eighteenth-century
Italy. She wrote a popular book on analytic geometry, published in 1748, which included an interesting curve that had
been studied by Fermat in 1630. The mathematician Guido Grandi showed in 1703 how to construct this curve, which
he later called the "versoria," a Latin term for a rope used in sailing. Agnesi used the Italian term for this rope,
"versiera," but in Latin, this same word means a "female goblin." When Agnesi's book was translated into English in
1801, the translator used the term "witch" for the curve, instead of rope. The name "witch of Agnesi" has stuck ever
since.

The witch of Agnesi is a curve defined as follows: Start with a circle of radius a so that the points  and                are

points on the circle (Figure 7.12). Let O denote the origin. Choose any other point A on the circle, and draw the secant

line OA. Let B denote the point at which the line OA intersects the horizontal line through            The vertical line

through B intersects the horizontal line through A at the point P. As the point A varies, the path that the point P

travels is the witch of Agnesi curve for the given circle.

Witch of Agnesi curves have applications in physics, including modeling water waves and distributions of spectral
lines. In probability theory, the curve describes the probability density function of the Cauchy distribution. In this
project you will parameterize these curves.
546 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Figure 7.12 As the point A moves around the circle, the point P traces out the witch of Agnesi curve for the given
circle.

 1. On the figure, label the following points, lengths, and angle:
       a. C is the point on the x-axis with the same x-coordinate as A.
       b. x is the x-coordinate of P, and y is the y-coordinate of P.
       c. E is the point
       d. F is the point on the line segment OA such that the line segment EF is perpendicular to the line segment OA.
       e. b is the distance from O to F.
        f. c is the distance from F to A.
       g. d is the distance from O to B.
       h. is the measure of angle

     The goal of this project is to parameterize the witch using as a parameter. To do this, write equations for x and
     y in terms of only
2. Show that

3. Note that                     Show that          When you do this, you will have parameterized the x-coordinate of

the curve with respect to If you can get a similar equation for y, you will have parameterized the curve.

4. In terms of what is the angle

5. Show that

6. Show that

7. Show that                     You have now parameterized the y-coordinate of the curve with respect to

8. Conclude that a parameterization of the given witch curve is

                                                                   

9. Use your parameterization to show that the given witch curve is the graph of the function

STUDENT PROJECT

Travels with My Ant: The Curtate and Prolate Cycloids
Earlier in this section, we looked at the parametric equations for a cycloid, which is the path a point on the edge of a
wheel traces as the wheel rolls along a straight path. In this project we look at two different variations of the cycloid,
called the curtate and prolate cycloids.

First, let's revisit the derivation of the parametric equations for a cycloid. Recall that we considered a tenacious ant
trying to get home by hanging onto the edge of a bicycle tire. We have assumed the ant climbed onto the tire at the
very edge, where the tire touches the ground. As the wheel rolls, the ant moves with the edge of the tire (Figure 7.13).

As we have discussed, we have a lot of flexibility when parameterizing a curve. In this case we let our parameter t

represent the angle the tire has rotated through. Looking at Figure 7.13, we see that after the tire has rotated

through an angle of t, the position of the center of the wheel,    is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        7.1 · Parametric Equations 547

Furthermore, letting     denote the position of the ant, we note that
Then

Figure 7.13 (a) The ant clings to the edge of the bicycle tire as the tire rolls along the ground. (b) Using geometry to
determine the position of the ant after the tire has rotated through an angle of t.

Note that these are the same parametric representations we had before, but we have now assigned a physical
meaning to the parametric variable t.

After a while the ant is getting dizzy from going round and round on the edge of the tire. So he climbs up one of the

spokes toward the center of the wheel. By climbing toward the center of the wheel, the ant has changed his path of

motion. The new path has less up-and-down motion and is called a curtate cycloid (Figure 7.14). As shown in the

figure, we let b denote the distance along the spoke from the center of the wheel to the ant. As before, we let t

represent the angle the tire has rotated through. Additionally, we let  represent the position of the

center of the wheel and  represent the position of the ant.

Figure 7.14 (a) The ant climbs up one of the spokes toward the center of the wheel. (b) The ant's path of motion after
548 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

he climbs closer to the center of the wheel. This is called a curtate cycloid. (c) The new setup, now that the ant has
moved closer to the center of the wheel.

1. What is the position of the center of the wheel after the tire has rotated through an angle of t?

2. Use geometry to find expressions for             and for

3. On the basis of your answers to parts 1 and 2, what are the parametric equations representing the curtate

cycloid?

Once the ant's head clears, he realizes that the bicyclist has made a turn, and is now traveling away from his

home. So he drops off the bicycle tire and looks around. Fortunately, there is a set of train tracks nearby, headed

back in the right direction. So the ant heads over to the train tracks to wait. After a while, a train goes by, heading

in the right direction, and he manages to jump up and just catch the edge of the train wheel (without getting

squished!).

The ant is still worried about getting dizzy, but the train wheel is slippery and has no spokes to climb, so he

decides to just hang on to the edge of the wheel and hope for the best. Now, train wheels have a flange to keep

the wheel running on the tracks. So, in this case, since the ant is hanging on to the very edge of the flange, the

distance from the center of the wheel to the ant is actually greater than the radius of the wheel (Figure 7.15).

The setup here is essentially the same as when the ant climbed up the spoke on the bicycle wheel. We let b

denote the distance from the center of the wheel to the ant, and we let t represent the angle the tire has rotated

through. Additionally, we let                       represent the position of the center of the wheel and

represent the position of the ant (Figure 7.15).

When the distance from the center of the wheel to the ant is greater than the radius of the wheel, his path of

motion is called a prolate cycloid. A graph of a prolate cycloid is shown in the figure.

         Figure 7.15 (a) The ant is hanging onto the flange of the train wheel. (b) The new setup, now that the ant has
         jumped onto the train wheel. (c) The ant travels along a prolate cycloid.
   4. Using the same approach you used in parts 1- 3, find the parametric equations for the path of motion of the ant.
   5. What do you notice about your answer to part 3 and your answer to part 4?
         Notice that the ant is actually traveling backward at times (the "loops" in the graph), even though the train
        continues to move forward. He is probably going to be really dizzy by the time he gets home!

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     7.1 · Parametric Equations 549

        SECTION 7.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, sketch the curves below by eliminating the parameter t. Give the orientation of the curve.

1.             2.           3.

4.

For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter and sketch the graphs.
5.

For the following exercises, use technology (CAS or calculator) to sketch the parametric equations.

6. [T]         7. [T]       8. [T]

9. [T]

For the following exercises, sketch the parametric equations by eliminating the parameter. Indicate any asymptotes of
the graph.

10.            11.          12.

13.                    14.                                                           15.

16.            17.          18.

19.            20.

For the following exercises, convert the parametric equations of a curve into rectangular form. No sketch is necessary.
State the domain of the rectangular form.

21.            22.              23.

24.            25.          26.

27.            28.          29.

30.            31.          32.

33.            34.          35.

                                                                             where n is a natural

                                                                             number

36.     where  37.          38.

For the following exercises, the pairs of parametric equations represent lines, parabolas, circles, ellipses, or hyperbolas.
Name the type of basic curve that each pair of equations represents.

39.            40.          41.

42.            43.          44.

45.            46.          47.
550 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

48.                              49. Show that                                     50. Use the equations in the

                                                    represents the equation of     preceding problem to find
                                                    a circle.                      a set of parametric
                                                                                   equations for a circle

                                                                                   whose radius is 5 and

                                                                                   whose center is

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph the curve represented by the parametric equations and
identify the curve from its equation.

51. [T]                          52. [T]                                           53. [T]

54. An airplane traveling horizontally              55. The trajectory of a bullet is given by
      at 100 m/s over flat ground at an                   where
      elevation of 4000 meters must                                                   and
      drop an emergency package on a                                             When will the bullet hit
      target on the ground. The                           the ground? How far from the gun will
      trajectory of the package is given                  the bullet hit the ground?
      by
                                                    57. [T] Use technology to sketch
      where the origin is the point on
      the ground directly beneath the
      plane at the moment of release.
      How many horizontal meters
      before the target should the
      package be released in order to hit
      the target?

56. [T] Use technology to sketch the
      curve represented by

58. Sketch the curve known as an                    59. [T] Use technology to
      epitrochoid, which gives the path                   sketch the spiral curve
      of a point on a circle of radius b as               given by
      it rolls on the outside of a circle of
      radius a. The equations are                         from

      Let                                           61. [T] Sketch the curve given
60. [T] Use technology to graph the curve given           by parametric equations

      by the parametric equations                                           where

      This curve is known as the witch of Agnesi.

7.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves

Learning Objectives

      7.2.1 Determine derivatives and equations of tangents for parametric curves.
      7.2.2 Find the area under a parametric curve.
      7.2.3 Use the equation for arc length of a parametric curve.
      7.2.4 Apply the formula for surface area to a volume generated by a parametric curve.

Now that we have introduced the concept of a parameterized curve, our next step is to learn how to work with this
concept in the context of calculus. For example, if we know a parameterization of a given curve, is it possible to calculate
the slope of a tangent line to the curve? How about the arc length of the curve? Or the area under the curve?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 551

Another scenario: Suppose we would like to represent the location of a baseball after the ball leaves a pitcher's hand. If

the position of the baseball is represented by the plane curve       then we should be able to use calculus to find

the speed of the ball at any given time. Furthermore, we should be able to calculate just how far that ball has traveled as

a function of time.

Derivatives of Parametric Equations

We start by asking how to calculate the slope of a line tangent to a parametric curve at a point. Consider the plane curve
defined by the parametric equations

The graph of this curve appears in Figure 7.16. It is a line segment starting at       and ending at

                     Figure 7.16 Graph of the line segment described by the given parametric equations.

We can eliminate the parameter by first solving the equation         for t:

Substituting this into  we obtain

The slope of this line is given by  Next we calculate           and  This gives        and               Notice

that                    This is no coincidence, as outlined in the following theorem.
552 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Theorem 7.1

Derivative of Parametric Equations

Consider the plane curve defined by the parametric equations                 and        Suppose that  and

exist, and assume that           Then the derivative is given by

                                                                                                           (7.1)

Proof

This theorem can be proven using the Chain Rule. In particular, assume that the parameter t can be eliminated, yielding

a differentiable function        Then                            Differentiating both sides of this equation using the Chain Rule

yields

so

But            which proves the theorem.



Equation 7.1 can be used to calculate derivatives of plane curves, as well as critical points. Recall that a critical point of a

differentiable function          is any point            such that either           or  does not exist. Equation 7.1

gives a formula for the slope of a tangent line to a curve defined parametrically regardless of whether the curve can be

described by a function          or not.

EXAMPLE 7.4

Finding the Derivative of a Parametric Curve
Calculate the derivative for each of the following parametrically defined plane curves, and locate any critical points
on their respective graphs.

a.
b.
c.

     Solution

a. To apply Equation 7.1, first calculate           and

     Next substitute these into the equation:

     This derivative is undefined when              Calculating  and         gives      and

                                 which corresponds to the point            on the graph. The graph of this curve is a parabola

     opening to the right, and the point            is its vertex as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 553

Figure 7.17 Graph of the parabola described by parametric equations in part a.

b. To apply Equation 7.1, first calculate        and

Next substitute these into the equation:

This derivative is zero when               When       we have

which corresponds to the point             on the graph. When       we have

which corresponds to the point             on the graph. The point  is a relative minimum and the point  is a

relative maximum, as seen in the following graph.

Figure 7.18 Graph of the curve described by parametric equations in part b.

c. To apply Equation 7.1, first calculate        and
554 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

             Next substitute these into the equation:

This derivative is zero when     and is undefined when                    This gives  as critical

points for t. Substituting each of these into          and     we obtain

                                                       05      0

                                                            0  5

                                                            -5 0

                                                            0  -5

                                                            5  0

These points correspond to the sides, top, and bottom of the circle that is represented by the parametric equations
(Figure 7.19). On the left and right edges of the circle, the derivative is undefined, and on the top and bottom, the
derivative equals zero.

Figure 7.19 Graph of the curve described by parametric equations in part c.

7.4 Calculate the derivative     for the plane curve defined by the equations

and locate any critical points on its graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 555

  EXAMPLE 7.5

Finding a Tangent Line
Find the equation of the tangent line to the curve defined by the equations

Solution

First find the slope of the tangent line using Equation 7.1, which means calculating  and

Next substitute these into the equation:

When      so this is the slope of the tangent line. Calculating              and      gives

which corresponds to the point  on the graph (Figure 7.20). Now use the point-slope form of the equation of a line

to find the equation of the tangent line:

         Figure 7.20 Tangent line to the parabola described by the given parametric equations when
7.5 Find the equation of the tangent line to the curve defined by the equations

Second-Order Derivatives

Our next goal is to see how to take the second derivative of a function defined parametrically. The second derivative of a

function  is defined to be the derivative of the first derivative; that is,
556 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Since           we can replace the on both sides of this equation with This gives us

                                                                                                             (7.2)

If we know      as a function of t, then this formula is straightforward to apply.

EXAMPLE 7.6

Finding a Second Derivative                         for the plane curve defined by the parametric equations
Calculate the second derivative

     Solution                                       Using Equation 7.2, we obtain
From Example 7.4 we know that

7.6 Calculate the second derivative                 for the plane curve defined by the equations

                  and locate any critical points on its graph.

Integrals Involving Parametric Equations

Now that we have seen how to calculate the derivative of a plane curve, the next question is this: How do we find the
area under a curve defined parametrically? Recall the cycloid defined by the equations

                                                  Suppose we want to find the area of the shaded region in the following graph.

                                     Figure 7.21 Graph of a cycloid with the arch over  highlighted.
To derive a formula for the area under the curve defined by the functions

we assume that  is increasing on the interval       and is differentiable and start with an equal partition of
the interval      Suppose                               and consider the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 557

                                 Figure 7.22 Approximating the area under a parametrically defined curve.  , so an

We use rectangles to approximate the area under the curve. The height of the th rectangle is
approximation to the area is

This follows from results obtained in Calculus 1 for the function
Then a Riemann sum for the area is

Multiplying and dividing each area by          gives

Taking the limit as approaches infinity gives

If is a decreasing function for                      
                                       , a similar derivation will show that the area is given by

This leads to the following theorem.
  Theorem 7.2
  Area under a Parametric Curve
  Consider the non-self-intersecting plane curve defined by the parametric equations

  and assume that is differentiable. The area under this curve is given by

                                                                                                                    (7.3)
558 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

         EXAMPLE 7.7
       Finding the Area under a Parametric Curve
       Find the area under the curve of the cycloid defined by the equations

            Solution
       Using Equation 7.3, we have

       7.7 Find the area under the curve of the hypocycloid defined by the equations

Arc Length of a Parametric Curve

In addition to finding the area under a parametric curve, we sometimes need to find the arc length of a parametric
curve. In the case of a line segment, arc length is the same as the distance between the endpoints. If a particle travels
from point A to point B along a curve, then the distance that particle travels is the arc length. To develop a formula for
arc length, we start with an approximation by line segments as shown in the following graph.

Figure 7.23 Approximation of a curve by line segments.

Given a plane curve defined by the functions                                  we start by partitioning the interval  into
n equal subintervals:
calculate the length of each line segment:    The width of each subinterval is given by                              We can

Then add these up. We let s denote the exact arc length and denote the approximation by n line segments:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 559

                                                                                                                     (7.4)

If we assume that and are differentiable functions of t, then the Mean Value Theorem (Introduction to the

Applications of Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-introduction)) applies, so in each

subinterval  there exist and such that

Therefore Equation 7.4 becomes

This is a Riemann sum that approximates the arc length over a partition of the interval  If we further assume that

the derivatives are continuous and let the number of points in the partition increase without bound, the approximation

approaches the exact arc length. This gives

                                             

                                             

When taking the limit, the values of and are both contained within the same ever-shrinking interval of width so
they must converge to the same value.
We can summarize this method in the following theorem.

  Theorem 7.3

  Arc Length of a Parametric Curve
  Consider the plane curve defined by the parametric equations

  and assume that and are differentiable functions of t. Then the arc length of this curve is given by
                                                                                                                                                                 (7.5)

At this point a side derivation leads to a previous formula for arc length. In particular, suppose the parameter can be

eliminated, leading to a function            Then  and the Chain Rule gives

Substituting this into Equation 7.5 gives
560 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Here we have assumed that        which is a reasonable assumption. The Chain Rule gives               and

letting     and                  we obtain the formula

which is the formula for arc length obtained in the Introduction to the Applications of Integration.

  EXAMPLE 7.8

Finding the Arc Length of a Parametric Curve
Find the arc length of the semicircle defined by the equations

Solution

The values  to   trace out the red curve in Figure 7.23. To determine its length, use Equation 7.5:

Note that the formula for the arc length of a semicircle is and the radius of this circle is 3. This is a great example of
using calculus to derive a known formula of a geometric quantity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 561

                                  Figure 7.24 The arc length of the semicircle is equal to its radius times

       7.8 Find the arc length of the curve defined by the equations

We now return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section about a baseball leaving a pitcher's hand. Ignoring
the effect of air resistance (unless it is a curve ball!), the ball travels a parabolic path. Assuming the pitcher's hand is at
the origin and the ball travels left to right in the direction of the positive x-axis, the parametric equations for this curve
can be written as

where t represents time. We first calculate the distance the ball travels as a function of time. This distance is represented
by the arc length. We can modify the arc length formula slightly. First rewrite the functions and using v as an
independent variable, so as to eliminate any confusion with the parameter t:

Then we write the arc length formula as follows:

The variable v acts as a dummy variable that disappears after integration, leaving the arc length as a function of time t.
To integrate this expression we can use a formula from Appendix A,

We set  and  This gives  so  Therefore

and
562 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

This function represents the distance traveled by the ball as a function of time. To calculate the speed, take the derivative
of this function with respect to t. While this may seem like a daunting task, it is possible to obtain the answer directly
from the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus:

Therefore

One third of a second after the ball leaves the pitcher's hand, the distance it travels is equal to

This value is just over three quarters of the way to home plate. The speed of the ball is

This speed translates to approximately 95 mph--a major-league fastball.

Surface Area Generated by a Parametric Curve

Recall the problem of finding the surface area of a volume of revolution. In Curve Length and Surface Area, we derived a

formula for finding the surface area of a volume generated by a function  from                       to  revolved around

the x-axis:

We now consider a volume of revolution generated by revolving a parametrically defined curve
                                         around the x-axis as shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 563

                             Figure 7.25 A surface of revolution generated by a parametrically defined curve.           (7.6)
The analogous formula for a parametrically defined curve is

provided that is not negative on
  EXAMPLE 7.9

Finding Surface Area
Find the surface area of a sphere of radius r centered at the origin.

     Solution
We start with the curve defined by the equations

This generates an upper semicircle of radius r centered at the origin as shown in the following graph.

                                           Figure 7.26 A semicircle generated by parametric equations.

When this curve is revolved around the x-axis, it generates a sphere of radius r. To calculate the surface area of the
sphere, we use Equation 7.6:
564 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

This is, in fact, the formula for the surface area of a sphere.
       7.9 Find the surface area generated when the plane curve defined by the equations
                  is revolved around the x-axis.

        SECTION 7.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, each set of parametric equations represents a line. Without eliminating the parameter, find
the slope of each line.

62.                              63.                                               64.

65.

For the following exercises, determine the slope of the tangent line, then find the equation of the tangent line at the
given value of the parameter.

66.                                                 67.                                 68.

69.                                   70.

For the following exercises, find all points on the curve that have the given slope.

71.                              72.

     slope = 0.5

73.                                                 74.

For the following exercises, write the equation of the tangent line in Cartesian coordinates for the given parameter t.

75.                                                 76.                                 77.

78. For                          79. For                                           80. Find all points on the curve
                                                                                         that have the slope of
     where        Find all                          where  Find all

     values of t at which a                         values of t at which a

     horizontal tangent line                        vertical tangent line exists.

     exists.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              7.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 565

81. Find for                          82. Find the equation of the            83. For the curve
                                            tangent line to                                                    find the
84. For the parametric curve                                              at
      whose equation is                                                             slope and concavity of the
      find the slope and                                                            curve at
      concavity of the curve at
                                      85. Find the slope and concavity        86. Find all points on the curve
                                            for the curve whose                                                    at
                                            equation is
                                                                                    which there are vertical
                                            at                                      and horizontal tangents.

87. Find all points on the curve
                                  at

      which horizontal and
      vertical tangents exist.

For the following exercises, find

88.                                   89.                                     90.

For the following exercises, find points on the curve at which tangent line is horizontal or vertical.

91.                                   92.

For the following exercises, find          at the value of the parameter.
93.                                        94.
95.

For the following exercises, find          at the given point without eliminating the parameter.
96.
                                      97.                                     98. Find t intervals on which
99. Determine the concavity of
      the curve                                                                    the curve

                                                                                                        is

                                                                                   concave up as well as

                                                                                   concave down.

                                      100. Sketch and find the area under          101. Find the area bounded by
                                              one arch of the cycloid                      the curve

                                                                                   and the lines                         and

102. Find the area enclosed by the         103. Find the area of the region
        ellipse                                    bounded by

                                                   for

For the following exercises, find the area of the regions bounded by the parametric curves and the indicated values of
the parameter.

104.                                       105. [T]

106. [T]                                   107. [T]
        (the "hourglass")                          (the "teardrop")
566 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

For the following exercises, find the arc length of the curve on the indicated interval of the parameter.

108.                                                109.

110.                                                111.

112.                                                113.
        (Use a CAS for this and express the
        answer as a decimal rounded to                     on the interval        (the
        three places.)
                                                           hypocycloid)
114. Find the length of one arch of the
        cycloid                                     115. Find the distance traveled by a

                                                    particle with position        as t

                                                    varies in the given time interval:

116. Find the length of one arch  117. Show that the total length of              118. Find the length of the curve
        of the cycloid                    the ellipse
                                                                           is

                                                    where  and

For the following exercises, find the area of the surface obtained by rotating the given curve about the x-axis.

119.                                    120.

121. [T] Use a CAS to find the area of              122. Find the surface area    123. Find the area of the
        the surface generated by                            obtained by rotating          surface generated by
        rotating                                                                          revolving
                                                            about the y-axis.
        about the x-axis. (Answer to                                                      about the x-axis.
        three decimal places.)

124. Find the surface area
        generated by revolving

        about the y-axis.

7.3 Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      7.3.1 Locate points in a plane by using polar coordinates.
      7.3.2 Convert points between rectangular and polar coordinates.
      7.3.3 Sketch polar curves from given equations.
      7.3.4 Convert equations between rectangular and polar coordinates.
      7.3.5 Identify symmetry in polar curves and equations.

The rectangular coordinate system (or Cartesian plane) provides a means of mapping points to ordered pairs and
ordered pairs to points. This is called a one-to-one mapping from points in the plane to ordered pairs. The polar
coordinate system provides an alternative method of mapping points to ordered pairs. In this section we see that in
some circumstances, polar coordinates can be more useful than rectangular coordinates.

Defining Polar Coordinates

To find the coordinates of a point in the polar coordinate system, consider Figure 7.27. The point has Cartesian

coordinates  The line segment connecting the origin to the point measures the distance from the origin to

and has length The angle between the positive -axis and the line segment has measure This observation suggests

a natural correspondence between the coordinate pair            and the values and This correspondence is the basis of

the polar coordinate system. Note that every point in the Cartesian plane has two values (hence the term ordered pair)

associated with it. In the polar coordinate system, each point also has two values associated with it: and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.3 · Polar Coordinates 567

                                                Figure 7.27 An arbitrary point in the Cartesian plane.
Using right-triangle trigonometry, the following equations are true for the point

Furthermore,

Each point    in the Cartesian coordinate system can therefore be represented as an ordered pair        in the polar

coordinate system. The first coordinate is called the radial coordinate and the second coordinate is called the angular

coordinate. Every point in the plane can be represented in this form.

Note that the equation  has an infinite number of solutions for any ordered pair                        However, if we restrict

the solutions to values between and then we can assign a unique solution to the quadrant in which the original

point       is located. Then the corresponding value of r is positive, so

Theorem 7.4

Converting Points between Coordinate Systems           and polar coordinates                            the following conversion
Given a point in the plane with Cartesian coordinates                                                                                 (7.7)
formulas hold true:                                                                                                                   (7.8)

These formulas can be used to convert from rectangular to polar or from polar to rectangular coordinates.

  EXAMPLE 7.10

Converting between Rectangular and Polar Coordinates
Convert each of the following points into polar coordinates.

 a.
b.
 c.
d.

Convert each of the following points into rectangular coordinates.

 e.
 f.
568 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

g.

    Solution

a. Use        and       in Equation 7.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as      in polar coordinates.

b. Use        and                in Equation 7.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as      in polar coordinates.

c. Use        and       in Equation 7.8:

    Direct application of the second equation leads to division by zero. Graphing the point  on the rectangular

    coordinate system reveals that the point is located on the positive y-axis. The angle between the positive x-axis and

    the positive y-axis is Therefore this point can be represented as      in polar coordinates.

d. Use             and           in Equation 7.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as      in polar coordinates.

e. Use        and       in Equation 7.7:

    Therefore this point can be represented as      in rectangular coordinates.

f. Use        and                in Equation 7.7:

    Therefore this point can be represented as      in rectangular coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            7.3 · Polar Coordinates 569

g. Use       and  in Equation 7.7:

Therefore this point can be represented as    in rectangular coordinates.

7.10 Convert      into polar coordinates and  into rectangular coordinates.

The polar representation of a point is not unique. For example, the polar coordinates  and  both represent

the point         in the rectangular system. Also, the value of can be negative. Therefore, the point with polar

coordinates       also represents the point  in the rectangular system, as we can see by using Equation 7.8:

Every point in the plane has an infinite number of representations in polar coordinates. However, each point in the plane
has only one representation in the rectangular coordinate system.

Note that the polar representation of a point in the plane also has a visual interpretation. In particular, is the directed
distance that the point lies from the origin, and measures the angle that the line segment from the origin to the point
makes with the positive -axis. Positive angles are measured in a counterclockwise direction and negative angles are
measured in a clockwise direction. The polar coordinate system appears in the following figure.

                  Figure 7.28 The polar coordinate system.

The line segment starting from the center of the graph going to the right (called the positive x-axis in the Cartesian

system) is the polar axis. The center point is the pole, or origin, of the coordinate system, and corresponds to        The
570 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

innermost circle shown in Figure 7.28 contains all points a distance of 1 unit from the pole, and is represented by the

equation  Then                   is the set of points 2 units from the pole, and so on. The line segments emanating from the

pole correspond to fixed angles. To plot a point in the polar coordinate system, start with the angle. If the angle is

positive, then measure the angle from the polar axis in a counterclockwise direction. If it is negative, then measure it

clockwise. If the value of is positive, move that distance along the terminal ray of the angle. If it is negative, move along

the ray that is opposite the terminal ray of the given angle.

EXAMPLE 7.11

Plotting Points in the Polar Plane
Plot each of the following points on the polar plane.

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
The three points are plotted in the following figure.

                                 Figure 7.29 Three points plotted in the polar coordinate system.

7.11 Plot                        and                on the polar plane.

Polar Curves

Now that we know how to plot points in the polar coordinate system, we can discuss how to plot curves. In the

rectangular coordinate system, we can graph a function                   and create a curve in the Cartesian plane. In a similar

fashion, we can graph a curve that is generated by a function

The general idea behind graphing a function in polar coordinates is the same as graphing a function in rectangular
coordinates. Start with a list of values for the independent variable in this case) and calculate the corresponding
values of the dependent variable This process generates a list of ordered pairs, which can be plotted in the polar
coordinate system. Finally, connect the points, and take advantage of any patterns that may appear. The function may be
periodic, for example, which indicates that only a limited number of values for the independent variable are needed.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Plotting a Curve in Polar Coordinates                                    and the second column is for
 1. Create a table with two columns. The first column is for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            7.3 · Polar Coordinates 571

2. Create a list of values for

3. Calculate the corresponding values for each

4. Plot each ordered pair       on the coordinate axes.

5. Connect the points and look for a pattern.

MEDIA
Watch this video (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_polarcurves) for more information on sketching polar curves.

EXAMPLE 7.12

Graphing a Function in Polar Coordinates          Identify the curve and rewrite the equation in rectangular
Graph the curve defined by the function
coordinates.

     Solution
Because the function is a multiple of a sine function, it is periodic with period so use values for between 0 and
The result of steps 1-3 appear in the following table. Figure 7.30 shows the graph based on this table.

                                0              0         0

                                                         0
572 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                 Figure 7.30 The graph of the function         is a circle.

This is the graph of a circle. The equation         can be converted into rectangular coordinates by first multiplying

both sides by This gives the equation               Next use the facts that                  and  This gives

              To put this equation into standard form, subtract from both sides of the equation and complete the

square:

This is the equation of a circle with radius 2 and center  in the rectangular coordinate system.

    7.12 Create a graph of the curve defined by the function

The graph in Example 7.12 was that of a circle. The equation of the circle can be transformed into rectangular
coordinates using the coordinate transformation formulas in Equation 7.8. Example 7.14 gives some more examples of
functions for transforming from polar to rectangular coordinates.

EXAMPLE 7.13

Transforming Polar Equations to Rectangular Coordinates
Rewrite each of the following equations in rectangular coordinates and identify the graph.

a.

b.
c.

    Solution

a. Take the tangent of both sides. This gives                           Since  we can replace the left-hand side

    of this equation by This gives                  which can be rewritten as  This is the equation of a straight

    line passing through the origin with slope In general, any polar equation of the form         represents a

    straight line through the pole with slope equal to

b. First, square both sides of the equation. This gives    Next replace with                 This gives the equation

              which is the equation of a circle centered at the origin with radius 3. In general, any polar equation of

    the form  where k is a positive constant represents a circle of radius k centered at the origin. (Note: when

    squaring both sides of an equation it is possible to introduce new points unintentionally. This should always be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     7.3 · Polar Coordinates 573

taken into consideration. However, in this case we do not introduce new points. For example,         is the same

point as

c. Multiply both sides of the equation by This leads to  Next use the formulas

This gives

To put this equation into standard form, first move the variables from the right-hand side of the equation to the left-
hand side, then complete the square.

This is the equation of a circle with center at  and radius 5. Notice that the circle passes through the origin
since the center is 5 units away.

7.13 Rewrite the equation                        in rectangular coordinates and identify its graph.

We have now seen several examples of drawing graphs of curves defined by polar equations. A summary of some
common curves is given in the tables below. In each equation, a and b are arbitrary constants.
574 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                                                    Figure 7.31

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     7.3 · Polar Coordinates 575

                                             Figure 7.32

A cardioid is a special case of a limaçon (pronounced "lee-mah-son"), in which  or   The rose is a very
                                                                                                  has three
interesting curve. Notice that the graph of  has four petals. However, the graph of

petals as shown.
576 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                                     Figure 7.33 Graph of
       If the coefficient of is even, the graph has twice as many petals as the coefficient. If the coefficient of is odd, then the
       number of petals equals the coefficient. You are encouraged to explore why this happens. Even more interesting graphs
       emerge when the coefficient of is not an integer. For example, if it is rational, then the curve is closed; that is, it
       eventually ends where it started (Figure 7.34(a)). However, if the coefficient is irrational, then the curve never closes
       (Figure 7.34(b)). Although it may appear that the curve is closed, a closer examination reveals that the petals just above
       the positive x axis are slightly thicker. This is because the petal does not quite match up with the starting point.

       Figure 7.34 Polar rose graphs of functions with (a) rational coefficient and (b) irrational coefficient. Note that the rose in
       part (b) does not fill the disk of radius 3 centered at the origin, even though it appears to. To see this, just note that for
       any fixed ray from the origin, there are only a countable number of values of theta for which we get a point on the graph
       along that ray. What we can say, though, is that for any point in the disk, there are points as close as you please to that
       point on the given graph.

         EXAMPLE 7.14
       Chapter Opener: Describing a Spiral
       Recall the chambered nautilus introduced in the chapter opener. This creature displays a spiral when half the outer shell
       is cut away. It is possible to describe a spiral using rectangular coordinates. Figure 7.35 shows a spiral in rectangular
       coordinates. How can we describe this curve mathematically?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              7.3 · Polar Coordinates 577

             Figure 7.35 How can we describe a spiral graph mathematically?

Solution

As the point P travels around the spiral in a counterclockwise direction, its distance d from the origin increases. Assume

that the distance d is a constant multiple k of the angle that the line segment OP makes with the positive x-axis.

Therefore    where is the origin. Now use the distance formula and some trigonometry:

Although this equation describes the spiral, it is not possible to solve it directly for either x or y. However, if we use polar

coordinates, the equation becomes much simpler. In particular,               and is the second coordinate. Therefore

the equation for the spiral becomes  Note that when             we also have  so the spiral emanates from the

origin. We can remove this restriction by adding a constant to the equation. Then the equation for the spiral becomes

           for arbitrary constants and This is referred to as an Archimedean spiral, after the Greek mathematician

Archimedes.

Another type of spiral is the logarithmic spiral, described by the function   A graph of the function

             is given in Figure 7.36. This spiral describes the shell shape of the chambered nautilus.
578 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Figure 7.36 A logarithmic spiral is similar to the shape of the chambered nautilus shell. (credit: modification of work by
Jitze Couperus, Flickr)

Suppose a curve is described in the polar coordinate system via the function           Since we have conversion
formulas from polar to rectangular coordinates given by

it is possible to rewrite these formulas using the function

This step gives a parameterization of the curve in rectangular coordinates using as the parameter. For example, the

spiral formula  from Figure 7.31 becomes

Letting range from  to  generates the entire spiral.

Symmetry in Polar Coordinates

When studying symmetry of functions in rectangular coordinates (i.e., in the form           we talk about symmetry

with respect to the y-axis and symmetry with respect to the origin. In particular, if         for all in the domain

of then is an even function and its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. If         for all in the

domain of then is an odd function and its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. By determining which types

of symmetry a graph exhibits, we can learn more about the shape and appearance of the graph. Symmetry can also

reveal other properties of the function that generates the graph. Symmetry in polar curves works in a similar fashion.

Theorem 7.5

Symmetry in Polar Curves and Equations               in polar coordinates.
Consider a curve generated by the function

i. The curve is symmetric about the polar axis if for every point  on the graph, the point    is also on the

graph. Similarly, the equation                      is unchanged by replacing with

ii. The curve is symmetric about the pole if for every point       on the graph, the point    is also on the

graph. Similarly, the equation                      is unchanged when replacing with or with

iii. The curve is symmetric about the vertical line          if for every point        on the graph, the point   is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.3 · Polar Coordinates 579

also on the graph. Similarly, the equation             is unchanged when is replaced by

The following table shows examples of each type of symmetry.

EXAMPLE 7.15

Using Symmetry to Graph a Polar Equation                      and create a graph.
Find the symmetry of the rose defined by the equation

     Solution      is on the graph of
Suppose the point

i. To test for symmetry about the polar axis, first try replacing with This gives

Since this changes the original equation, this test is not satisfied. However, returning to the original equation and

replacing with and with  yields
580 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Multiplying both sides of this equation by gives                    which is the original equation. This demonstrates

that the graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.

ii. To test for symmetry with respect to the pole, first replace with which yields               Multiplying both

sides by -1 gives  which does not agree with the original equation. Therefore the equation does not

pass the test for this symmetry. However, returning to the original equation and replacing with  gives

Since this agrees with the original equation, the graph is symmetric about the pole.

iii. To test for symmetry with respect to the vertical line  first replace both with  and with

Multiplying both sides of this equation by          gives           which is the original equation. Therefore the graph
is symmetric about the vertical line

This graph has symmetry with respect to the polar axis, the origin, and the vertical line going through the pole. To graph
the function, tabulate values of between 0 and and then reflect the resulting graph.

This gives one petal of the rose, as shown in the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       7.3 · Polar Coordinates 581

      Figure 7.37 The graph of the equation between                        and

Reflecting this image into the other three quadrants gives the entire graph as shown.

      Figure 7.38 The entire graph of the equation is called a four-petaled rose.

      7.14 Determine the symmetry of the graph determined by the equation              and create a graph.

        SECTION 7.3 EXERCISES                                                                                 and then

In the following exercises, plot the point whose polar coordinates are given by first constructing the angle
marking off the distance r along the ray.

125.  126.  127.

128.  129.  130.

131.
582 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

       For the following exercises, consider the polar graph below. Give two sets of polar coordinates for each point.

                                          132. Coordinates of point A.

133. Coordinates of point B.     134. Coordinates of point C.  135. Coordinates of point D.

For the following exercises, the rectangular coordinates of a point are given. Find two sets of polar coordinates for the

point in  Round to three decimal places.

136.                             137.                          138.

139.                             140.                          141.

For the following exercises, find rectangular coordinates for the given point in polar coordinates.

142.                             143.                          144.

145.                             146.                          147.

148.

For the following exercises, determine whether the graphs of the polar equation are symmetric with respect to the
 -axis, the -axis, or the origin.

149.                             150.                          151.

152.                             153.

For the following exercises, describe the graph of each polar equation. Confirm each description by converting into a
rectangular equation.

154.                             155.                          156.

157.

For the following exercises, convert the rectangular equation to polar form and sketch its graph.

158.                             159.                          160.

For the following exercises, convert the rectangular equation to polar form and sketch its graph.

161.                             162.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 7.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 583

For the following exercises, convert the polar equation to rectangular form and sketch its graph.

163.                                  164.                              165.

166.

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the polar equation and identify any symmetry.

167.                                  168.                              169.

170.                                  171.                              172.

173.                                  174.                              175.

176.                                  177.                              178. [T] The graph of
                                                                                                             is
179. [T] Use a graphing utility       180. [T] Use a graphing utility
        and sketch the graph of               to graph                          called a strophoid. Use a
                                                                                graphing utility to sketch
                                                                                the graph, and, from the
                                                                                graph, determine the
                                                                                asymptote.

                                                                        181. [T] Use technology to
                                                                                graph

182. [T] Use technology to plot       183. Without using technology,    184. [T] Use a graphing utility
                          (use the            sketch the polar curve
                                                                               to plot        for
        interval
                                      186. [T] There is a curve known   187. [T] Use the results of the
185. [T] Use technology to plot               as the "Black Hole." Use          preceding two problems
                       for                    technology to plot                to explore the graphs of
                                                              for                                 and
                                                                                                   for

7.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      7.4.1 Apply the formula for area of a region in polar coordinates.
      7.4.2 Determine the arc length of a polar curve.

In the rectangular coordinate system, the definite integral provides a way to calculate the area under a curve. In

particular, if we have a function           defined from  to            where           on this interval, the area between

the curve and the x-axis is given by                      This fact, along with the formula for evaluating this integral, is

summarized in the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Similarly, the arc length of this curve is given by

      In this section, we study analogous formulas for area and arc length in the polar coordinate

system.

Areas of Regions Bounded by Polar Curves

We have studied the formulas for area under a curve defined in rectangular coordinates and parametrically defined
curves. Now we turn our attention to deriving a formula for the area of a region bounded by a polar curve. Recall that
the proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus used the concept of a Riemann sum to approximate the area under a
curve by using rectangles. For polar curves we use the Riemann sum again, but the rectangles are replaced by sectors of
a circle.

Consider a curve defined by the function    where                       Our first step is to partition the interval  into n

equal-width subintervals. The width of each subinterval is given by the formula               and the ith partition

point is given by the formula               Each partition point        defines a line with slope                passing through

the pole as shown in the following graph.
584 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                          Figure 7.39 A partition of a typical curve in polar coordinates.

The line segments are connected by arcs of constant radius. This defines sectors whose areas can be calculated by using
a geometric formula. The area of each sector is then used to approximate the area between successive line segments.
We then sum the areas of the sectors to approximate the total area. This approach gives a Riemann sum approximation
for the total area. The formula for the area of a sector of a circle is illustrated in the following figure.

                                 Figure 7.40 The area of a sector of a circle is given by

Recall that the area of a circle is                 When measuring angles in radians, 360 degrees is equal to radians.

Therefore a fraction of a circle can be measured by the central angle The fraction of the circle is given by so the

area of the sector is this fraction multiplied by the total area:

Since the radius of a typical sector in Figure 7.39 is given by    the area of the ith sector is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            7.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 585

Therefore a Riemann sum that approximates the area is given by

We take the limit as   to get the exact area:

                                                                       
This gives the following theorem.

Theorem 7.6

Area of a Region Bounded by a Polar Curve

Suppose is continuous and nonnegative on the interval                             with      The area of the region
                                                                                                                           (7.9)
bounded by the graph of            between the radial lines                  and        is

EXAMPLE 7.16

Finding an Area of a Polar Region
Find the area of one petal of the rose defined by the equation

     Solution            follows.
The graph of

                                          Figure 7.41 The graph of

When      we have                         The next value for which                is        This can be seen by solving the

equation              for Therefore the values                           to  trace out the first petal of the rose. To find the area

inside this petal, use Equation 7.9 with                                     and
586 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

To evaluate this integral, use the formula           with

7.15 Find the area inside the cardioid defined by the equation

Example 7.16 involved finding the area inside one curve. We can also use Area of a Region Bounded by a Polar Curve to
find the area between two polar curves. However, we often need to find the points of intersection of the curves and
determine which function defines the outer curve or the inner curve between these two points.

EXAMPLE 7.17

Finding the Area between Two Polar Curves           and inside the circle
Find the area outside the cardioid

     Solution
First draw a graph containing both curves as shown.

              Figure 7.42 The region between the curves                    and

To determine the limits of integration, first find the points of intersection by setting the two functions equal to each
other and solving for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  7.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 587

This gives the solutions  and         which are the limits of integration. The circle  is the red graph,

which is the outer function, and the cardioid             is the blue graph, which is the inner function. To calculate the

area between the curves, start with the area inside the circle between       and       then subtract the area inside

the cardioid between      and

7.16 Find the area inside the circle            and outside the circle

In Example 7.17 we found the area inside the circle and outside the cardioid by first finding their intersection points.

Notice that solving the equation directly for yielded two solutions:         and       However, in the graph there are

three intersection points. The third intersection point is the origin. The reason why this point did not show up as a
solution is because the origin is on both graphs but for different values of For example, for the cardioid we get

so the values for that solve this equation are            where n is any integer. For the circle we get

The solutions to this equation are of the form  for any integer value of n. These two solution sets have no points in

common. Regardless of this fact, the curves intersect at the origin. This case must always be taken into consideration.

Arc Length in Polar Curves

Here we derive a formula for the arc length of a curve defined in polar coordinates.

In rectangular coordinates, the arc length of a parameterized curve               for  is given by

In polar coordinates we define the curve by the equation              where            In order to adapt the arc length
formula for a polar curve, we use the equations

and we replace the parameter t by Then
588 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

We replace by     and the lower and upper limits of integration are and respectively. Then the arc length formula
becomes

This gives us the following theorem.

Theorem 7.7

Arc Length of a Curve Defined by a Polar Function

Let be a function whose derivative is continuous on an interval       The length of the graph of    from
                                                                                                  (7.10)
      to      is

EXAMPLE 7.18

Finding the Arc Length of a Polar Curve
Find the arc length of the cardioid

Solution

When                             Furthermore, as    goes from  to the cardioid is traced out exactly once. Therefore

these are the limits of integration. Using                       and  Equation 7.10 becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 589

Next, using the identity           add 1 to both sides and multiply by 2. This gives
                                         so the integral becomes
Substituting  gives

The absolute value is necessary because the cosine is negative for some values in its domain. To resolve this issue,
change the limits from to and double the answer. This strategy works because cosine is positive between and
Thus,

7.17 Find the total arc length of

        SECTION 7.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine a definite integral that represents the area.

188. Region enclosed by       189. Region enclosed by      190. Region in the first
                                                                   quadrant within the
                                                                   cardioid

191. Region enclosed by one   192. Region enclosed by one  193. Region below the polar
        petal of                      petal of                     axis and enclosed by

194. Region in the first      195. Region enclosed by the  196. Region enclosed by the
        quadrant enclosed by          inner loop of                inner loop of
590 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

197. Region enclosed by            198. Region common to                          199. Region common to
                              and

        outside the inner loop

200. Region common to

For the following exercises, find the area of the described region.

201. Enclosed by                   202. Above the polar axis                 203. Below the polar axis and
                                           enclosed by                               enclosed by

204. Enclosed by one petal of      205. Enclosed by one petal of             206. Enclosed by

207. Enclosed by the inner         208. Enclosed by                          209. Common interior of
        loop of                                                  and

                                           outside the inner loop

210. Common interior of                             211. Common interior of         212. Inside             and

                                                                                       outside

213. Common interior of

For the following exercises, find a definite integral that represents the arc length.

214.                                                      215.            on the

                                                                interval

216.                                                      217.

For the following exercises, find the length of the curve over the given interval.

218.                                                219.

220.                                                      221.

222.

For the following exercises, use the integration capabilities of a calculator to approximate the length of the curve.

223. [T]                                            224. [T]

225. [T]                                                  226. [T]

227. [T]

For the following exercises, use the familiar formula from geometry to find the area of the region described and then
confirm by using the definite integral.

228.                                                      229.

230.

For the following exercises, use the familiar formula from geometry to find the length of the curve and then confirm
using the definite integral.

231.                                                      232.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7.5 · Conic Sections 591

233.                                                    234. Verify that if

                                                                                 then

For the following exercises, find the slope of a tangent line to a polar curve   Let              and

                     so the polar equation              is now written in parametric form.

235. Use the definition of the        236.                                 237.

      derivative

      and the product rule to
      derive the derivative of a
      polar equation.

238.                                  239.                                 240.

241.                 tips of the      242.              tips of the 243.
        leaves                                leaves

244. Find the points on the           245. For the cardioid
                                                                 find the
      interval                    at
                                              slope of the tangent line
      which the cardioid                      when

                     has a

      vertical or horizontal

      tangent line.

For the following exercises, find the slope of the tangent line to the given polar curve at the point given by the value of

246.                                  247.                                 248.

249. [T] Use technology:
                              at

For the following exercises, find the points at which the following polar curves have a horizontal or vertical tangent line.

250.                                  251.                                 252.

253. The cardioid                     254. Show that the curve

                                                        (called a

                                            cissoid of Diocles) has the

                                            line      as a vertical

                                            asymptote.

7.5 Conic Sections

Learning Objectives

      7.5.1 Identify the equation of a parabola in standard form with given focus and directrix.
      7.5.2 Identify the equation of an ellipse in standard form with given foci.
      7.5.3 Identify the equation of a hyperbola in standard form with given foci.
      7.5.4 Recognize a parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola from its eccentricity value.
      7.5.5 Write the polar equation of a conic section with eccentricity .
      7.5.6 Identify when a general equation of degree two is a parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola.

Conic sections have been studied since the time of the ancient Greeks, and were considered to be an important
mathematical concept. As early as 320 BCE, such Greek mathematicians as Menaechmus, Appollonius, and Archimedes
were fascinated by these curves. Appollonius wrote an entire eight-volume treatise on conic sections in which he was, for
example, able to derive a specific method for identifying a conic section through the use of geometry. Since then,
important applications of conic sections have arisen (for example, in astronomy), and the properties of conic sections are
used in radio telescopes, satellite dish receivers, and even architecture. In this section we discuss the three basic conic
sections, some of their properties, and their equations.

Conic sections get their name because they can be generated by intersecting a plane with a cone. A cone has two
identically shaped parts called nappes. One nappe is what most people mean by "cone," having the shape of a party hat.
592 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

       A right circular cone can be generated by revolving a line passing through the origin around the y-axis as shown.

                         Figure 7.43 A cone generated by revolving the line  around the -axis.

Conic sections are generated by the intersection of a plane with a cone (Figure 7.44). If the plane intersects both nappes,

then the conic section is a hyperbola. If the plane is parallel to the generating line, the conic section is a parabola. If the

plane is perpendicular to the axis of revolution, the conic section is a circle. If the plane intersects one nappe at an angle

to the axis (other than  then the conic section is an ellipse.

   Figure 7.44 The four conic sections. Each conic is determined by the angle the plane makes with the axis of the cone.

Parabolas

A parabola is generated when a plane intersects a cone parallel to the generating line. In this case, the plane intersects
only one of the nappes. A parabola can also be defined in terms of distances.

  Definition
  A parabola is the set of all points whose distance from a fixed point, called the focus, is equal to the distance from a
  fixed line, called the directrix. The point halfway between the focus and the directrix is called the vertex of the
  parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    7.5 · Conic Sections 593

A graph of a typical parabola appears in Figure 7.45. Using this diagram in conjunction with the distance formula, we can

derive an equation for a parabola. Recall the distance formula: Given point P with coordinates      and point Q with

coordinates  the distance between them is given by the formula

Then from the definition of a parabola and Figure 7.45, we get

Squaring both sides and simplifying yields

Figure 7.45 A typical parabola in which the distance from the focus to the vertex is represented by the variable

Now suppose we want to relocate the vertex. We use the variables  to denote the coordinates of the vertex. Then if

the focus is directly above the vertex, it has coordinates      and the directrix has the equation  Going

through the same derivation yields the formula                    Solving this equation for y leads to the following

theorem.

Theorem 7.8

Equations for Parabolas                                         and focus located at            where p is a constant,
Given a parabola opening upward with vertex located at                                                                 (7.11)
the equation for the parabola is given by

This is the standard form of a parabola.

We can also study the cases when the parabola opens down or to the left or the right. The equation for each of these
cases can also be written in standard form as shown in the following graphs.
594 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

            Figure 7.46 Four parabolas, opening in various directions, along with their equations in standard form.

In addition, the equation of a parabola can be written in the general form, though in this form the values of h, k, and p
are not immediately recognizable. The general form of a parabola is written as

The first equation represents a parabola that opens either up or down. The second equation represents a parabola that
opens either to the left or to the right. To put the equation into standard form, use the method of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 7.19

Converting the Equation of a Parabola from General into Standard Form

Put the equation                                    into standard form and graph the resulting parabola.

     Solution
Since y is not squared in this equation, we know that the parabola opens either upward or downward. Therefore we need
to solve this equation for y, which will put the equation into standard form. To do that, first add to both sides of the
equation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     7.5 · Conic Sections 595

The next step is to complete the square on the right-hand side. Start by grouping the first two terms on the right-hand
side using parentheses:

Next determine the constant that, when added inside the parentheses, makes the quantity inside the parentheses a

perfect square trinomial. To do this, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives       Add 4 inside the

parentheses and subtract 4 outside the parentheses, so the value of the equation is not changed:

Now combine like terms and factor the quantity inside the parentheses:
Finally, divide by 8:

This equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 7.11 gives                    and  The parabola

opens up, with vertex at  focus at  and directrix  The graph of this parabola appears as follows.

                                    Figure 7.47 The parabola in Example 7.19.

7.18 Put the equation               into standard form and graph the resulting parabola.

The axis of symmetry of a vertical (opening up or down) parabola is a vertical line passing through the vertex. The
parabola has an interesting reflective property. Suppose we have a satellite dish with a parabolic cross section. If a beam
of electromagnetic waves, such as light or radio waves, comes into the dish in a straight line from a satellite (parallel to
the axis of symmetry), then the waves reflect off the dish and collect at the focus of the parabola as shown.
596 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Consider a parabolic dish designed to collect signals from a satellite in space. The dish is aimed directly at the satellite,
and a receiver is located at the focus of the parabola. Radio waves coming in from the satellite are reflected off the
surface of the parabola to the receiver, which collects and decodes the digital signals. This allows a small receiver to
gather signals from a wide angle of sky. Flashlights and headlights in a car work on the same principle, but in reverse:
the source of the light (that is, the light bulb) is located at the focus and the reflecting surface on the parabolic mirror
focuses the beam straight ahead. This allows a small light bulb to illuminate a wide angle of space in front of the
flashlight or car.

Ellipses

An ellipse can also be defined in terms of distances. In the case of an ellipse, there are two foci (plural of focus), and two
directrices (plural of directrix). We look at the directrices in more detail later in this section.

  Definition

  An ellipse is the set of all points for which the sum of their distances from two fixed points (the foci) is constant.

Figure 7.48 A typical ellipse in which the sum of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the foci is constant.

A graph of a typical ellipse is shown in Figure 7.48. In this figure the foci are labeled as and Both are the same fixed

distance from the origin, and this distance is represented by the variable c. Therefore the coordinates of are  and

the coordinates of are           The points and are located at the ends of the major axis of the ellipse, and have

coordinates  and                 respectively. The major axis is always the longest distance across the ellipse, and can be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.5 · Conic Sections 597

horizontal or vertical. Thus, the length of the major axis in this ellipse is 2a. Furthermore, and are called the vertices

of the ellipse. The points and are located at the ends of the minor axis of the ellipse, and have coordinates

and          respectively. The minor axis is the shortest distance across the ellipse. The minor axis is perpendicular to the

major axis.

According to the definition of the ellipse, we can choose any point on the ellipse and the sum of the distances from this

point to the two foci is constant. Suppose we choose the point P. Since the coordinates of point P are  the sum of

the distances is

Therefore the sum of the distances from an arbitrary point A with coordinates  is also equal to 2a. Using the
distance formula, we get

Subtract the second radical from both sides and square both sides:

Now isolate the radical on the right-hand side and square again:

Isolate the variables on the left-hand side of the equation and the constants on the right-hand side:

Divide both sides by  This gives the equation

If we refer back to Figure 7.48, then the length of each of the two green line segments is equal to a. This is true because

the sum of the distances from the point Q to the foci  is equal to 2a, and the lengths of these two line segments

are equal. This line segment forms a right triangle with hypotenuse length a and leg lengths b and c. From the

Pythagorean theorem,  and                              Therefore the equation of the ellipse becomes

Finally, if the center of the ellipse is moved from the origin to a point  we have the following standard form of an
ellipse.
598 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Theorem 7.9

Equation of an Ellipse in Standard Form

Consider the ellipse with center                    a horizontal major axis with length 2a, and a vertical minor axis with length 2b.

Then the equation of this ellipse in standard form is

                                                                                                                 (7.12)

and the foci are located at       where                The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis is vertical, then the equation of the ellipse becomes

                                                                                                                 (7.13)

and the foci are located at       where                The equations of the directrices in this case are

If the major axis is horizontal, then the ellipse is called horizontal, and if the major axis is vertical, then the ellipse is

called vertical. The equation of an ellipse is in general form if it is in the form                        where A

and B are either both positive or both negative. To convert the equation from general to standard form, use the method

of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 7.20

Finding the Standard Form of an Ellipse             into standard form and graph the resulting ellipse.
Put the equation

     Solution
First subtract 36 from both sides of the equation:

Next group the x terms together and the y terms together, and factor out the common factor:

We need to determine the constant that, when added inside each set of parentheses, results in a perfect square. In the

first set of parentheses, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives   In the second set of

parentheses, take half the coefficient of y and square it. This gives                Add these inside each pair of parentheses.

Since the first set of parentheses has a 9 in front, we are actually adding 36 to the left-hand side. Similarly, we are adding
36 to the second set as well. Therefore the equation becomes

Now factor both sets of parentheses and divide by 36:

The equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 7.14 gives                  and           This is a

vertical ellipse with center at   major axis 6, and minor axis 4. The graph of this ellipse appears as follows.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.5 · Conic Sections 599

                       Figure 7.49 The ellipse in Example 7.20.

7.19 Put the equation  into standard form and graph the resulting ellipse.

According to Kepler's first law of planetary motion, the orbit of a planet around the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one
of the foci as shown in Figure 7.50(a). Because Earth's orbit is an ellipse, the distance from the Sun varies throughout the
year. A commonly held misconception is that Earth is closer to the Sun in the summer. In fact, in summer for the
northern hemisphere, Earth is farther from the Sun than during winter. The difference in season is caused by the tilt of
Earth's axis in the orbital plane. Comets that orbit the Sun, such as Halley's Comet, also have elliptical orbits, as do
moons orbiting the planets and satellites orbiting Earth.

Ellipses also have interesting reflective properties: A light ray emanating from one focus passes through the other focus
after mirror reflection in the ellipse. The same thing occurs with a sound wave as well. The National Statuary Hall in the
U.S. Capitol in Washington, DC, is a famous room in an elliptical shape as shown in Figure 7.50(b). This hall served as the
meeting place for the U.S. House of Representatives for almost fifty years. The location of the two foci of this semi-
elliptical room are clearly identified by marks on the floor, and even if the room is full of visitors, when two people stand
on these spots and speak to each other, they can hear each other much more clearly than they can hear someone
standing close by. Legend has it that John Quincy Adams had his desk located on one of the foci and was able to
eavesdrop on everyone else in the House without ever needing to stand. Although this makes a good story, it is unlikely
to be true, because the original ceiling produced so many echoes that the entire room had to be hung with carpets to
dampen the noise. The ceiling was rebuilt in 1902 and only then did the now-famous whispering effect emerge. Another
famous whispering gallery--the site of many marriage proposals--is in Grand Central Station in New York City.

Figure 7.50 (a) Earth's orbit around the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one focus. (b) Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol is a
whispering gallery with an elliptical cross section.

Hyperbolas

A hyperbola can also be defined in terms of distances. In the case of a hyperbola, there are two foci and two directrices.
Hyperbolas also have two asymptotes.
600 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

         Definition
         A hyperbola is the set of all points where the difference between their distances from two fixed points (the foci) is
         constant.

       A graph of a typical hyperbola appears as follows.

Figure 7.51 A typical hyperbola in which the difference of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the foci is
constant. The transverse axis is also called the major axis, and the conjugate axis is also called the minor axis.

The derivation of the equation of a hyperbola in standard form is virtually identical to that of an ellipse. One slight hitch

lies in the definition: The difference between two numbers is always positive. Let P be a point on the hyperbola with

coordinates  Then the definition of the hyperbola gives                                       To simplify the

derivation, assume that P is on the right branch of the hyperbola, so the absolute value bars drop. If it is on the left

branch, then the subtraction is reversed. The vertex of the right branch has coordinates      so

This equation is therefore true for any point on the hyperbola. Returning to the coordinates      for P:

Add the second radical from both sides and square both sides:

Now isolate the radical on the right-hand side and square again:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  7.5 · Conic Sections 601

Isolate the variables on the left-hand side of the equation and the constants on the right-hand side:

Finally, divide both sides by  This gives the equation

We now define b so that             This is possible because  Therefore the equation of the ellipse becomes

Finally, if the center of the hyperbola is moved from the origin to the point  we have the following standard form of
a hyperbola.

Theorem 7.10

Equation of a Hyperbola in Standard Form

Consider the hyperbola with center  a horizontal major axis, and a vertical minor axis. Then the equation of this

ellipse is

                                                                                                      (7.14)

and the foci are located at         where               The equations of the asymptotes are given by

              The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis is vertical, then the equation of the hyperbola becomes

                                                                                                      (7.15)

and the foci are located at         where               The equations of the asymptotes are given by

              The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis (transverse axis) is horizontal, then the hyperbola is called horizontal, and if the major axis is vertical
then the hyperbola is called vertical. The equation of a hyperbola is in general form if it is in the form

                                              where A and B have opposite signs. In order to convert the equation from general to
standard form, use the method of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 7.21

Finding the Standard Form of a Hyperbola      into standard form and graph the resulting hyperbola. What are
Put the equation
the equations of the asymptotes?

     Solution
First add 124 to both sides of the equation:
602 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Next group the x terms together and the y terms together, then factor out the common factors:

We need to determine the constant that, when added inside each set of parentheses, results in a perfect square. In the

first set of parentheses, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives         In the second set of

parentheses, take half the coefficient of y and square it. This gives               Add these inside each pair of

parentheses. Since the first set of parentheses has a 9 in front, we are actually adding 36 to the left-hand side. Similarly,
we are subtracting 16 from the second set of parentheses. Therefore the equation becomes

Next factor both sets of parentheses and divide by 144:

The equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 7.15 gives                    and                 This is a

horizontal hyperbola with center at                 and asymptotes given by the equations      The graph of this

hyperbola appears in the following figure.

                                 Figure 7.52 Graph of the hyperbola in Example 7.21.

7.20 Put the equation                                    into standard form and graph the resulting hyperbola.
             What are the equations of the asymptotes?

Hyperbolas also have interesting reflective properties. A ray directed toward one focus of a hyperbola is reflected by a
hyperbolic mirror toward the other focus. This concept is illustrated in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 7.5 · Conic Sections 603

                                   Figure 7.53 A hyperbolic mirror used to collect light from distant stars.

This property of the hyperbola has important applications. It is used in radio direction finding (since the difference in
signals from two towers is constant along hyperbolas), and in the construction of mirrors inside telescopes (to reflect
light coming from the parabolic mirror to the eyepiece). Another interesting fact about hyperbolas is that for a comet
entering the solar system, if the speed is great enough to escape the Sun's gravitational pull, then the path that the
comet takes as it passes through the solar system is hyperbolic.

Eccentricity and Directrix

An alternative way to describe a conic section involves the directrices, the foci, and a new property called eccentricity. We
will see that the value of the eccentricity of a conic section can uniquely define that conic.

Definition

The eccentricity e of a conic section is defined to be the distance from any point on the conic section to its focus,
divided by the perpendicular distance from that point to the nearest directrix. This value is constant for any conic
section, and can define the conic section as well:

1. If       the conic is a parabola.
2. If       it is an ellipse.
3. If       it is a hyperbola.

The eccentricity of a circle is zero. The directrix of a conic section is the line that, together with the point known as the
focus, serves to define a conic section. Hyperbolas and noncircular ellipses have two foci and two associated
directrices. Parabolas have one focus and one directrix.

The three conic sections with their directrices appear in the following figure.
604 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                    Figure 7.54 The three conic sections with their foci and directrices.

Recall from the definition of a parabola that the distance from any point on the parabola to the focus is equal to the
distance from that same point to the directrix. Therefore, by definition, the eccentricity of a parabola must be 1. The

equations of the directrices of a horizontal ellipse are             The right vertex of the ellipse is located at  and the

right focus is      Therefore the distance from the vertex to the focus is  and the distance from the vertex to the

right directrix is  This gives the eccentricity as

Since  this step proves that the eccentricity of an ellipse is less than 1. The directrices of a horizontal hyperbola are

also located at      and a similar calculation shows that the eccentricity of a hyperbola is also                   However in
this case we have   so the eccentricity of a hyperbola is greater than 1.

EXAMPLE 7.22

Determining Eccentricity of a Conic Section
Determine the eccentricity of the ellipse described by the equation

Solution

From the equation we see that  and                  The value of c can be calculated using the equation             for an

ellipse. Substituting the values of a and b and solving for c gives  Therefore the eccentricity of the ellipse is

7.21 Determine the eccentricity of the hyperbola described by the equation

Polar Equations of Conic Sections

Sometimes it is useful to write or identify the equation of a conic section in polar form. To do this, we need the concept
of the focal parameter. The focal parameter of a conic section p is defined as the distance from a focus to the nearest
directrix. The following table gives the focal parameters for the different types of conics, where a is the length of the
semi-major axis (i.e., half the length of the major axis), c is the distance from the origin to the focus, and e is the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7.5 · Conic Sections 605

eccentricity. In the case of a parabola, a represents the distance from the vertex to the focus.

                                         Conic         e              p

   Ellipse

   Parabola
   Hyperbola

                                                   Table 7.1 Eccentricities and Focal Parameters
                                                   of the Conic Sections

Using the definitions of the focal parameter and eccentricity of the conic section, we can derive an equation for any conic
section in polar coordinates. In particular, we assume that one of the foci of a given conic section lies at the pole. Then
using the definition of the various conic sections in terms of distances, it is possible to prove the following theorem.

  Theorem 7.11

  Polar Equation of Conic Sections
  The polar equation of a conic section with focal parameter p is given by

In the equation on the left, the major axis of the conic section is horizontal, and in the equation on the right, the major
axis is vertical. To work with a conic section written in polar form, first make the constant term in the denominator equal
to 1. This can be done by dividing both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the constant that appears
in front of the plus or minus in the denominator. Then the coefficient of the sine or cosine in the denominator is the
eccentricity. This value identifies the conic. If cosine appears in the denominator, then the conic is horizontal. If sine
appears, then the conic is vertical. If both appear then the axes are rotated. The center of the conic is not necessarily at
the origin. The center is at the origin only if the conic is a circle (i.e.,

  EXAMPLE 7.23

Graphing a Conic Section in Polar Coordinates
Identify and create a graph of the conic section described by the equation

     Solution
The constant term in the denominator is 1, so the eccentricity of the conic is 2. This is a hyperbola. The focal parameter p

can be calculated by using the equation         Since     this gives     The cosine function appears in the

denominator, so the hyperbola is horizontal. Pick a few values for and create a table of values. Then we can graph the
hyperbola (Figure 7.55).

0                                               1                        -3
606 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                    3                       3

                                     Figure 7.55 Graph of the hyperbola described in Example 7.23.
    7.22 Identify and create a graph of the conic section described by the equation

General Equations of Degree Two

A general equation of degree two can be written in the form

The graph of an equation of this form is a conic section. If  then the coordinate axes are rotated. To identify the
conic section, we use the discriminant of the conic section            One of the following cases must be true:

1.      If so, the graph is an ellipse.

2.      If so, the graph is a parabola.

3.      If so, the graph is a hyperbola.

The simplest example of a second-degree equation involving a cross term is      This equation can be solved for y to

obtain  The graph of this function is called a rectangular hyperbola as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.5 · Conic Sections 607

Figure 7.56 Graph of the equation                            The red lines indicate the rotated axes.

The asymptotes of this hyperbola are the x and y coordinate axes. To determine the angle of rotation of the conic

section, we use the formula  In this case                    and  so                                    and

The method for graphing a conic section with rotated axes involves determining the coefficients of the conic in the

rotated coordinate system. The new coefficients are labeled           and are given by the formulas

The procedure for graphing a rotated conic is the following:

 1. Identify the conic section using the discriminant
 2. Determine using the formula
 3. Calculate
 4. Rewrite the original equation using
 5. Draw a graph using the rotated equation.

  EXAMPLE 7.24

Identifying a Rotated Conic
Identify the conic and calculate the angle of rotation of axes for the curve described by the equation

     Solution                              and                    The discriminant of this equation is
In this equation,
                                           Therefore this conic is an ellipse. To calculate the angle of
rotation of the axes, use
                             This gives
608 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Therefore  and  which is the angle of the rotation of the axes.

To determine the rotated coefficients, use the formulas given above:

The equation of the conic in the rotated coordinate system becomes
A graph of this conic section appears as follows.

Figure 7.57 Graph of the ellipse described by the equation            The axes are rotated
The red dashed lines indicate the rotated axes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               7.5 · Conic Sections 609

      7.23 Identify the conic and calculate the angle of rotation of axes for the curve described by the equation

        SECTION 7.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the parabola using the information given.

255. Focus       and directrix 256. Focus              and                      257. Focus       and

                                            directrix                                 directrix

258. Focus       and directrix 259. Focus              and directrix 260. Focus                  and

                                                                                      directrix

261. Focus       and                  262. Focus       and

      directrix                             directrix

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the ellipse using the information given.

263. Endpoints of major axis at       264. Endpoints of major axis at           265. Endpoints of minor axis at
                            and foci                              and foci                                  and foci

        located at                            located at                                located at

266. Endpoints of major axis at       267. Endpoints of major axis at           268. Endpoints of major axis at
                            and foci                                  and foci                           and foci

        located at                            located at                                located at

269. Foci located at                  270. Foci located at
                            and                                   and

        eccentricity of                       eccentricity of

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the hyperbola using the information given.

271. Vertices located at              272. Vertices located at                  273. Endpoints of the
                            and foci                              and foci              conjugate axis located at
                                                                                                            and foci
        located at                            located at                                located

274. Vertices located at              275. Vertices located at                  276. Endpoints of the
                         and focus                                    and               conjugate axis located at
                                                                                                         and focus
        located at                            focus located at                          located at

277. Foci located at                  278.             and
                            and
                                            eccentricity of 2.5
        eccentricity of 3

For the following exercises, consider the following polar equations of conics. Determine the eccentricity and identify the
conic.

279.                                  280.                                      281.

282.                                  283.                                      284.

For the following exercises, find a polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin and eccentricity and directrix as
given.

285.                                  286.                                      287.

288.
610 7 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each conic.

289.                                  290.                                  291.

292.                                  293.                                  294.

295.                                  296.                                  297.

298.                                  299.                                  300.

301.                                  302.                                  303.

304.                                  305.

For the following equations, determine which of the conic sections is described.

306.                                  307.                                  308.

309.                                  310.

311.                                                312. The mirror in an
                                                            automobile headlight has
313. A satellite dish is shaped                             a parabolic cross section,
        like a paraboloid of                                with the lightbulb at the
        revolution. The receiver is                         focus. On a schematic,
        to be located at the focus.                         the equation of the
        If the dish is 12 feet                              parabola is given as
        across at its opening and                                        At what
        4 feet deep at its center,                          coordinates should you
        where should the receiver                           place the lightbulb?
        be placed?
                                      314. Consider the satellite dish      315. A searchlight is shaped
316. Whispering galleries are                 of the preceding problem.             like a paraboloid of
        rooms designed with                   If the dish is 8 feet across          revolution. A light source
        elliptical ceilings. A                at the opening and 2 feet             is located 1 foot from the
        person standing at one                deep, where should we                 base along the axis of
        focus can whisper and be              place the receiver?                   symmetry. If the opening
        heard by a person                                                           of the searchlight is 3 feet
        standing at the other                                                       across, find the depth.
        focus because all the
        sound waves that reach        317. A person is standing 8
        the ceiling are reflected to          feet from the nearest wall
        the other person. If a                in a whispering gallery. If
        whispering gallery has a              that person is at one
        length of 120 feet and the            focus and the other focus
        foci are located 30 feet              is 80 feet away, what is
        from the center, find the             the length and the height
        height of the ceiling at              at the center of the
        the center.                           gallery?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.5 · Conic Sections 611

For the following exercises, determine the polar equation form of the orbit given the length of the major axis and
eccentricity for the orbits of the comets or planets. Distance is given in astronomical units (AU).

318. Halley's Comet: length of       319. Hale-Bopp Comet: length     320. Mars: length of major axis
        major axis = 35.88,                  of major axis = 525.91,          = 3.049, eccentricity =
        eccentricity = 0.967                 eccentricity = 0.995             0.0934

321. Jupiter: length of major
        axis = 10.408, eccentricity
        = 0.0484
612 7 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

angular coordinate the angle formed by a line segment connecting the origin to a point in the polar coordinate

system with the positive radial (x) axis, measured counterclockwise

cardioid a plane curve traced by a point on the perimeter of a circle that is rolling around a fixed circle of the same

radius; the equation of a cardioid is                or

conic section a conic section is any curve formed by the intersection of a plane with a cone of two nappes

cusp a pointed end or part where two curves meet

cycloid the curve traced by a point on the rim of a circular wheel as the wheel rolls along a straight line without

slippage

directrix a directrix (plural: directrices) is a line used to construct and define a conic section; a parabola has one

directrix; ellipses and hyperbolas have two

discriminant the value             which is used to identify a conic when the equation contains a term involving is

called a discriminant

eccentricity the eccentricity is defined as the distance from any point on the conic section to its focus divided by the

perpendicular distance from that point to the nearest directrix

focal parameter the focal parameter is the distance from a focus of a conic section to the nearest directrix

focus a focus (plural: foci) is a point used to construct and define a conic section; a parabola has one focus; an ellipse

and a hyperbola have two

general form an equation of a conic section written as a general second-degree equation

limaçon the graph of the equation                or                  If    then the graph is a cardioid

major axis the major axis of a conic section passes through the vertex in the case of a parabola or through the two

vertices in the case of an ellipse or hyperbola; it is also an axis of symmetry of the conic; also called the transverse

axis

minor axis the minor axis is perpendicular to the major axis and intersects the major axis at the center of the conic, or

at the vertex in the case of the parabola; also called the conjugate axis

nappe a nappe is one half of a double cone

orientation the direction that a point moves on a graph as the parameter increases

parameter an independent variable that both x and y depend on in a parametric curve; usually represented by the

variable t

parameterization of a curve rewriting the equation of a curve defined by a function      as parametric equations

parametric curve the graph of the parametric equations and over an interval                      combined with the

equations

parametric equations the equations           and         that define a parametric curve

polar axis the horizontal axis in the polar coordinate system corresponding to

polar coordinate system a system for locating points in the plane. The coordinates are the radial coordinate, and

the angular coordinate

polar equation an equation or function relating the radial coordinate to the angular coordinate in the polar coordinate

system

pole the central point of the polar coordinate system, equivalent to the origin of a Cartesian system

radial coordinate the coordinate in the polar coordinate system that measures the distance from a point in the plane

to the pole

rose graph of the polar equation             or          for a positive constant a

space-filling curve a curve that completely occupies a two-dimensional subset of the real plane

standard form an equation of a conic section showing its properties, such as location of the vertex or lengths of major

and minor axes

vertex a vertex is an extreme point on a conic section; a parabola has one vertex at its turning point. An ellipse has two

vertices, one at each end of the major axis; a hyperbola has two vertices, one at the turning point of each branch

Key Equations

Derivative of parametric equations

Second-order derivative of parametric equations

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             7 · Chapter Review 613

Area under a parametric curve

Arc length of a parametric curve

Surface area generated by a parametric curve

Area of a region bounded by a polar curve

Arc length of a polar curve

Key Concepts

7.1 Parametric Equations

· Parametric equations provide a convenient way to describe a curve. A parameter can represent time or some other
    meaningful quantity.

· It is often possible to eliminate the parameter in a parameterized curve to obtain a function or relation describing
    that curve.

· There is always more than one way to parameterize a curve.
· Parametric equations can describe complicated curves that are difficult or perhaps impossible to describe using

    rectangular coordinates.

7.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves

· The derivative of the parametrically defined curve  and  can be calculated using the formula

Using the derivative, we can find the equation of a tangent line to a parametric curve.

· The area between a parametric curve and the x-axis can be determined by using the formula

· The arc length of a parametric curve can be calculated by using the formula
· The surface area of a volume of revolution revolved around the x-axis is given by

                                                               If the curve is revolved around the y-axis, then the formula is

7.3 Polar Coordinates

  · The polar coordinate system provides an alternative way to locate points in the plane.
  · Convert points between rectangular and polar coordinates using the formulas

      and

  · To sketch a polar curve from a given polar function, make a table of values and take advantage of periodic
      properties.

  · Use the conversion formulas to convert equations between rectangular and polar coordinates.
614 7 · Chapter Review

· Identify symmetry in polar curves, which can occur through the pole, the horizontal axis, or the vertical axis.

7.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates

· The area of a region in polar coordinates defined by the equation                with         is given by the integral

· To find the area between two curves in the polar coordinate system, first find the points of intersection, then

      subtract the corresponding areas.

· The arc length of a polar curve defined by the equation               with             is given by the integral

7.5 Conic Sections

· The equation of a vertical parabola in standard form with given focus and directrix is                           where p is

      the distance from the vertex to the focus and        are the coordinates of the vertex.

· The equation of a horizontal ellipse in standard form is                         where the center has coordinates

               the major axis has length 2a, the minor axis has length 2b, and the coordinates of the foci are
      where

· The equation of a horizontal hyperbola in standard form is                             where the center has coordinates

      the vertices are located at            and the coordinates of the foci are                where

· The eccentricity of an ellipse is less than 1, the eccentricity of a parabola is equal to 1, and the eccentricity of a

      hyperbola is greater than 1. The eccentricity of a circle is 0.

· The polar equation of a conic section with eccentricity e is                 or               where p represents the

      focal parameter.

· To identify a conic generated by the equation                                                    first calculate the
                                                                                   then the conic is a parabola, and if
      discriminant                     If    then the conic is an ellipse, if

      then the conic is a hyperbola.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

322. The rectangular                   323. The equations               324. The arc length of the
        coordinates of the point
                                                                               spiral given by      for
                    are
                                                           represent a                   is

                                             hyperbola.

325. Given               and
                     if          then

        is a constant.    where C

For the following exercises, sketch the parametric curve and eliminate the parameter to find the Cartesian equation of
the curve.

326.                                   327.                             328.

329.

For the following exercises, sketch the polar curve and determine what type of symmetry exists, if any.

330.                                   331.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   7 · Chapter Review 615

For the following exercises, find the polar equation for the curve given as a Cartesian equation.

332.                                333.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the tangent line to the given curve. Graph both the function and its
tangent line.

334.                                335.                                 336. Find          and    of

For the following exercises, find the area of the region.

337.                                338.                   in the first

                                          quadrant

For the following exercises, find the arc length of the curve over the given interval.

339.                                340.

                                          Check your answer by

                                          geometry.

For the following exercises, find the Cartesian equation describing the given shapes.

341. A parabola with focus          342. An ellipse with a major         343. A hyperbola with vertices
                  and directrix
                                          axis length of 10 and foci           at       and

                                          at        and                        and foci at         and

For the following exercises, determine the eccentricity and identify the conic. Sketch the conic.

344.                                345.                                 346.

347. Determine the Cartesian        348. The C/1980 E1 comet was
        equation describing the             observed in 1980. Given
        orbit of Pluto, the most            an eccentricity of 1.057
        eccentric orbit around the          and a perihelion (point of
        Sun. The length of the              closest approach to the
        major axis is 39.26 AU              Sun) of 3.364 AU, find the
        and minor axis is 38.07             Cartesian equations
        AU. What is the                     describing the comet's
        eccentricity?                       trajectory. Are we
                                            guaranteed to see this
                                            comet again? (Hint:
                                            Consider the Sun at point
616 7 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                         A · Table of Integrals 617

 A TABLE OF INTEGRALS

Basic Integrals

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Trigonometric Integrals

18.
19.
20.
21.
618 A · Table of Integrals

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.

Exponential and Logarithmic Integrals

42.
43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 A · Table of Integrals 619

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

Hyperbolic Integrals

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

Inverse Trigonometric Integrals

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.
620 A · Table of Integrals

66.
67.

Integrals Involving a2 + u2, a > 0

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

Integrals Involving u2 - a2, a > 0

77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84a.
84b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     A · Table of Integrals 621

Integrals Involving a2 - u2, a > 0

85.
86.

87.

88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93a.
93b.

Integrals Involving 2au - u2, a > 0

94.
95.
96.
97.

Integrals Involving a + bu, a  0

98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
622 A · Table of Integrals

104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       B · Table of Derivatives 623

 B TABLE OF DERIVATIVES

General Formulas

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

Trigonometric Functions

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Inverse Trigonometric Functions

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

21.
22.
23.
24.

Hyperbolic Functions

25.
26.
624 B · Table of Derivatives

27.
28.
29.
30.

Inverse Hyperbolic Functions

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Access for free at openstax.org
                           C · Review of Pre-Calculus 625

 C REVIEW OF PRE-CALCULUS

Formulas from Geometry

Formulas from Algebra

Laws of Exponents

Special Factorizations

Quadratic Formula

If     then

Binomial Theorem

where
626 C · Review of Pre-Calculus

Formulas from Trigonometry

Right-Angle Trigonometry

Trigonometric Functions of Important Angles

                                                                                                           --

Fundamental Identities
Law of Sines

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               C · Review of Pre-Calculus 627

Law of Cosines
Addition and Subtraction Formulas
Double-Angle Formulas
Half-Angle Formulas
628 C · Review of Pre-Calculus
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            Answer Key 629

Answer Key

Chapter 1

Checkpoint

1.1

1.2 15,550
1.3 440
1.4 The left-endpoint approximation is 0.7595. The right-endpoint approximation is 0.6345.

1.5 a.
       b.

1.6
1.7 6
1.8 18 square units
1.9 6
1.10 18
1.11
1.12 -7
1.13 3
1.14
1.15
1.16
1.17
1.18
1.19
630 Answer Key

1.20 Kathy still wins, but by a much larger margin: James skates 24 ft in 3 sec, but Kathy skates 29.3634 ft in 3 sec.
1.21

1.22 Net displacement:                            total distance traveled:             m

1.23 17.5 mi

1.24

1.25

1.26
1.27
1.28
1.29
1.30
1.31

1.32

1.33

1.34

1.35                             There are 20,099 bacteria in the dish after 3 hours.

1.36 There are 116 flies.

1.37

1.38
1.39
1.40
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44

Section 1.1 Exercises

1. a. They are equal; both represent the sum of the first 10 whole numbers. b. They are equal; both represent the sum

      of the first 10 whole numbers. c. They are equal by substituting                 d. They are equal; the first sum factors

      the terms of the second.

3.

5.

7.

9.                                                

11.                                                        

13.

15.

17.

19.

21.             The graph of f is a triangle with area 9.

23.                              They are equal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    Answer Key 631

25.
27.
29.

                                                       The plot shows that the left Riemann sum is an underestimate because the
      function is increasing. Similarly, the right Riemann sum is an overestimate. The area lies between the left and right
      Riemann sums. Ten rectangles are shown for visual clarity. This behavior persists for more rectangles.
31.

                                                                    The left endpoint sum is an underestimate because the function is
      increasing. Similarly, a right endpoint approximation is an overestimate. The area lies between the left and right
      endpoint estimates.
33.

                                               The plot shows that the left Riemann sum is an underestimate because the function is
      increasing. Ten rectangles are shown for visual clarity. This behavior persists for more rectangles.
35. The sum represents the cumulative rainfall in January 2009.
37. The total mileage is
39. Add the numbers to get 8.1-in. net increase.
41. 309,389,957
632 Answer Key

43.

45.

47.

49.                                                     and                           By symmetry of the graph, the exact

     area is zero.

51.

53. If    is a subinterval of       under one of the left-endpoint sum rectangles, then the area of the rectangle

     contributing to the left-endpoint estimate is      But,                          for                  so the area under the

     graph of f between c and d is      plus the area below the graph of f but above the horizontal line segment

     at height      which is positive. As this is true for each left-endpoint sum interval, it follows that the left Riemann

     sum is less than or equal to the area below the graph of f on

55.                                                                              and

     The left sum has a term corresponding to        and the right sum has a term corresponding to         In
                     any term corresponding to
                                                        occurs once with a plus sign and once with a minus sign,
     so each such term cancels and one is left with

57. Graph 1: a.                     b.               Graph 2: a.                 b.                            Graph 3: a.
                          b.                                                                                   so
                                                                                                           As
59. Let A be the area of the unit circle. The circle encloses n congruent triangles each of area
                             Similarly, the circle is contained inside n congruent triangles each of area                      so
                                                                        so

                                        so we conclude              Also, as 

     we also have             By the squeeze theorem for limits, we conclude that

Section 1.2 Exercises

61.

63.

65.

67.

69.

71.
73.
75.
77. The integral is the area of the triangle,
79. The integral is the area of the triangle, 9.
81. The integral is the area
83. The integral is the area of the "big" triangle less the "missing" triangle,
85.
87.

89.

91.

93.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         Answer Key 633

95. The integrand is odd; the integral is zero.                  The integral is zero.
97. The integrand is antisymmetric with respect to
99.

101.

103.

105. The integrand is negative over

107.         over        so                 over

109.               Multiply by the length of the interval to get the inequality.

111.
113. when

115.

117.                                  the exact average is between these values.

119.

121.                                                                   The exact answer     so L100 is not accurate.

123.                                                                   The exact answer                  so L100 is not
        accurate to first decimal.

125. Use                     Then,

127.               so divide by the length 2 of the interval.          has period , so yes, it is true.

129. The integral is maximized when one uses the largest interval on which p is nonnegative. Thus,

        and        for some               then since             is continuous, there is an interval containing t0 such that
131. If

                   over the interval  and then                         over this interval.

133. The integral of f over an interval is the same as the integral of the average of f over that interval. Thus,

        Dividing through by         gives the desired identity.
135.

137.                                                so the estimate is accurate to two decimal places.

139. The average is which is equal to the integral in this case.

141. a. The graph is antisymmetric with respect to               over  so the average value is zero. b. For any value of a,

      the graph between               is a shift of the graph over     so the net areas above and below the axis do not

      change and the average remains zero.

143. Yes, the integral over any interval of length 1 is the same.

Section 1.3 Exercises

145. Yes. It is implied by the Mean Value Theorem for Integrals.

147.               average value of over    is

149.

151.

153.
155.
157.
159.
634 Answer Key

161. a. f is positive over       and  negative over            and  and zero over             and      b. The
                                                                                                  and      and it is
      maximum value is 2 and the minimum is -3. c. The average value is 0.

163. a.  is positive over        and  and negative over             b. It is increasing over

      constant over         and       c. Its average value is

165.

167.

169.

171.
173.
175.
177.
179.
181.
183.
185.
187.
189.
191.
193.

195.

197.                                  since       has period 12 and integral 0 over any period. Consumption is equal
                                            when
199. a. The average is                                and when      b. Total consumption is the average rate times
        to the average when
        duration:                                 c.

201. If f is not constant, then its average is strictly smaller than the maximum and larger than the minimum, which are

      attained over         by the extreme value theorem.

203. a.                                                                     b.

205. Mean gravitational force =

Section 1.4 Exercises

207.

209.
211.

213.            so               and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        Answer Key 635

215.

217. With p as in the previous exercise, each of the 12 pentagons increases in area from 2p to 4p units so the net
       increase in the area of the dodecahedron is 36p units.

219.

221.

223.                              The total distance is

225.               For                                   For

                                                         The total distance is

227.                                           m/s
229. The net increase is 1 unit.

231. At       the height of water is           The net change in height from    to  is

                                   m.

233. The total daily power consumption is estimated as the sum of the hourly power rates, or 911 gW-h.
235. 17 kJ
237. a. 54.3%; b. 27.00%; c. The curve in the following plot is

239. In dry conditions, with initial velocity  m/s,      and, if                    In wet conditions, if

              and  and if

241. 225 cal

243.

245. a.

      b. Between 600 and 1000 the average decrease in vehicles per hour per lane is -0.0075. Between 1000 and 1500 it
      is -0.006 per vehicles per hour per lane, and between 1500 and 2100 it is -0.04 vehicles per hour per lane. c.
636 Answer Key

        The graph is nonlinear, with minutes per mile increasing dramatically as vehicles per hour per lane reach 2000.
247.

249. Average acceleration is       mph/s
251.
253.

Section 1.5 Exercises

255.
257.
259.
261.
263.

265.
267.
269.
271.
273.

275.
277.
279.
281.

283.

285.

287.

289.            The exact area is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 637

291.  ... The exact area is 0.

293.

295.

297.
299.

        The antiderivative is  Since the antiderivative is not continuous at  one cannot find a value
       of C that would make          work as a definite integral.
301.
638 Answer Key

        The antiderivative is    You should take  so that
303.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      Answer Key 639

      The antiderivative is                      One should take

305. No, because the integrand is discontinuous at

307.          the integral becomes

309.                         the integral becomes

311.          the integral becomes

      since the integrand is odd.

313. Setting  and                  gets you

315.                                                              As  the limit is  if
                 and the limit diverges to + if

317.
319.

Section 1.6 Exercises

321.
323.
325.
327.
640 Answer Key

329.

331.
333.
335.

337.
339.
341.
343.

345.

347.

349.
351.
353.
355.

357.

359.                                   Since f is decreasing, the right endpoint estimate underestimates the area.
361.                                            Since f is increasing, the right endpoint estimate overestimates the
363.
365.                                        Since f is increasing, the right endpoint estimate overestimates the area
367. Exact solution:

369. Exact solution:
        area.

371. Exact solution:

        (the actual area is a larger negative number).
373.
375.

377.                                          The quantity is less than 0.01 when

379.                                   Then,            Now make the substitution                   so  and
381. 23
383. We may assume that

                and change endpoints:

385. Answers will vary.

387.                   Then,                                     Since any number t can be written      for some x, and for
                                 it follows that for any
       such t we have
389.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             Answer Key 641

Section 1.7 Exercises

391.

393.

395.

397.

399.

401.

403.                           So,          They differ by a constant.

405.  is not defined as a real number when

407.

        The antiderivative is       Taking  recovers the definite integral.
409.
642 Answer Key

        The antiderivative is    Taking  recovers the definite integral.
411.
413.
415.
417.

        The antiderivative is    Taking  recovers the definite integral over
419.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 643

        The general antiderivative is               Taking        recovers the definite integral.
421.

        The general antiderivative is               Taking         recovers the definite integral.
423.
425.
427.
429.
431.

433.               as         

435. Using the hint, one has                                 Set  Then,                               and the

      integral is                                                 If one uses the identity

                              then this can also be written

437.               The left endpoint estimate with           is 4.781 and these decimals persist for

Review Exercises       exact answer: 4
                          exact answer: 5.870
439. False
441. True
443.
445.
447.
449. 1
451.

453.
644 Answer Key

455.

457.
459. $6,328,113
461. $73.36
463.

Chapter 2

Checkpoint

2.1 units2
2.2 unit2

2.3          units2

2.4 units2

2.5 units2

2.7   units3
2.8    units3
2.9      units3
2.10
         units3
2.11     units3
2.12
2.13   units3
2.14     units3
2.15     units3

2.16  units3

2.17 Use the method of washers;

2.18

2.19
2.20

2.21

2.22  ft-lb
2.23
2.24  Approximately              ft-lb
2.25
2.26         N
2.27
2.28  Approximately 7,164,520,000 lb or 3,582,260 t
2.29
                  m
2.30  The centroid of the region is
2.31  The centroid of the region is
2.32  The centroid of the region is
2.33
2.34        units3
2.35
       a.

      b.

2.36
2.37
2.38 a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      Answer Key 645

         b.

2.39
2.40 a.

         b.

2.41

2.42  There are        bacteria in the population after hours. The population reaches million bacteria after

2.43         minutes.
2.44
2.45  At interest, she must invest  At interest, she must invest

2.46         months
2.47
      The coffee is first cool enough to serve about minutes after it is poured. The coffee is too cold to serve about

      minutes after it is poured.

      A total of      g of carbon remains. The artifact is approximately  years old.

      a.

      b.

2.48 a.
         b.

2.49 a.

         b.

2.50 a.

         b.

2.51

Section 2.1 Exercises

 1.
 3.
 5.
 7.

    243 square units
9.
646 Answer Key

      4
11.

13.
15.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 647

17.
19.
21.
648 Answer Key

23.
25.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 649

27.
29.

31.
33.

35.
650 Answer Key

37.

39.
41.
43.
45.

47.

49.             total profit for cell phones sold

51.  mi represents how far ahead the hare is from the tortoise

53.

55.
57.

Section 2.2 Exercises

63. 8 units3

65.  units3

67.           units3

69.

Access for free at openstax.org
                    Answer Key 651

           units3
71.

        units3
73.

            units3
75.
652 Answer Key

               units3
77.

           units3
79.

          units3
81.

Access for free at openstax.org
                      Answer Key 653

              units3
83.

           units3
85.

            units3
87.

         units3
89.
654 Answer Key

            units3
91.

            units3
93.

              units3
95.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               Answer Key 655

           units3
97.

               units3
99.

      units3

101.

103.     units3             units3
      units3           units3
105.
107.     units3                        units3
109.                          units3
111.
113.
656 Answer Key

Section 2.3 Exercises

115.

      units3

117.

      units3

119.

121.     units3
123.  units3
125.  units3
127.  units3
129.  units3
131.
133.   units3
135.   units3
137.
139.   units3
141.   units3
143.  units3
145.

Access for free at openstax.org
                      Answer Key 657

147.          units3

149.  units3
151.

      units3

153.

      units3

155.

      units3

157.

      units3
658 Answer Key

159.         units3
161.
163.      units3
         units3

Section 2.4 Exercises

165.
167.
169.

171.
173.
175.
177.
179.
181.

183.

185.

187.
189.
191.

193.
195.
197.
199.

201.

203.

205.
207.
209.
211. ft
213.
215. Answers may vary
217. For more information, look up Gabriel's Horn.

Section 2.5 Exercises

219.     ft-lb

221.

223. J

225.

227.

229.

231.

233.

235. J

237. cm

239. J

241.         ft-lb

243. Weight

      Work

245.                lb, b.       lbs
247. a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                Answer Key 659

249.  million ft-lb

251.
253. Answers may vary

Section 2.6 Exercises

255.
257.
259.
261.
263.

265.

267.                   volume:
269.
271.
273.
275.
277.
279.
281.
283.
285.
287.
289.

291. Center of mass:

293. Volume:

Section 2.7 Exercises

295.
297.

299.
301.
303.
305.
307.
309.
311.
313.
315.

317.
319.

321.

323.
325.
327.
329.

331.
333.
335.
660 Answer Key

337.
339.
341.

Section 2.8 Exercises

349. True

351. False;

353. hours

355. No. The relic is approximately  years old.

357.         years

359. days hours minutes

361.

363.

365.

367. hours minutes

369.         years

371.                             The population is always increasing.

373. The population reaches billion people in

375.                             The population is always increasing.

Section 2.9 Exercises

377.
379. Answers may vary
381. Answers may vary
383. Answers may vary
385.
387.
389.

391.

393.
395.
397.
399.
401.
403.
405.

407.

409.
411.

413.

415.
417.
419. Answers may vary
421.
423.
425.
427.

Review Exercises

435. False
437. False

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      Answer Key 661

439.
441.

443. a. b.         c.

445. a.        b.            c.
447. a.     b.         c.

449.        center of mass:
451. Mass:

453.

455. Volume: surface area:

457. 11:02 a.m.
459.

Chapter 3

Checkpoint

          
3.1

3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12

3.13

             

3.14

             

3.15

3.16

3.17
3.18
3.19

3.20

3.21 Possible solutions include  and

3.22

3.23
3.24 0.0074, 1.1%
3.25

3.26

3.27 converges
662 Answer Key

3.28  diverges                               diverges.

                                 
3.29 Since

Section 3.1 Exercises

 1.
 3.
 5.
 7.
 9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.

21.
23.
25.
27.

29.
31.
33.

35.

37.
39.

41. 2

43.

45.

47.

49. Answers vary

51. a.                           b.

53. Do not use integration by parts. Choose u to be     and the integral is of the form

55. Do not use integration by parts. Let             and the integral can be put into the form

57. Do not use integration by parts. Choose u to be     and the integral can be put into the form
59. The area under graph is 0.39535.

61.
63. 2.05

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        Answer Key 663

65.
67.

Section 3.2 Exercises

69.
71.

73.

75.

77.

79.

81.   or

83.

85.
87.
89.

91.
93.

95.
97.
99.
101.
103. 0
105. 0
107. 0
109. Approximately 0.239
111.
113. 1.0
115. 0
117.

119.

121.

123.
125. The second integral is more difficult because the first integral is simply a u-substitution type.

Section 3.3 Exercises

127.
129.
131.
133.
135.
137.

139.

141.

143.

145.
664 Answer Key

147.

149.

151.
153.
155.

157.

159.
161.

163.

165.  area of a semicircle with radius 3

167.            is the common answer.

169.            is the result using either method.

171. Use trigonometric substitution. Let
173. 4.367

175.

177.
179. 24.6 m3
181.

Section 3.4 Exercises

183.
185.
187.
189.
191.
193.
195.

197.
199.
201.
203.
205.

207.

209.
211.
213.
215.
217.
219.

221.
223.

225.
227.
229.

Access for free at openstax.org
                       Answer Key 665

231.
233.
235.
237.

239.
241. 2.0 in.2
243.

Section 3.5 Exercises

245.
247.

249.
251.
253.
255.
257.
259.
261.
263.
265.
267.
269.
271.
273.
275. 8.0
277.
279.
281.

283.
285.
287.
289.
291. 1276.14
293. 7.21
295.
297.

Section 3.6 Exercises

299. 0.696
301. 9.484
666 Answer Key

303. 0.5000
305.
307. 0.500
309. 1.129
311. 0.6577
313. 0.0213
315. 1.5629
317. 1.9133
319.
321. 1.0
323. Approximate error is 0.000325.
325.

327.

329. 475

331. 174

333. 0.1544

335. 6.2807

337. 4.606

339. 3.41 ft

341.            absolute error = 0.125

343. about 89,250 m2

345. parabola

Section 3.7 Exercises

347. divergent
349.

351.
353. Converges
355. Converges to 1/2.
357. -4
359.
361. diverges
363. diverges
365. 1.5
367. diverges
369. diverges
371. diverges
373. Both integrals diverge.
375. diverges
377. diverges
379.
381. 0.0
383. 0.0
385. 6.0
387.

389.
391.
393.

395. 7.0
397.

399.
401.
403.

405. Answers will vary.
407. 0.8775

Access for free at openstax.org
                                Answer Key 667

Review Exercises

409. False
411. False

413.
415.

417.

419.

421.

423.

425.

427. approximately 0.2194

431. Answers may vary. Ex:  km

Chapter 4

Checkpoint

4.2
4.3
4.5
4.6
4.7

4.8
668 Answer Key

     The equilibrium solutions are         and  For this equation,  is an unstable equilibrium solution, and

     is a semi-stable equilibrium solution.

4.9

4.10
4.11
4.12 Initial value problem:

4.13 a. Initial value problem

     b.                          minutes.
     c. Approximately

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                Answer Key 669

4.14 a.
         b.

c.

         d. After  months, the population will be     rabbits.
4.15                                             and
4.16
4.17

4.18 a.

b.

c.

                   

4.19 Initial-value problem:

Section 4.1 Exercises

 1.
 3.
 5.
 7.
19.

21.
23.
25.

27.

29.
31.

33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
670 Answer Key

45.

47.                      never

49. Solution changes from increasing to decreasing at

51. Solution changes from increasing to decreasing at

53.

55. ft/s

57.       meters

59.                                hours minute

61.

63.

65.               and

Section 4.2 Exercises

67.

69.       is a stable equilibrium

71.

73.       is a stable equilibrium and  is unstable

75. General solution is            .

Access for free at openstax.org
                            Answer Key 671

77. General solution is  .

79.
81.
672 Answer Key

83.

85. E  exact:
87. A         exact:
89. B
91. A       exact:
93. C     exact:
95.
97.    exact:
99.
101.

103.
105.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    Answer Key 673

107.
109.
111.
113.

          Step Size Relative Error

115.

117.

Section 4.3 Exercises

119.
121.
674 Answer Key

123.
125.
127.
129.
131.
133.
135.
137.
139.
141.
143.

145.

147.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     Answer Key 675

149.

151.

153.  kilograms

155.  seconds

157. hours minutes

159.

161.

163.

165.                          g/cm2
167.

Section 4.4 Exercises

169.

                 semi-stable
171.

173.
175. hours minutes
676 Answer Key

177. years months
179.

181.

            semi-stable
183.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  Answer Key 677

                  stable
185.

                  is semi-stable
187.
189.
678 Answer Key

191.

193. years months
195.

197.  days

199. September

201.

203.            Threshold:       Gompertz:
205.
207. Logistic:

Section 4.5 Exercises

209. Yes

Access for free at openstax.org
                   Answer Key 679

211. Yes  seconds
213.
215.
217.
219.
221.
223.
225.
227.
229.
231.
233.
235.

237.
239.
241.
243.

245.
247.

249.
251.
253.
255.

257.
259.
261.

Review Exercises

263. F
265. T
267.
269.
271.
273.
275.

277.
279.
680 Answer Key

281. Euler:     exact solution:
283. second
285.                                             seconds
287.
289.

Chapter 5                                        for all positive integers The limit comparison test could also

Checkpoint

5.1

5.2
5.3 The sequence converges, and its limit is
5.4 The sequence converges, and its limit is
5.5
5.6
5.7 The series diverges because the partial sum
5.8
5.9
5.10
5.11
5.12 The series diverges.
5.13 The series diverges.
5.14 The series converges.
5.15
5.16 The series converges.
5.17 The series diverges.
5.18 The series converges.
5.19
5.20 The series converges absolutely.
5.21 The series converges.
5.22 The series converges.
5.23 The comparison test because

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Answer Key 681

     be used.

Section 5.1 Exercises

1.   if is odd and     if is even

3.

5.

7.

9.

11.

13.                                  and appear to converge to

15.
17.
19. Terms oscillate above and below

21. Terms oscillate above and below  and appear to converge to a limit.

23.
25.
682 Answer Key

27.

29.

31. bounded, decreasing for

33. bounded, not monotone

35. bounded, decreasing

37. not monotone, not bounded

39. is decreasing and bounded below by        The limit must satisfy             so   independent of the initial

     value.

41.

43.                 and                   so

45. Graph oscillates and suggests no limit.

47.          and                 so
49. Since
51.                              one has                           as 
53.                                                       as 
                    and                   as   so
                                                                 In particular,
                                                                                      so          as 

55.

57.

59. a. Without losses, the population would obey               The subtraction of accounts for fish losses. b.

     After months, we have

61. a. The student owes              after months. b. The loan will be paid in full after months or eleven and a half

     years.

63.                                                so the pattern repeats, and

65. For the starting values                          the corresponding bit averages calculated by the method

     indicated are                                                                    and         Here is an

     example of ten corresponding averages of strings of  bits generated by a random number generator:

                                                                      There is no real pattern in either type of

     average. The random-number-generated averages range between                 and  a range of  whereas

     the calculated PRNG bit averages range between       and         a range of

Section 5.2 Exercises

       
67.

       
69.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 683

71.                                   Series converges to
73.                                                             Series diverges because partial sums are unbounded.
75.
77.                                                                  In general                                      Series

79.
      diverges.

81.

      The pattern is                    and the series converges to
83.
85.

                      

87. diverges,

89. convergent geometric series,
91. convergent geometric series,

       

93.                     converges to

                          converges to
95.

                        

97.

       
99.

101.                           as 

103.                      diverges
         

105.

107.                      and

      

109.

111.
113.

115. converges to                     is a sum of rectangles of height over the interval  which lie above the
        graph of
684 Answer Key

117.                                                                                                   b. The probability of coming
119.
121. a. The probability of any given ordered sequence of outcomes for coin flips is                    which is  The

        up heads for the first time on the th flip is the probability of the sequence
                                                                                                     

      probability of coming up heads for the first time on an even flip is             or

123.                              as can be shown using summation by parts
               

125.

127. The part of the first dose after hours is         the part of the second dose is                  and, in general, the part

      remaining of the dose is                   so

129.

131. Since                        and since                                 If                         for some n, then there is a

      smallest n. For this n,                so                                                            a contradiction. Thus

                 and              for all n, so is increasing and bounded by Let                       If        then

                             but we can find n such that          which implies that

                      contradicting that is increasing to Thus

133. Let                     and    Then eventually becomes arbitrarily close to which means that

                      

                                  becomes arbitrarily small as  

                           
135.

137. At stage one a square of area           is removed, at stage one removes squares of area              at stage three one
        removes squares of area              and so on. The total removed area after stages is

      as          The total perimeter is                        

Section 5.3 Exercises

139.                  Divergence test does not apply.
           

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           Answer Key 685

141.         Series diverges.
           

143.          (does not exist). Series diverges.
           

145.         Series diverges.
           

147.         does not exist. Series diverges.

      

149.         Series diverges.
           

151.         Divergence test does not apply.
           

153. Series converges,
155. Series converges,
157. Series converges,

                                                              
159. Series diverges by comparison with

                                                              
161. Series diverges by comparison with

                                                                
163. Series converges by comparison with

165.         Since             diverges by -series.

167.         Since                               diverges by -series.

             

169.

                                                                                     Estimate agrees with  to
171.
                                           okay if
                                                   okay if
173.

                     
175.

                     
177.

                     
179.

        five decimal places.
                    

181.

                              Estimate agrees with the sum to three decimal places.

183.

185.

187. The expected number of random insertions to get to the top is                   Then one more

      insertion puts back in at random. Thus, the expected number of shuffles to randomize the deck is

189. Set     and               such that is decreasing on 

191. The series converges for  by integral test using change of variable.

193.                          terms are needed.
686 Answer Key

Section 5.4 Exercises

195. Converges by comparison with

197. The sum is one half times a harmonic series, which diverges.

199.                                       Converges by comparison with p-series,

201.                so converges by comparison with p-series,

203.                so converges by comparison with p-series,

205. Since                                                  series converges by comparison with p-series for

207. Converges by limit comparison with p-series for
209. Converges by limit comparison with p-series,
211. Converges by limit comparison with

213. Converges by limit comparison with

215. Diverges by limit comparison with harmonic series.

217. Converges by limit comparison with p-series,

219. Converges by limit comparison with p-series,

221. Diverges by limit comparison with

223. Converges for               by comparison with a series for slightly smaller

225. Converges for all

227. Converges for all           If        then          say, once                 and then the series converges by limit

      comparison with a geometric series with ratio

                                                                                                                                                
229. The numerator is equal to when is odd and when is even, so the series can be rewritten

      which diverges by limit comparison with the harmonic series.

231.                                 or                  so convergence follows from comparison of         with

      Since the partial sums on the left are bounded by those on the right, the inequality holds for the infinite series.

233.                                 If is sufficiently large, then       so                   and the series converges

      by comparison to a

235.            so               for large Convergence follows from limit comparison.          converges, but

                                                                          

      does not, so the fact that           converges does not imply that           converges.

                    diverges. Let          unless        for some Then                         converges.
237. No.

239.                so the result follows from the comparison test.

                                                       

241. By the comparison test,

243. If                                              
                then, by comparison,

245. Yes. Keep adding            weights until the balance tips to the side with the weights. If it balances perfectly, with

      Robert standing on the other side, stop. Otherwise, remove one of the        weights, and add                                               weights one

      at a time. If it balances after adding some of these, stop. Otherwise if it tips to the weights, remove the last

                weight. Start adding             weights. If it balances, stop. If it tips to the side with the weights, remove the

      last          weight that was added. Continue in this way for the            weights, and so on. After a finite

      number of steps, one has a finite series of the form                  where is the number of full kg weights and

         is the number of                weights that were added. If at some state this series is Robert's exact weight, the

      process will stop. Otherwise it represents the partial sum of an infinite series that gives Robert's exact

      weight, and the error of this sum is at most

247. a.                          b.        c.                        d. Group the terms in the deleted harmonic series

      together by number of digits.        bounds the number of terms, and each term is at most

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           Answer Key 687

                          

                                                             One can actually use comparison to estimate the value to smaller than

        The actual value is smaller than                                                   Then
249. Continuing the hint gives                                                   Since

                                                                                                 is bounded by a constant

      times when            one has                                  which converges by comparison to the p-series for

Section 5.5 Exercises

251. Does not converge by divergence test. Terms do not tend to zero.

253. Converges conditionally by alternating series test, since                   is decreasing. Does not converge absolutely by

      comparison with p-series,

255. Converges absolutely by limit comparison to                   for example.

257. Diverges by divergence test since
                                                           

259. Does not converge. Terms do not tend to zero.

261.                       Diverges by divergence test.
           

263. Converges by alternating series test.

265. Converges conditionally by alternating series test. Does not converge absolutely by limit comparison with

      p-series,

267. Diverges; terms do not tend to zero.

269. Converges by alternating series test. Does not converge absolutely by limit comparison with harmonic series.

271. Converges absolutely by limit comparison with p-series,                     after applying the hint.

273. Converges by alternating series test since                                  is decreasing to zero for large Does not

      converge absolutely by limit comparison with harmonic series after applying hint.

275. Converges absolutely, since                             are terms of a telescoping series.

277. Terms do not tend to zero. Series diverges by divergence test.

279. Converges by alternating series test. Does not converge absolutely by limit comparison with harmonic series.

281.

283.              or                                           or

285.                  or

287. True. need not tend to zero since if                            then

289. True.                  so convergence of                      follows from the comparison test.

291. True. If one converges, then so must the other, implying absolute convergence.
                                                                                   

293. Yes. Take        if         and           if              Then              converges. Similarly, one can show

                 converges. Since both series converge, the series must converge absolutely.

295. Not decreasing. Does not converge absolutely.                               which diverges by comparison with
                                                             

297. Not alternating. Can be expressed as

299. Let          if        and            if                Then          for all so the sequence of partial sums of is
                                                                                                                           

      increasing and bounded above by the sequence of partial sums of            which converges; hence,

      converges.

301. For          one has                    When                                                When
                                          When
688 Answer Key

303. Let                         Then              when                        or  and

305. Let        Then                      whereas
                                       so

                The alternating series is more accurate for      terms.

307.

309.      The   partial sum is the same as that for the alternating harmonic series.

311. The series jumps rapidly near the endpoints. For away from the endpoints, the graph looks like

313. Here is a typical result. The top curve consists of partial sums of the harmonic series. The bottom curve plots
        partial sums of a random harmonic series.

315. By the alternating series test,               so one needs  terms of the alternating harmonic series to
                                                                        

      estimate  to within              The first   partial sums of the series      are (up to four decimals)

                                                                                                              and the tenth partial sum is within
          of

Section 5.6 Exercises

317.            Converges.

319.                                   Converges.

321.            Converges.

323.            Converges.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           Answer Key 689

325.           Ratio test is inconclusive.

327.           Converges.

329.                  Diverges.

331.                  Converges.

333.                  Converges.

335.                             Converges.

337.                        by L'Hôpital's rule. Converges.

339.                        Converges by ratio test.

341.           Converges by root test.

343.                  Diverges by root test.

345.                             Converge.

347. Converges by root test and limit comparison test since

349. Converges absolutely by limit comparison with

351.                        Series diverges.
           

353. Terms do not tend to zero:               since

355.                  which converges by comparison with               for

357.                                   converges by comparison with geometric series.

359.                        Series converges by limit comparison with

                                                                                       

361. If                     and        then                     and

363.

365.

367.         

369. All real numbers by the ratio test.
371.

373.           Note that the ratio and root tests are inconclusive. Using the hint, there are      terms   for
                                                                                                               which
                                                                            

                      and for          each term is at least Thus,

      converges by the ratio test for         For     the series diverges by the divergence test.

375. One has                                                    The ratio test does not apply because              if is

      even. However,                   so the series converges according to the previous exercise. Of course, the series is

      just a duplicated geometric series.

377.                                          The inverse of the factor is                                 so the

      product is less than                            Thus for              The series converges for

Review Exercises

379. false
381. true
383. unbounded, not monotone, divergent
385. bounded, monotone, convergent,
387. unbounded, not monotone, divergent
389. diverges
391. converges
393. converges, but not absolutely
395. converges absolutely
397. converges absolutely
399.
690 Answer Key                              The radius of convergence is

401. 

403.
                            

Chapter 6

Checkpoint

6.1 The interval of convergence is
6.2

              with interval of convergence
6.3

6.4 Interval of convergence is
       

6.5                              The interval of convergence is

6.6           The interval of convergence is
6.7

       

6.8

       
6.9

6.10

6.11

6.12
6.13 0.96593

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            Answer Key 691

                         The interval of convergence is
6.14

         
6.15

        By the ratio test, the interval of convergence is        Since             the series converges to

        for all real x.
         
6.16

         
6.17

         
6.18

6.19                               The definite integral is approximately      to within an error of
6.20

               
6.21

6.22 The estimate is approximately       This estimate is accurate to within

Section 6.1 Exercises

1. True. If a series converges then its terms tend to zero.

3. False. It would imply that       for                    If    then          does not tend to zero for any

5. It must converge on         and hence at: a.            b.    c.        d.  e.            and f.

7.                                  so

9.                                        so

11.                                      so

13.              so            so   When                       the series is harmonic and diverges. When    the series is

     alternating harmonic and converges. The interval of convergence is

15.              so          so     When                   the series diverges by the divergence test. The interval of

     convergence is

17.              so      When       the series diverges by the divergence test. The interval of convergence is

19.              so      When       the series is an absolutely convergent p-series. The interval of convergence is

21.                                 so the series converges for all x by the ratio test and               
                                             so
23.              so                           so
                                                                        so
25.                      so

27.                  so
692 Answer Key

29.                                      so

31.     so                                                  so

        

33.                         on

     

35.       on

     

37.                 on

     

39.     on

     

41.             on

43.                                as  and                  when                            converges when
                                                                     Therefore,

     by the nth root test.

45.                 so                      so

47.                     so               so 

                                                 and

49. We can rewrite                                                   since only even powers of remain,  is an even

     function, for which, by definition                 .

51. If          then                                so               
                                                                                converges.

53. Converges on                 by the ratio test
55. Consider the series
                                   where                if  and      otherwise. Then        and so the series
      converges on
57.                         by the comparison test.

     The approximation is more accurate near                The partial sums follow  more closely as N increases but are

      never accurate near          since the series diverges there.
59.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 693

      The approximation appears to stabilize quickly near both
61.

     The polynomial curves have roots close to those of    up to their degree and then the polynomials diverge from

Section 6.2 Exercises

                                                         

63.                    and

                                                                   

65.

67.                                                              

          
69.

71.
694 Answer Key

73.                  where                                      Then                                                When

75. In general,                                                 When                                     When
      when
                                            for N years of payouts, or                       For    and                    one has
77. In general,
79.                                         when                and              when           
81.                                                                                       
                     Thus,

83.              so                                                         and

85.              so                                                    and

                                                        
87. The derivative of is

                                                              
89. The indefinite integral of is

                                                                                                       
                                                                                                  so
91.
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                          so

93.                                                                                                               

95.

                                                                       
                                                                                  
97.

                                                            

99.

101. Term-by-term integration gives

                                                            

                                                                                                                                   
103. We have
                                            so                                   Thus,
                                                

     When        we obtain                                             We have                                      while
                                                                              therefore,
                                                    and
                                                                       The radius of convergence is equal to 1 by the ratio test.
105.                                    
                                   so

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       Answer Key 695

107. If                                              If              then                 when         So the series converges
            then

        for all
109. Answers will vary.
111.

      The solid curve is S5. The dashed curve is S2, dotted is S3, and dash-dotted is S4

                                                                              

113. When                                            Since                                    one has                  whereas
                                                                                          and                          so
                         therefore,

115.                                          One has

            is the smallest partial sum with accuracy to within 0.001. Also,                           while

                                     so       is the smallest N to give accuracy to within 0.00001.

Section 6.3 Exercises                when            so the remainder estimate applies to the linear approximation

117.                         which gives                             while
119.
121.                                     we can use the Taylor expansion of order 9 to estimate ex at    as
123.
125.

127. Using the estimate

                                                            whereas

129. Since                                           One has                                    whereas

131.                                                          whereas
133. Since
135. Since  is           or          we have         Since             we seek the smallest n such that

                         The smallest such value is         The remainder estimate is

                         one has              Since             one seeks the smallest n such that
696 Answer Key                                        The remainder estimate is

        The smallest such value is
137.

      Since  is increasing for small x and since                                 the estimate applies whenever

      which applies up to

139.

      Since the second derivative of                  is    and since    is decreasing away from                the estimate applies
                                                                       
      when                       or
                                                                                which is also
141.

143. Values of derivatives are the same as for              so

                                                          

145.                                 so

147. The derivatives are                               
                                         so

                                                    
149.

151.
153.

                        

155.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     Answer Key 697

                                             

157.

                                       
159.

161.

163.
165.

        The difference is small on the interior of the interval but approaches  near the endpoints. The remainder
        estimate is
167.

      The difference is on the order of  on          while the Taylor approximation error is around near The

      top curve is a plot of             and the lower dashed plot shows

169. a. Answers will vary. b. The following are the  values after  iterations of Newton's method to approximation a
                                                      for
      root of                   for                                             for  (Note:

               c. Answers will vary.

171.

173.
698 Answer Key

Section 6.4 Exercises

                               
175.

                            
177.

                         
179.

                                           

181.                            so
                                  
183.
                    so

185.                 

187.                                       Using, for example, a fourth-degree estimate at                                       gives

189. The approximation is                                                                                               whereas
191. The approximation is
193.                                                Two terms would suffice for three-digit accuracy.
                                           the CAS value is

                                            the CAS value is

                                                               Thus

                                                                                                                                        whereas

195.                                       whereas
                                                               
197.
199. Twice the approximation is
201.

         
203.

                                         
205. For

                  
207.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   Answer Key 699

                        
209.

                       
211.

                      
213.

                    
215.

                    
217.

219.

221.

223.

225. Using the expansion for            gives
                                           by the ratio test.

227.                        so

                          

229.                                    so  by the ratio test.

                                                                                                            
231. Add series of and term by term. Odd terms cancel and

233.

      The ratio           approximates     better than does                                                   for  The dashed
                                        The dotted curve corresponds to
      curves are            for                                          and the dash-dotted curve corresponds

      to         The solid curve is
700 Answer Key

                                                                                                          
235. By the term-by-term differentiation theorem,                                 so                                    whereas

                                           

                                 so

237. The probability is                         where                            and            that is,

239.

      As in the previous problem one obtains    if is odd and                                                 if is even, so
                                                                  so                            implies that
      leads to
                                                                                                                  and
                                              
                                                                                                 whereas
241.                                  and

                                                or                                    for all
                                                          We have
      so                         and

243. a. (Proof) b. We have

                                            so the actual error is approximately
245.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 701

                                                                one has
        Since                         and
                                                                               The sums of the first  nonzero
                                                                the dashed curve.
                                           and
        terms are plotted below with
247.                                       the solid curve and

      whereas

249.                                  seconds. The small angle estimate is                            The relative
                                                    exact
      error is around percent.

251.                    Hence

Review Exercises

253. True    IOC:
255. True     IOC:
257. ROC:
259. ROC:               ROC: IOC:

           
261.

                      

263. integration:

265.
         

267.

         
269.

         
271.

                    
273.

275. Answers may vary.
277.

Chapter 7

Checkpoint

7.1
702 Answer Key

7.2             or      This equation describes a portion of a rectangular hyperbola centered at

7.3 One possibility is                       Another possibility is

     There are, in fact, an infinite number of possibilities.

7.4             and                      so

     This expression is undefined when       and equal to zero when

7.5 The equation of the tangent line is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 703

7.6        Critical points

7.7   (Note that the integral formula actually yields a negative answer. This is due to the fact that is a

      decreasing function over the interval  that is, the curve is traced from right to left.)

7.8

7.9

7.10  and

7.11

7.12
704 Answer Key

      The name of this shape is a cardioid, which we will study further later in this section.

7.13  which is the equation of a parabola opening upward.

7.14 Symmetric with respect to the polar axis.

7.15
7.16
7.17
7.18

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          Answer Key 705

7.19

7.20            This is a vertical hyperbola. Asymptotes

7.21       and  This conic section is an ellipse.
7.22 Here
706 Answer Key

7.23 The conic is a hyperbola and the angle of rotation of the axes is

Section 7.1 Exercises

 1.

      orientation: bottom to top
 3.

      orientation: left to right
 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 707

 7.
 9.
11.
13.
708 Answer Key

15.

     Asymptotes are              and

17.

19.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                Answer Key 709

21.            ; domain:    

23.            domain

25.            domain: all real numbers.

27.                       domain:

29.            domain:

31.            domain:

33.           domain:     

35.           domain:     

37.            domain:

39. line

41. parabola

43. circle

45. ellipse

47. hyperbola

51. The equations represent a cycloid.

53.

55. 22,092 meters at approximately 51 seconds.
57.
710 Answer Key

59.

61.

Section 7.2 Exercises

63. 0
65.
67.
69. Slope is undefined;

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Answer Key 711

71.                                                                        ,

                .

73. No points possible; undefined expression.
75.
77.
79.

81.

83.          and   so the curve is neither concave up nor concave down at  Therefore the graph is linear

      and has a constant slope but no concavity.

85.                the curve is concave down at

87. No horizontal tangents. Vertical tangents at

89.

91. Horizontal     vertical

93. 1

95. 0

97. 4

99. Concave up on

101.
103.
105.
107.
109.

111.
113.
115.

119.
121. 59.101
123.

Section 7.3 Exercises

125.

127.
712 Answer Key

129.

131.

133.
135.
137.
139.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               Answer Key 713

141.

143.

145.

147.

149. Symmetry with respect to the x-axis, y-axis, and origin.

151. Symmetric with respect to x-axis only.

153. Symmetry with respect to x-axis only.

155. Line

157.

159. Hyperbola; polar form                   or

161.

163.
714 Answer Key

165.
167.

Access for free at openstax.org
                        Answer Key 715

       y-axis symmetry
169.

       y-axis symmetry
171.
716 Answer Key

       x- and y-axis symmetry and symmetry about the pole
173.

       x-axis symmetry
175.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    Answer Key 717

       x- and y-axis symmetry and symmetry about the pole
177.

        no symmetry
179.
718 Answer Key

        a line
181.

183.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    Answer Key 719

185.

187. Answers vary. One possibility is the spiral lines become closer together and the total number of spirals increases.

Section 7.4 Exercises

189.
191.
193.
195.
197.
199.
720 Answer Key

201.
203.
205.

207.
209.

211.
213.

215.

217.

219.
221. 32
223. 6.238
225. 2
227. 4.39

229.

231.

233.

235.

237. The slope is

239. The slope is 0.

241. At     the slope is undefined. At  the slope is 0.

243. The slope is undefined at

245. Slope = -1.
247. Slope is

249. Calculator answer: -0.836.

251. Horizontal tangent at

253. Horizontal tangents at             Vertical tangents at  and also at the pole

Section 7.5 Exercises

255.
257.
259.
261.
263.
265.
267.
269.
271.
273.
275.
277.

Access for free at openstax.org
                 Answer Key 721

279.  parabola

281.  ellipse

283.  hyperbola

285.

287.

289.

291.

293.

295.
722 Answer Key

297.
299.
301.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 723

303.

305.

307. Hyperbola
309. Ellipse
311. Ellipse
313. At the point 2.25 feet above the vertex.
724 Answer Key

315. 0.5625 feet
317. Length is 96 feet and height is approximately 26.53 feet.
319.
321.

Review Exercises

323. True.
325. False. Imagine
327.

329.

331.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    Answer Key 725

        Symmetric about polar axis
333.

335.

337.

339.
341.

343.

345.  ellipse

347.
726 Answer Key
Access for free at openstax.org
Index                               cycloid 543                                                                    Index 727

A                                   D                                  geometric sequence 375
                                                                       geometric series 400
absolute convergence 441            deceleration 69                    golden ratio 390
absolute error 280                  definite integral 24               Gompertz equation 355
air resistance 356                  density function 162               growth of bacteria 87
Airy's equation 520                 differential equation 308          growth rate 344
algebraic function 233              direction field (slope field) 319
alternating series 437              directrix 592                      H
alternating series test 439         discriminant 606
angular coordinate 567              disease epidemics 332              half-life 209
annuities 494                       disk method 125                    hanging cables 219
annuity payments 534                displacement 29, 57                harmonic series 398
aphelion 55                         divergence of a series 396         Hooke's law 166
arc length 150                      divergence test 414                Hoover Dam 173
Archimedean spiral 577              divergent sequence 378             hydrostatic pressure 170
Archimedes 6                        doubling time 207                  hypocycloid 543
area density 163                    drugs in the bloodstream 342
area under the curve 16             dummy variable 6, 24               I
arithmetic sequence 375
asymptotically semi-stable          E                                  iceboat 60
solution 321                                                           improper integral 288
asymptotically stable solution 321  Earth's orbit 536                  indefinite integrals 237
asymptotically unstable solution    eccentricity 603                   index 6
321                                 elliptic integral 523              index variable 374
autonomous differential equation    epitrochoid 550                    infinite sequence 374
334                                 equilibrium solution 321           infinite series 396
average value of the function 35    Euler transform 448                initial population 344
                                    Euler's constant 407               initial value 310
B                                   Euler's formula 534                initial velocity 313
                                    Euler's Method 325                 initial-value problem 310
bald eagle 70                       evaluation theorem 46              integrable function 24
binomial series 514                 even function 61                   integral test 415
bounded above 386                   explicit formulas 374              integrand 24
bounded below 386                   exponential decay 207              integrating factor 359
bounded sequence 386                exponential growth 204             integration by parts 232
                                                                       integration by substitution 74
C                                   F                                  integration tables 272
                                                                       interval of convergence 472
carbon dating 209                   fave 35
cardioid 575                        federal income tax 70              J
carrying capacity 345               Fibonacci numbers 389
catenary 219                        focal parameter 604                joule 165
center of mass 178                  focus 592
centroid 181                        Fresnel integrals 529              K
chambered nautilus 535, 576         fruit flies 88
change of variables 75              frustum 154                        Koch's snowflake 403
cissoid of Diocles 591              Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
comparison test 426                 41                                 L
compound interest 205               Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,
computer algebra systems (CAS)      Part 1 43                          lamina 181
272                                 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,   Laplace transform 298, 301
conditional convergence 441         Part 2 46                          left-endpoint approximation 10
conic section 592                                                      Leibniz 24
convergence of a series 396         G                                  limaçon 575
convergent sequence 378                                                limit comparison test 430
coupon collector's problem 425      Gabriel's Horn 290                 limit of the sequence 378
cross-section 119                   general form 594                   limits of integration 24
curtate cycloid 547                 general solution 309               linear 357
cusps 544                                                              logarithmic function 233
                                                                       logistic differential equation 345
                                                                       lower sum 17
728 Index

M                                   polar axis 569                       308
                                    polar coordinate system 566          space-filling curves 544
Maclaurin polynomials 499           polar equations 573                  spring constant 166
Maclaurin series 498                pole 569                             standard form 358, 593
major axis 596                      Population growth 204                step size 324
Mean Value Theorem for Integrals    power reduction formulas 248         summation notation 6
41                                  power series 470                     sums and powers of integers 8
method of cylindrical shells. 140   power-reducing identities 242        Surface area 153
method of equating coefficients     present value 485                    symmetry 578
264                                 price-demand function 85             symmetry principle 181
method of exhaustion 6              probability 291
method of strategic substitution    probability density function 301     T
264                                 prolate cycloid 548
midpoint rule 277                                                        Taylor polynomials 498
minor axis 597                      R                                    Taylor series 498
moment 178                                                               Taylor's theorem with remainder
monotone sequence 387               radial coordinate 567                503
                                    radial density 163                   telescoping series 406
N                                   radius of convergence 472            term 374
                                    Ramanujan 458                        term-by-term differentiation of a
nappes 591                          rate of change 57                    power series 489
net change theorem 57               ratio test 449                       term-by-term integration of a
net signed area 28                  rational functions 262               power series 489
Newton 41                           RC circuit 364                       theorem of Pappus for volume
Newton's law of cooling 208, 339    recurrence relation 374, 374         189
Newton's second law of motion       regular partition 10                 threshold population 352
312                                 relative error 280                   total area 30
nonelementary integral 521          remainder estimate 421               Tour de France 67
numerical integration 276           Riemann sum 16                       traffic accidents 291
                                    Riemann sums 276                     trapezoidal rule 278
O                                   right-endpoint approximation 11      trigonometric integrals 241
                                    root test 452                        trigonometric substitution 250
odd function 61                     rose 575
order of a differential equation                                         U
309                                 S
orientation 538                                                          unbounded sequence 386
                                    separable differential equation      upper sum 17
P                                   334
                                    separation of variables 334          V                        24
p-series 419                        Sierpinski triangle 413                                        412
parameter 537                       sigma notation 6                     variable of integration
parameterization of a curve 542     simple interest 205                  velocity 57
parametric curve 537                Simpson's rule 282                   vertex 592
parametric equations 537            skydiver 50                          von Bertalanffy growth
partial fraction decomposition 262  slicing method 121
partial sum 396                     smooth 150                           W
particular solution 310             solid of revolution 122
partition 10                        solution concentrations 337          washer method 130
Pascal's principle 171              solution curve 320                   wingsuits 51
pascals 170                         solution to a differential equation  witch of Agnesi 545
perihelion 55                                                            work 165
phase line 345

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 729
