Volume 3
Calculus Volume 3

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

GILBERT STRANG, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY
EDWIN "JED" HERMAN, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN AT
STEVENS POINT
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2016 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any
user of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution
as follows:

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
    HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every
    physical page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format
    page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following
    attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-3 in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13        978-1-938168-07-9
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13    978-1-50669-805-2
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13       978-1-947172-16-6
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR     2016
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CJP 24 16
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                         When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                                Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                               Get started at openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-3

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates 7

         Introduction 7
         1.1 Parametric Equations 8
         1.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves 22
         1.3 Polar Coordinates 38
         1.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 55
         1.5 Conic Sections 63
         Chapter Review 84

2 Vectors in Space 89

         Introduction 89
         2.1 Vectors in the Plane 90
         2.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions 109
         2.3 The Dot Product 132
         2.4 The Cross Product 149
         2.5 Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 169
         2.6 Quadric Surfaces 192
         2.7 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 209
         Chapter Review 228

3 Vector-Valued Functions 235

         Introduction 235
         3.1 Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves 235
         3.2 Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 243
         3.3 Arc Length and Curvature 256
         3.4 Motion in Space 274
         Chapter Review 296

4 Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables 301

         Introduction 301
         4.1 Functions of Several Variables 302
         4.2 Limits and Continuity 316
         4.3 Partial Derivatives 330
         4.4 Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 347
         4.5 The Chain Rule 361
         4.6 Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 374
         4.7 Maxima/Minima Problems 386
         4.8 Lagrange Multipliers 402
         Chapter Review 413
5 Multiple Integration 419

         Introduction 419
         5.1 Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 420
         5.2 Double Integrals over General Regions 440
         5.3 Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 464
         5.4 Triple Integrals 484
         5.5 Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 503
         5.6 Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 528
         5.7 Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 545
         Chapter Review 567

6 Vector Calculus 575

Introduction 575                  616
6.1 Vector Fields 576            722
6.2 Line Integrals 593
6.3 Conservative Vector Fields
6.4 Green's Theorem 636
6.5 Divergence and Curl 660
6.6 Surface Integrals 675
6.7 Stokes' Theorem 706
6.8 The Divergence Theorem
Chapter Review 738

7 Second-Order Differential Equations 745

         Introduction 745
         7.1 Second-Order Linear Equations 746
         7.2 Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 758
         7.3 Applications 769
         7.4 Series Solutions of Differential Equations 786
         Chapter Review 794

A Table of Integrals 799
B Table of Derivatives 805
C Review of Pre-Calculus 807

     Answer Key 811
     Index 905

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

Welcome to Calculus Volume 3, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to high-
quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education. Our first
openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 25 books for college and
AP® courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost personalized learning tool, is
being used in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our
alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to
learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax's resources

Customization

Calculus Volume 3 is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-
BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide
attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, do not use the content for commercial purposes, and distribute the
content under the same CC-BY-NC-SA license.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
OpenStax.org for more information.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Calculus Volume 3

Calculus is designed for the typical two- or three-semester general calculus course, incorporating innovative features to
enhance student learning. The book guides students through the core concepts of calculus and helps them understand
how those concepts apply to their lives and the world around them. Due to the comprehensive nature of the material,
we are offering the book in three volumes for flexibility and efficiency. Volume 3 covers parametric equations and polar
coordinates, vectors, functions of several variables, multiple integration, and second-order differential equations.

Coverage and scope

Our Calculus Volume 3 textbook adheres to the scope and sequence of most general calculus courses nationwide. We
have worked to make calculus interesting and accessible to students while maintaining the mathematical rigor inherent
in the subject. With this objective in mind, the content of the three volumes of Calculus have been developed and
arranged to provide a logical progression from fundamental to more advanced concepts, building upon what students
have already learned and emphasizing connections between topics and between theory and applications. The goal of
each section is to enable students not just to recognize concepts, but work with them in ways that will be useful in later
courses and future careers. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and vetted with feedback from
mathematics educators dedicated to the project.

Volume 1
  · Chapter 1: Functions and Graphs
  · Chapter 2: Limits
  · Chapter 3: Derivatives
  · Chapter 4: Applications of Derivatives
2 Preface

       · Chapter 5: Integration
       · Chapter 6: Applications of Integration
    Volume 2
       · Chapter 1: Integration
       · Chapter 2: Applications of Integration
       · Chapter 3: Techniques of Integration
       · Chapter 4: Introduction to Differential Equations
       · Chapter 5: Sequences and Series
       · Chapter 6: Power Series
       · Chapter 7: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates
    Volume 3
       · Chapter 1: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates
       · Chapter 2: Vectors in Space
       · Chapter 3: Vector-Valued Functions
       · Chapter 4: Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables
       · Chapter 5: Multiple Integration
       · Chapter 6: Vector Calculus
       · Chapter 7: Second-Order Differential Equations

   Pedagogical foundation

    Throughout Calculus Volume 3 you will find examples and exercises that present classical ideas and techniques as well as
    modern applications and methods. Derivations and explanations are based on years of classroom experience on the part
    of long-time calculus professors, striving for a balance of clarity and rigor that has proven successful with their students.
    Motivational applications cover important topics in probability, biology, ecology, business, and economics, as well as
    areas of physics, chemistry, engineering, and computer science. Student Projects in each chapter give students
    opportunities to explore interesting sidelights in pure and applied mathematics, from navigating a banked turn to
    adapting a moon landing vehicle for a new mission to Mars. Chapter Opening Applications pose problems that are
    solved later in the chapter, using the ideas covered in that chapter. Problems include the average distance of Halley's
    Comment from the Sun, and the vector field of a hurricane. Definitions, Rules, and Theorems are highlighted
    throughout the text, including over 60 Proofs of theorems.

   Assessments that reinforce key concepts

    In-chapter Examples walk students through problems by posing a question, stepping out a solution, and then asking
    students to practice the skill with a "Checkpoint" question. The book also includes assessments at the end of each
    chapter so students can apply what they've learned through practice problems. Many exercises are marked with a [T] to
    indicate they are suitable for solution by technology, including calculators or Computer Algebra Systems (CAS). Answers
    for selected exercises are available in the Answer Key at the back of the book.

   Early or late transcendentals

    The three volumes of Calculus are designed to accommodate both Early and Late Transcendental approaches to calculus.
    Exponential and logarithmic functions are introduced informally in Chapter 1 of Volume 1 and presented in more
    rigorous terms in Chapter 6 in Volume 1 and Chapter 2 in Volume 2. Differentiation and integration of these functions is
    covered in Chapters 3-5 in Volume 1 and Chapter 1 in Volume 2 for instructors who want to include them with other
    types of functions. These discussions, however, are in separate sections that can be skipped for instructors who prefer to
    wait until the integral definitions are given before teaching the calculus derivations of exponentials and logarithms.

   Comprehensive art program

    Our art program is designed to enhance students' understanding of concepts through clear and effective illustrations,
    diagrams, and photographs.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

Answers to Questions in the Book

Answers to Examples are provided just below the question in the book. All Checkpoint answers are provided in the
Answer Key. Odd-numbered Exercises and Review Exercises questions are provided to students in the Answer Key as well
as the Student Solution Guide on the Student Resources page. Even-numbered answers are provided only to instructors
in the Instructor Answer Guide via the Instructor Resources page.

Additional resources

Student and instructor resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an instructor
solution manual, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you can apply
for when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your
OpenStax book.

Community Hubs

OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer Community
Hubs on OER Commons - a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support OpenStax
books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download resources
to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant course content.
We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research as an
opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty.
To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax (https://www.oercommons.org/hubs/
OpenStax).

Partner resources

OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to
students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access
the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on OpenStax.org.
4 Preface

   About the authors

   Senior contributing authors

    Gilbert Strang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    Dr. Strang received his PhD from UCLA in 1959 and has been teaching mathematics at MIT ever since. His Calculus online
    textbook is one of eleven that he has published and is the basis from which our final product has been derived and
    updated for today's student. Strang is a decorated mathematician and past Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University.

    Edwin "Jed" Herman, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
    Dr. Herman earned a BS in Mathematics from Harvey Mudd College in 1985, an MA in Mathematics from UCLA in 1987,
    and a PhD in Mathematics from the University of Oregon in 1997. He is currently a Professor at the University of
    Wisconsin-Stevens Point. He has more than 20 years of experience teaching college mathematics, is a student research
    mentor, is experienced in course development/design, and is also an avid board game designer and player.

   Contributing authors

    Catherine Abbott, Keuka College
    Nicoleta Virginia Bila, Fayetteville State University
    Sheri J. Boyd, Rollins College
    Joyati Debnath, Winona State University
    Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College
    Joseph Lakey, New Mexico State University
    Julie Levandosky, Framingham State University
    David McCune, William Jewell College
    Michelle Merriweather, Bronxville High School
    Kirsten R. Messer, Colorado State University - Pueblo
    Alfred K. Mulzet, Florida State College at Jacksonville
    William Radulovich (retired), Florida State College at Jacksonville
    Erica M. Rutter, Arizona State University
    David Smith, University of the Virgin Islands
    Elaine A. Terry, Saint Joseph's University
    David Torain, Hampton University

   Reviewers

    Marwan A. Abu-Sawwa, Florida State College at Jacksonville
    Kenneth J. Bernard, Virginia State University
    John Beyers, University of Maryland
    Charles Buehrle, Franklin & Marshall College
    Matthew Cathey, Wofford College
    Michael Cohen, Hofstra University
    William DeSalazar, Broward County School System
    Murray Eisenberg, University of Massachusetts Amherst
    Kristyanna Erickson, Cecil College
    Tiernan Fogarty, Oregon Institute of Technology
    David French, Tidewater Community College
    Marilyn Gloyer, Virginia Commonwealth University
    Shawna Haider, Salt Lake Community College
    Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College
    Jerry Jared, The Blue Ridge School
    Peter Jipsen, Chapman University
    David Johnson, Lehigh University
    M.R. Khadivi, Jackson State University
    Robert J. Krueger, Concordia University
    Tor A. Kwembe, Jackson State University
    Jean-Marie Magnier, Springfield Technical Community College
    Cheryl Chute Miller, SUNY Potsdam
    Bagisa Mukherjee, Penn State University, Worthington Scranton Campus
    Kasso Okoudjou, University of Maryland College Park
    Peter Olszewski, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
    Steven Purtee, Valencia College
    Alice Ramos, Bethel College

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                Preface 5

Doug Shaw, University of Northern Iowa
Hussain Elalaoui-Talibi, Tuskegee University
Jeffrey Taub, Maine Maritime Academy
William Thistleton, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
A. David Trubatch, Montclair State University
Carmen Wright, Jackson State University
Zhenbu Zhang, Jackson State University
6 Preface
     Access for free at openstax.org
                                   1 · Introduction 7

1  PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND POLAR
   COORDINATES

Figure 1.1 The chambered nautilus is a marine animal that lives in the tropical Pacific Ocean. Scientists think they have
existed mostly unchanged for about 500 million years.(credit: modification of work by Jitze Couperus, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Parametric Equations
  1.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves
  1.3 Polar Coordinates
  1.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates
  1.5 Conic Sections

      Introduction

The chambered nautilus is a fascinating creature. This animal feeds on hermit crabs, fish, and other crustaceans. It has a
hard outer shell with many chambers connected in a spiral fashion, and it can retract into its shell to avoid predators.
When part of the shell is cut away, a perfect spiral is revealed, with chambers inside that are somewhat similar to growth
8 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

rings in a tree.

The mathematical function that describes a spiral can be expressed using rectangular (or Cartesian) coordinates.
However, if we change our coordinate system to something that works a bit better with circular patterns, the function
becomes much simpler to describe. The polar coordinate system is well suited for describing curves of this type. How
can we use this coordinate system to describe spirals and other radial figures? (See Example 1.14.)

In this chapter we also study parametric equations, which give us a convenient way to describe curves, or to study the
position of a particle or object in two dimensions as a function of time. We will use parametric equations and polar
coordinates for describing many topics later in this text.

1.1 Parametric Equations

Learning Objectives

      1.1.1 Plot a curve described by parametric equations.
      1.1.2 Convert the parametric equations of a curve into the form
      1.1.3 Recognize the parametric equations of basic curves, such as a line and a circle.
      1.1.4 Recognize the parametric equations of a cycloid.

In this section we examine parametric equations and their graphs. In the two-dimensional coordinate system,

parametric equations are useful for describing curves that are not necessarily functions. The parameter is an

independent variable that both x and y depend on, and as the parameter increases, the values of x and y trace out a path

along a plane curve. For example, if the parameter is t (a common choice), then t might represent time. Then x and y are

defined as functions of time, and                 can describe the position in the plane of a given object as it moves along a

curved path.

Parametric Equations and Their Graphs

Consider the orbit of Earth around the Sun. Our year lasts approximately 365.25 days, but for this discussion we will use
365 days. On January 1 of each year, the physical location of Earth with respect to the Sun is nearly the same, except for
leap years, when the lag introduced by the extra day of orbiting time is built into the calendar. We call January 1 "day 1"
of the year. Then, for example, day 31 is January 31, day 59 is February 28, and so on.

The number of the day in a year can be considered a variable that determines Earth's position in its orbit. As Earth
revolves around the Sun, its physical location changes relative to the Sun. After one full year, we are back where we
started, and a new year begins. According to Kepler's laws of planetary motion, the shape of the orbit is elliptical, with
the Sun at one focus of the ellipse. We study this idea in more detail in Conic Sections.

                                                 Figure 1.2 Earth's orbit around the Sun in one year.
Figure 1.2 depicts Earth's orbit around the Sun during one year. The point labeled is one of the foci of the ellipse; the
other focus is occupied by the Sun. If we superimpose coordinate axes over this graph, then we can assign ordered pairs
to each point on the ellipse (Figure 1.3). Then each x value on the graph is a value of position as a function of time, and
each y value is also a value of position as a function of time. Therefore, each point on the graph corresponds to a value
of Earth's position as a function of time.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        1.1 · Parametric Equations 9

                       Figure 1.3 Coordinate axes superimposed on the orbit of Earth.

We can determine the functions for and      thereby parameterizing the orbit of Earth around the Sun. The

variable is called an independent parameter and, in this context, represents time relative to the beginning of each year.

A curve in the  plane can be represented parametrically. The equations that are used to define the curve are called

parametric equations.

Definition

If x and y are continuous functions of t on an interval I, then the equations

are called parametric equations and t is called the parameter. The set of points  obtained as t varies over the

interval I is called the graph of the parametric equations. The graph of parametric equations is called a parametric

curve or plane curve, and is denoted by C.

Notice in this definition that x and y are used in two ways. The first is as functions of the independent variable t. As t

varies over the interval I, the functions and generate a set of ordered pairs           This set of ordered pairs

generates the graph of the parametric equations. In this second usage, to designate the ordered pairs, x and y are

variables. It is important to distinguish the variables x and y from the functions and

EXAMPLE 1.1

Graphing a Parametrically Defined Curve
Sketch the curves described by the following parametric equations:

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
 a. To create a graph of this curve, first set up a table of values. Since the independent variable in both and is

      t, let t appear in the first column. Then and will appear in the second and third columns of the table.
10 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                   t

                                                   -3 -4 -2

                                                   -2 -3  0

                                                   -1 -2  2

                                                   0 -1   4

                                                   10     6

                                                   21     8

The second and third columns in this table provide a set of points to be plotted. The graph of these points appears
in Figure 1.4. The arrows on the graph indicate the orientation of the graph, that is, the direction that a point
moves on the graph as t varies from -3 to 2.

                            Figure 1.4 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part a.
b. To create a graph of this curve, again set up a table of values.

                                                                           t

                                                   -2 1   -3

                                                   -1 -2 -1

                                                   0 -3   1

                                                   1 -2   3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.1 · Parametric Equations 11

                                          t

                                          21                    5

                                          36                    7

The second and third columns in this table give a set of points to be plotted (Figure 1.5). The first point on the graph

(corresponding to     has coordinates        and the last point (corresponding to      has coordinates

As t progresses from -2 to 3, the point on the curve travels along a parabola. The direction the point moves is

again called the orientation and is indicated on the graph.

Figure 1.5 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part b.

c. In this case, use multiples of for t and create another table of values:

                   t                                         t

                   0  4                0                                           2

                                                                             -2

                                                                             0     -4

                      0                4                                     2

                      -2                                                           2

                                       2                                     4     0

                      -4               0
12 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

            The graph of this plane curve appears in the following graph.

                             Figure 1.6 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part c.
      This is the graph of a circle with radius 4 centered at the origin, with a counterclockwise orientation. The starting
      point and ending points of the curve both have coordinates

       1.1 Sketch the curve described by the parametric equations

Eliminating the Parameter

To better understand the graph of a curve represented parametrically, it is useful to rewrite the two equations as a single
equation relating the variables x and y. Then we can apply any previous knowledge of equations of curves in the plane to
identify the curve. For example, the equations describing the plane curve in Example 1.1b. are

Solving the second equation for t gives

This can be substituted into the first equation:

This equation describes x as a function of y. These steps give an example of eliminating the parameter. The graph of this

function is a parabola opening to the right. Recall that the plane curve started at  and ended at  These

terminations were due to the restriction on the parameter t.

EXAMPLE 1.2

Eliminating the Parameter
Eliminate the parameter for each of the plane curves described by the following parametric equations and describe the
resulting graph.

 a.
b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       1.1 · Parametric Equations 13

    Solution
a. To eliminate the parameter, we can solve either of the equations for t. For example, solving the first equation for t

     gives

Note that when we square both sides it is important to observe that  Substituting       this into
yields

This is the equation of a parabola opening upward. There is, however, a domain restriction because of the limits on

the parameter t. When                                   and when                   The graph of this plane

curve follows.

                            Figure 1.7 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part a.
b. Sometimes it is necessary to be a bit creative in eliminating the parameter. The parametric equations for this

     example are

     Solving either equation for t directly is not advisable because sine and cosine are not one-to-one functions. However,
     dividing the first equation by 4 and the second equation by 3 (and suppressing the t) gives us

Now use the Pythagorean identity  and replace the expressions for                  and  with the

equivalent expressions in terms of x and y. This gives
14 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

            This is the equation of a horizontal ellipse centered at the origin, with semimajor axis 4 and semiminor axis 3 as
            shown in the following graph.

                      Figure 1.8 Graph of the plane curve described by the parametric equations in part b.

As t progresses from to a point on the curve traverses the ellipse once, in a counterclockwise direction. Recall
from the section opener that the orbit of Earth around the Sun is also elliptical. This is a perfect example of using
parameterized curves to model a real-world phenomenon.

1.2 Eliminate the parameter for the plane curve defined by the following parametric equations and describe the
           resulting graph.

So far we have seen the method of eliminating the parameter, assuming we know a set of parametric equations that
describe a plane curve. What if we would like to start with the equation of a curve and determine a pair of parametric
equations for that curve? This is certainly possible, and in fact it is possible to do so in many different ways for a given
curve. The process is known as parameterization of a curve.

EXAMPLE 1.3

Parameterizing a Curve
Find two different pairs of parametric equations to represent the graph of

     Solution                                                     then replacing x with t in the equation for
First, it is always possible to parameterize a curve by defining
This gives the parameterization

Since there is no restriction on the domain in the original graph, there is no restriction on the values of t.

We have complete freedom in the choice for the second parameterization. For example, we can choose

The only thing we need to check is that there are no restrictions imposed on x; that is, the range of is all real

numbers. This is the case for    Now since                        we can substitute  for x. This gives

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1.1 · Parametric Equations 15

Therefore, a second parameterization of the curve can be written as

       1.3 Find two different sets of parametric equations to represent the graph of

Cycloids and Other Parametric Curves

Imagine going on a bicycle ride through the country. The tires stay in contact with the road and rotate in a predictable
pattern. Now suppose a very determined ant is tired after a long day and wants to get home. So he hangs onto the side
of the tire and gets a free ride. The path that this ant travels down a straight road is called a cycloid (Figure 1.9). A cycloid
generated by a circle (or bicycle wheel) of radius a is given by the parametric equations
To see why this is true, consider the path that the center of the wheel takes. The center moves along the x-axis at a
constant height equal to the radius of the wheel. If the radius is a, then the coordinates of the center can be given by the
equations

for any value of Next, consider the ant, which rotates around the center along a circular path. If the bicycle is moving
from left to right then the wheels are rotating in a clockwise direction. A possible parameterization of the circular motion
of the ant (relative to the center of the wheel) is given by

(The negative sign is needed to reverse the orientation of the curve. If the negative sign were not there, we would have
to imagine the wheel rotating counterclockwise.) Adding these equations together gives the equations for the cycloid.

    Figure 1.9 A wheel traveling along a road without slipping; the point on the edge of the wheel traces out a cycloid.
Now suppose that the bicycle wheel doesn't travel along a straight road but instead moves along the inside of a larger
wheel, as in Figure 1.10. In this graph, the green circle is traveling around the blue circle in a counterclockwise direction.
A point on the edge of the green circle traces out the red graph, which is called a hypocycloid.
16 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                          Figure 1.10 Graph of the hypocycloid described by the parametric equations shown.
The general parametric equations for a hypocycloid are

These equations are a bit more complicated, but the derivation is somewhat similar to the equations for the cycloid. In

this case we assume the radius of the larger circle is a and the radius of the smaller circle is b. Then the center of the

wheel travels along a circle of radius             This fact explains the first term in each equation above. The period of the

second trigonometric function in both and is equal to

The ratio is related to the number of cusps on the graph (cusps are the corners or pointed ends of the graph), as

illustrated in Figure 1.11. This ratio can lead to some very interesting graphs, depending on whether or not the ratio is

rational. Figure 1.10 corresponds to               and  The result is a hypocycloid with four cusps. Figure 1.11 shows some

other possibilities. The last two hypocycloids have irrational values for In these cases the hypocycloids have an infinite

number of cusps, so they never return to their starting point. These are examples of what are known as space-filling
curves.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       1.1 · Parametric Equations 17

Figure 1.11 Graph of various hypocycloids corresponding to different values of

STUDENT PROJECT

The Witch of Agnesi
Many plane curves in mathematics are named after the people who first investigated them, like the folium of
Descartes or the spiral of Archimedes. However, perhaps the strangest name for a curve is the witch of Agnesi. Why a
witch?

Maria Gaetana Agnesi (1718-1799) was one of the few recognized women mathematicians of eighteenth-century
Italy. She wrote a popular book on analytic geometry, published in 1748, which included an interesting curve that had
been studied by Fermat in 1630. The mathematician Guido Grandi showed in 1703 how to construct this curve, which
he later called the "versoria," a Latin term for a rope used in sailing. Agnesi used the Italian term for this rope,
"versiera," but in Latin, this same word means a "female goblin." When Agnesi's book was translated into English in
1801, the translator used the term "witch" for the curve, instead of rope. The name "witch of Agnesi" has stuck ever
since.

The witch of Agnesi is a curve defined as follows: Start with a circle of radius a so that the points  and                are

points on the circle (Figure 1.12). Let O denote the origin. Choose any other point A on the circle, and draw the secant

line OA. Let B denote the point at which the line OA intersects the horizontal line through            The vertical line

through B intersects the horizontal line through A at the point P. As the point A varies, the path that the point P

travels is the witch of Agnesi curve for the given circle.

Witch of Agnesi curves have applications in physics, including modeling water waves and distributions of spectral
lines. In probability theory, the curve describes the probability density function of the Cauchy distribution. In this
project you will parameterize these curves.
18 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Figure 1.12 As the point A moves around the circle, the point P traces out the witch of Agnesi curve for the given
circle.

 1. On the figure, label the following points, lengths, and angle:
       a. C is the point on the x-axis with the same x-coordinate as A.
       b. x is the x-coordinate of P, and y is the y-coordinate of P.
       c. E is the point
       d. F is the point on the line segment OA such that the line segment EF is perpendicular to the line segment OA.
       e. b is the distance from O to F.
        f. c is the distance from F to A.
       g. d is the distance from O to B.
       h. is the measure of angle

     The goal of this project is to parameterize the witch using as a parameter. To do this, write equations for x and
     y in terms of only
2. Show that

3. Note that                     Show that         When you do this, you will have parameterized the x-coordinate of

the curve with respect to If you can get a similar equation for y, you will have parameterized the curve.

4. In terms of what is the angle

5. Show that

6. Show that

7. Show that                     You have now parameterized the y-coordinate of the curve with respect to

8. Conclude that a parameterization of the given witch curve is

                                                                   

9. Use your parameterization to show that the given witch curve is the graph of the function

STUDENT PROJECT

Travels with My Ant: The Curtate and Prolate Cycloids
Earlier in this section, we looked at the parametric equations for a cycloid, which is the path a point on the edge of a
wheel traces as the wheel rolls along a straight path. In this project we look at two different variations of the cycloid,
called the curtate and prolate cycloids.

First, let's revisit the derivation of the parametric equations for a cycloid. Recall that we considered a tenacious ant
trying to get home by hanging onto the edge of a bicycle tire. We have assumed the ant climbed onto the tire at the
very edge, where the tire touches the ground. As the wheel rolls, the ant moves with the edge of the tire (Figure 1.13).

As we have discussed, we have a lot of flexibility when parameterizing a curve. In this case we let our parameter t

represent the angle the tire has rotated through. Looking at Figure 1.13, we see that after the tire has rotated

through an angle of t, the position of the center of the wheel,    is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        1.1 · Parametric Equations 19

Furthermore, letting     denote the position of the ant, we note that
Then

Figure 1.13 (a) The ant clings to the edge of the bicycle tire as the tire rolls along the ground. (b) Using geometry to
determine the position of the ant after the tire has rotated through an angle of t.

Note that these are the same parametric representations we had before, but we have now assigned a physical
meaning to the parametric variable t.

After a while the ant is getting dizzy from going round and round on the edge of the tire. So he climbs up one of the

spokes toward the center of the wheel. By climbing toward the center of the wheel, the ant has changed his path of

motion. The new path has less up-and-down motion and is called a curtate cycloid (Figure 1.14). As shown in the

figure, we let b denote the distance along the spoke from the center of the wheel to the ant. As before, we let t

represent the angle the tire has rotated through. Additionally, we let  represent the position of the

center of the wheel and  represent the position of the ant.

Figure 1.14 (a) The ant climbs up one of the spokes toward the center of the wheel. (b) The ant's path of motion after
20 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

he climbs closer to the center of the wheel. This is called a curtate cycloid. (c) The new setup, now that the ant has
moved closer to the center of the wheel.

1. What is the position of the center of the wheel after the tire has rotated through an angle of t?

2. Use geometry to find expressions for            and for

3. On the basis of your answers to parts 1 and 2, what are the parametric equations representing the curtate

cycloid?

Once the ant's head clears, he realizes that the bicyclist has made a turn, and is now traveling away from his

home. So he drops off the bicycle tire and looks around. Fortunately, there is a set of train tracks nearby, headed

back in the right direction. So the ant heads over to the train tracks to wait. After a while, a train goes by, heading

in the right direction, and he manages to jump up and just catch the edge of the train wheel (without getting

squished!).

The ant is still worried about getting dizzy, but the train wheel is slippery and has no spokes to climb, so he

decides to just hang on to the edge of the wheel and hope for the best. Now, train wheels have a flange to keep

the wheel running on the tracks. So, in this case, since the ant is hanging on to the very edge of the flange, the

distance from the center of the wheel to the ant is actually greater than the radius of the wheel (Figure 1.15).

The setup here is essentially the same as when the ant climbed up the spoke on the bicycle wheel. We let b

denote the distance from the center of the wheel to the ant, and we let t represent the angle the tire has rotated

through. Additionally, we let                      represent the position of the center of the wheel and

represent the position of the ant (Figure 1.15).

When the distance from the center of the wheel to the ant is greater than the radius of the wheel, his path of

motion is called a prolate cycloid. A graph of a prolate cycloid is shown in the figure.

         Figure 1.15 (a) The ant is hanging onto the flange of the train wheel. (b) The new setup, now that the ant has
         jumped onto the train wheel. (c) The ant travels along a prolate cycloid.
   4. Using the same approach you used in parts 1- 3, find the parametric equations for the path of motion of the ant.
   5. What do you notice about your answer to part 3 and your answer to part 4?
         Notice that the ant is actually traveling backward at times (the "loops" in the graph), even though the train
        continues to move forward. He is probably going to be really dizzy by the time he gets home!

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     1.1 · Parametric Equations 21

        SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, sketch the curves below by eliminating the parameter t. Give the orientation of the curve.

1.             2.           3.

4.

For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter and sketch the graphs.
5.

For the following exercises, use technology (CAS or calculator) to sketch the parametric equations.

6. [T]         7. [T]       8. [T]

9. [T]

For the following exercises, sketch the parametric equations by eliminating the parameter. Indicate any asymptotes of
the graph.

10.            11.          12.

13.                    14.                                                           15.

16.            17.          18.

19.            20.

For the following exercises, convert the parametric equations of a curve into rectangular form. No sketch is necessary.
State the domain of the rectangular form.

21.            22.              23.

24.            25.          26.

27.            28.          29.

30.            31.          32.

33.            34.          35.

                                                                             where n is a natural

                                                                             number

36.     where  37.          38.

For the following exercises, the pairs of parametric equations represent lines, parabolas, circles, ellipses, or hyperbolas.
Name the type of basic curve that each pair of equations represents.

39.            40.          41.

42.            43.          44.

45.            46.          47.
22 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

48.                              49. Show that                                    50. Use the equations in the

                                                   represents the equation of     preceding problem to find
                                                   a circle.                      a set of parametric
                                                                                  equations for a circle

                                                                                  whose radius is 5 and

                                                                                  whose center is

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph the curve represented by the parametric equations and
identify the curve from its equation.

51. [T]                          52. [T]                                          53. [T]

54. An airplane traveling horizontally             55. The trajectory of a bullet is given by
      at 100 m/s over flat ground at an                  where
      elevation of 4000 meters must                                                  and
      drop an emergency package on a                                            When will the bullet hit
      target on the ground. The                          the ground? How far from the gun will
      trajectory of the package is given                 the bullet hit the ground?
      by
                                                   57. [T] Use technology to sketch
      where the origin is the point on
      the ground directly beneath the
      plane at the moment of release.
      How many horizontal meters
      before the target should the
      package be released in order to hit
      the target?

56. [T] Use technology to sketch the
      curve represented by

58. Sketch the curve known as an                   59. [T] Use technology to
      epitrochoid, which gives the path                  sketch the spiral curve
      of a point on a circle of radius b as              given by
      it rolls on the outside of a circle of
      radius a. The equations are                        from

      Let                                          61. [T] Sketch the curve given
60. [T] Use technology to graph the curve given          by parametric equations

      by the parametric equations                                          where

      This curve is known as the witch of Agnesi.

1.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves

Learning Objectives

      1.2.1 Determine derivatives and equations of tangents for parametric curves.
      1.2.2 Find the area under a parametric curve.
      1.2.3 Use the equation for arc length of a parametric curve.
      1.2.4 Apply the formula for surface area to a volume generated by a parametric curve.

Now that we have introduced the concept of a parameterized curve, our next step is to learn how to work with this
concept in the context of calculus. For example, if we know a parameterization of a given curve, is it possible to calculate
the slope of a tangent line to the curve? How about the arc length of the curve? Or the area under the curve?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 23

Another scenario: Suppose we would like to represent the location of a baseball after the ball leaves a pitcher's hand. If

the position of the baseball is represented by the plane curve       then we should be able to use calculus to find

the speed of the ball at any given time. Furthermore, we should be able to calculate just how far that ball has traveled as

a function of time.

Derivatives of Parametric Equations

We start by asking how to calculate the slope of a line tangent to a parametric curve at a point. Consider the plane curve
defined by the parametric equations

The graph of this curve appears in Figure 1.16. It is a line segment starting at       and ending at

                     Figure 1.16 Graph of the line segment described by the given parametric equations.

We can eliminate the parameter by first solving the equation         for t:

Substituting this into  we obtain

The slope of this line is given by  Next we calculate           and  This gives        and               Notice

that                    This is no coincidence, as outlined in the following theorem.
24 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Theorem 1.1

Derivative of Parametric Equations

Consider the plane curve defined by the parametric equations                and        Suppose that  and

exist, and assume that           Then the derivative is given by

                                                                                                          (1.1)

Proof

This theorem can be proven using the Chain Rule. In particular, assume that the parameter t can be eliminated, yielding

a differentiable function        Then                           Differentiating both sides of this equation using the Chain Rule

yields

so

But            which proves the theorem.



Equation 1.1 can be used to calculate derivatives of plane curves, as well as critical points. Recall that a critical point of a

differentiable function          is any point           such that either           or  does not exist. Equation 1.1

gives a formula for the slope of a tangent line to a curve defined parametrically regardless of whether the curve can be

described by a function          or not.

EXAMPLE 1.4

Finding the Derivative of a Parametric Curve
Calculate the derivative for each of the following parametrically defined plane curves, and locate any critical points
on their respective graphs.

a.
b.
c.

     Solution

a. To apply Equation 1.1, first calculate          and

     Next substitute these into the equation:

     This derivative is undefined when             Calculating   and        gives      and

                                 which corresponds to the point           on the graph. The graph of this curve is a parabola

     opening to the right, and the point           is its vertex as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 25

Figure 1.17 Graph of the parabola described by parametric equations in part a.

b. To apply Equation 1.1, first calculate        and

Next substitute these into the equation:

This derivative is zero when               When       we have

which corresponds to the point             on the graph. When       we have

which corresponds to the point             on the graph. The point  is a relative minimum and the point  is a

relative maximum, as seen in the following graph.

Figure 1.18 Graph of the curve described by parametric equations in part b.

c. To apply Equation 1.1, first calculate        and
26 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

            Next substitute these into the equation:

This derivative is zero when     and is undefined when                   This gives  as critical

points for t. Substituting each of these into         and     we obtain

                                                      05      0

                                                           0  5

                                                           -5 0

                                                           0  -5

                                                           5  0

These points correspond to the sides, top, and bottom of the circle that is represented by the parametric equations
(Figure 1.19). On the left and right edges of the circle, the derivative is undefined, and on the top and bottom, the
derivative equals zero.

Figure 1.19 Graph of the curve described by parametric equations in part c.

1.4 Calculate the derivative     for the plane curve defined by the equations

and locate any critical points on its graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 27

  EXAMPLE 1.5

Finding a Tangent Line
Find the equation of the tangent line to the curve defined by the equations

Solution

First find the slope of the tangent line using Equation 1.1, which means calculating  and

Next substitute these into the equation:

When      so this is the slope of the tangent line. Calculating              and      gives

which corresponds to the point  on the graph (Figure 1.20). Now use the point-slope form of the equation of a line

to find the equation of the tangent line:

         Figure 1.20 Tangent line to the parabola described by the given parametric equations when
1.5 Find the equation of the tangent line to the curve defined by the equations

Second-Order Derivatives

Our next goal is to see how to take the second derivative of a function defined parametrically. The second derivative of a

function  is defined to be the derivative of the first derivative; that is,
28 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Since           we can replace the on both sides of this equation with This gives us

                                                                                                            (1.2)

If we know      as a function of t, then this formula is straightforward to apply.

EXAMPLE 1.6

Finding a Second Derivative                        for the plane curve defined by the parametric equations
Calculate the second derivative

     Solution                                      Using Equation 1.2, we obtain
From Example 1.4 we know that

1.6 Calculate the second derivative                for the plane curve defined by the equations

                  and locate any critical points on its graph.

Integrals Involving Parametric Equations

Now that we have seen how to calculate the derivative of a plane curve, the next question is this: How do we find the
area under a curve defined parametrically? Recall the cycloid defined by the equations

                                                  Suppose we want to find the area of the shaded region in the following graph.

                                     Figure 1.21 Graph of a cycloid with the arch over  highlighted.
To derive a formula for the area under the curve defined by the functions

we assume that  is increasing on the interval      and is differentiable and start with an equal partition of
the interval      Suppose                              and consider the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 29

                                 Figure 1.22 Approximating the area under a parametrically defined curve.  , so an

We use rectangles to approximate the area under the curve. The height of the th rectangle is
approximation to the area is

This follows from results obtained in Calculus 1 for the function
Then a Riemann sum for the area is

Multiplying and dividing each area by          gives

Taking the limit as approaches infinity gives

If is a decreasing function for                      
                                       , a similar derivation will show that the area is given by

This leads to the following theorem.
  Theorem 1.2
  Area under a Parametric Curve
  Consider the non-self-intersecting plane curve defined by the parametric equations

  and assume that is differentiable. The area under this curve is given by

                                                                                                                    (1.3)
30 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

        EXAMPLE 1.7
     Finding the Area under a Parametric Curve
     Find the area under the curve of the cycloid defined by the equations

           Solution
     Using Equation 1.3, we have

       1.7 Find the area under the curve of the hypocycloid defined by the equations

Arc Length of a Parametric Curve

In addition to finding the area under a parametric curve, we sometimes need to find the arc length of a parametric
curve. In the case of a line segment, arc length is the same as the distance between the endpoints. If a particle travels
from point A to point B along a curve, then the distance that particle travels is the arc length. To develop a formula for
arc length, we start with an approximation by line segments as shown in the following graph.

Figure 1.23 Approximation of a curve by line segments.

Given a plane curve defined by the functions                                we start by partitioning the interval  into
n equal subintervals:
calculate the length of each line segment:    The width of each subinterval is given by                            We can

Then add these up. We let s denote the exact arc length and denote the approximation by n line segments:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 31

                                                                                                                     (1.4)

If we assume that and are differentiable functions of t, then the Mean Value Theorem (Introduction to the

Applications of Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-introduction)) applies, so in each

subinterval  there exist and such that

Therefore Equation 1.4 becomes

This is a Riemann sum that approximates the arc length over a partition of the interval  If we further assume that

the derivatives are continuous and let the number of points in the partition increase without bound, the approximation

approaches the exact arc length. This gives

                                             

                                             

When taking the limit, the values of and are both contained within the same ever-shrinking interval of width so
they must converge to the same value.
We can summarize this method in the following theorem.

  Theorem 1.3

  Arc Length of a Parametric Curve
  Consider the plane curve defined by the parametric equations

  and assume that and are differentiable functions of t. Then the arc length of this curve is given by
                                                                                                                                                                 (1.5)

At this point a side derivation leads to a previous formula for arc length. In particular, suppose the parameter can be

eliminated, leading to a function            Then  and the Chain Rule gives

Substituting this into Equation 1.5 gives
32 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Here we have assumed that        which is a reasonable assumption. The Chain Rule gives              and

letting     and                  we obtain the formula

which is the formula for arc length obtained in the Introduction to the Applications of Integration (http://openstax.org/
books/calculus-volume-2/pages/2-introduction).

  EXAMPLE 1.8

Finding the Arc Length of a Parametric Curve
Find the arc length of the semicircle defined by the equations

Solution

The values  to   trace out the red curve in Figure 1.23. To determine its length, use Equation 1.5:

Note that the formula for the arc length of a semicircle is and the radius of this circle is 3. This is a great example of
using calculus to derive a known formula of a geometric quantity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 33

                                  Figure 1.24 The arc length of the semicircle is equal to its radius times

       1.8 Find the arc length of the curve defined by the equations

We now return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section about a baseball leaving a pitcher's hand. Ignoring
the effect of air resistance (unless it is a curve ball!), the ball travels a parabolic path. Assuming the pitcher's hand is at
the origin and the ball travels left to right in the direction of the positive x-axis, the parametric equations for this curve
can be written as

where t represents time. We first calculate the distance the ball travels as a function of time. This distance is represented
by the arc length. We can modify the arc length formula slightly. First rewrite the functions and using v as an
independent variable, so as to eliminate any confusion with the parameter t:

Then we write the arc length formula as follows:

The variable v acts as a dummy variable that disappears after integration, leaving the arc length as a function of time t.
To integrate this expression we can use a formula from Appendix A,

We set  and  This gives  so  Therefore

and
34 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

This function represents the distance traveled by the ball as a function of time. To calculate the speed, take the derivative
of this function with respect to t. While this may seem like a daunting task, it is possible to obtain the answer directly
from the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus:

Therefore

One third of a second after the ball leaves the pitcher's hand, the distance it travels is equal to

This value is just over three quarters of the way to home plate. The speed of the ball is

This speed translates to approximately 95 mph--a major-league fastball.

Surface Area Generated by a Parametric Curve

Recall the problem of finding the surface area of a volume of revolution. In Curve Length and Surface Area

(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/2-4-arc-length-of-a-curve-and-surface-area), we derived a formula

for finding the surface area of a volume generated by a function         from              to        revolved around the

x-axis:

We now consider a volume of revolution generated by revolving a parametrically defined curve
                                         around the x-axis as shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 35

                             Figure 1.25 A surface of revolution generated by a parametrically defined curve.           (1.6)
The analogous formula for a parametrically defined curve is

provided that is not negative on
  EXAMPLE 1.9

Finding Surface Area
Find the surface area of a sphere of radius r centered at the origin.

     Solution
We start with the curve defined by the equations

This generates an upper semicircle of radius r centered at the origin as shown in the following graph.

                                           Figure 1.26 A semicircle generated by parametric equations.

When this curve is revolved around the x-axis, it generates a sphere of radius r. To calculate the surface area of the
sphere, we use Equation 1.6:
36 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

This is, in fact, the formula for the surface area of a sphere.
       1.9 Find the surface area generated when the plane curve defined by the equations
                  is revolved around the x-axis.

        SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, each set of parametric equations represents a line. Without eliminating the parameter, find
the slope of each line.

62.                              63.                                              64.

65.

For the following exercises, determine the slope of the tangent line, then find the equation of the tangent line at the
given value of the parameter.

66.                                                67.                                 68.

69.                                                70.

For the following exercises, find all points on the curve that have the given slope.

71.                              72.

     slope = 0.5

73.                                                74.

For the following exercises, write the equation of the tangent line in Cartesian coordinates for the given parameter t.

75.                                                76.                                 77.

78. For                          79. For                                          80. Find all points on the curve
                                                                                        that have the slope of
     where        Find all                         where  Find all

     values of t at which a                        values of t at which a

     horizontal tangent line                       vertical tangent line exists.

     exists.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1.2 · Calculus of Parametric Curves 37

81. Find for                          82. Find the equation of the            83. For the curve
                                            tangent line to                                                    find the
84. For the parametric curve                                              at
      whose equation is                                                             slope and concavity of the
      find the slope and                                                            curve at
      concavity of the curve at
                                      85. Find the slope and concavity        86. Find all points on the curve
                                            for the curve whose                                                    at
                                            equation is
                                                                                    which there are vertical
                                            at                                      and horizontal tangents.

87. Find all points on the curve
                                  at

      which horizontal and
      vertical tangents exist.

For the following exercises, find

88.                                   89.                                     90.

For the following exercises, find points on the curve at which tangent line is horizontal or vertical.

91.                                   92.

For the following exercises, find          at the value of the parameter.
93.                                        94.
95.

For the following exercises, find          at the given point without eliminating the parameter.
96.
                                      97.                                     98. Find t intervals on which
99. Determine the concavity of
      the curve                                                                    the curve

                                                                                                        is

                                                                                   concave up as well as

                                                                                   concave down.

                                      100. Sketch and find the area under          101. Find the area bounded by
                                              one arch of the cycloid                      the curve

                                                                                   and the lines                         and

102. Find the area enclosed by the         103. Find the area of the region
        ellipse                                    bounded by

                                                   for

For the following exercises, find the area of the regions bounded by the parametric curves and the indicated values of
the parameter.

104.                                       105. [T]

106. [T]                                   107. [T]
        (the "hourglass")                          (the "teardrop")
38 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

For the following exercises, find the arc length of the curve on the indicated interval of the parameter.

108.                                               109.

110.                                               111.

112.                                               113.
        (Use a CAS for this and express the
        answer as a decimal rounded to                    on the interval        (the
        three places.)
                                                          hypocycloid)
114. Find the length of one arch of the
        cycloid                                    115. Find the distance traveled by a

                                                   particle with position        as t

                                                   varies in the given time interval:

116. Find the length of one arch  117. Show that the total length of             118. Find the length of the curve
        of the cycloid                    the ellipse
                                                                           is

                                                   where  and

For the following exercises, find the area of the surface obtained by rotating the given curve about the x-axis.

119.                                    120.

121. [T] Use a CAS to find the area of             122. Find the surface area    123. Find the area of the
        the surface generated by                           obtained by rotating          surface generated by
        rotating                                                                         revolving
                                                           about the y-axis.
        about the x-axis. (Answer to                                                     about the x-axis.
        three decimal places.)

124. Find the surface area
        generated by revolving

        about the y-axis.

1.3 Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      1.3.1 Locate points in a plane by using polar coordinates.
      1.3.2 Convert points between rectangular and polar coordinates.
      1.3.3 Sketch polar curves from given equations.
      1.3.4 Convert equations between rectangular and polar coordinates.
      1.3.5 Identify symmetry in polar curves and equations.

The rectangular coordinate system (or Cartesian plane) provides a means of mapping points to ordered pairs and
ordered pairs to points. This is called a one-to-one mapping from points in the plane to ordered pairs. The polar
coordinate system provides an alternative method of mapping points to ordered pairs. In this section we see that in
some circumstances, polar coordinates can be more useful than rectangular coordinates.

Defining Polar Coordinates

To find the coordinates of a point in the polar coordinate system, consider Figure 1.27. The point has Cartesian

coordinates  The line segment connecting the origin to the point measures the distance from the origin to

and has length The angle between the positive -axis and the line segment has measure This observation suggests

a natural correspondence between the coordinate pair           and the values and This correspondence is the basis of

the polar coordinate system. Note that every point in the Cartesian plane has two values (hence the term ordered pair)

associated with it. In the polar coordinate system, each point also has two values associated with it: and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1.3 · Polar Coordinates 39

                                                Figure 1.27 An arbitrary point in the Cartesian plane.
Using right-triangle trigonometry, the following equations are true for the point

Furthermore,

Each point    in the Cartesian coordinate system can therefore be represented as an ordered pair        in the polar

coordinate system. The first coordinate is called the radial coordinate and the second coordinate is called the angular

coordinate. Every point in the plane can be represented in this form.

Note that the equation  has an infinite number of solutions for any ordered pair                        However, if we restrict

the solutions to values between and then we can assign a unique solution to the quadrant in which the original

point       is located. Then the corresponding value of r is positive, so

Theorem 1.4

Converting Points between Coordinate Systems           and polar coordinates                            the following conversion
Given a point in the plane with Cartesian coordinates                                                                                 (1.7)
formulas hold true:                                                                                                                   (1.8)

These formulas can be used to convert from rectangular to polar or from polar to rectangular coordinates.

  EXAMPLE 1.10

Converting between Rectangular and Polar Coordinates
Convert each of the following points into polar coordinates.

 a.
b.
 c.
d.

Convert each of the following points into rectangular coordinates.

 e.
 f.
40 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

g.

    Solution

a. Use        and       in Equation 1.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as     in polar coordinates.

b. Use        and                in Equation 1.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as     in polar coordinates.

c. Use        and       in Equation 1.8:

    Direct application of the second equation leads to division by zero. Graphing the point  on the rectangular

    coordinate system reveals that the point is located on the positive y-axis. The angle between the positive x-axis and

    the positive y-axis is Therefore this point can be represented as     in polar coordinates.

d. Use             and           in Equation 1.8:

    Therefore this point can be represented as     in polar coordinates.

e. Use        and       in Equation 1.7:

    Therefore this point can be represented as     in rectangular coordinates.

f. Use        and                in Equation 1.7:

    Therefore this point can be represented as     in rectangular coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1.3 · Polar Coordinates 41

g. Use       and  in Equation 1.7:

Therefore this point can be represented as    in rectangular coordinates.

1.10 Convert      into polar coordinates and  into rectangular coordinates.

The polar representation of a point is not unique. For example, the polar coordinates  and  both represent

the point         in the rectangular system. Also, the value of can be negative. Therefore, the point with polar

coordinates       also represents the point  in the rectangular system, as we can see by using Equation 1.8:

Every point in the plane has an infinite number of representations in polar coordinates. However, each point in the plane
has only one representation in the rectangular coordinate system.

Note that the polar representation of a point in the plane also has a visual interpretation. In particular, is the directed
distance that the point lies from the origin, and measures the angle that the line segment from the origin to the point
makes with the positive -axis. Positive angles are measured in a counterclockwise direction and negative angles are
measured in a clockwise direction. The polar coordinate system appears in the following figure.

                  Figure 1.28 The polar coordinate system.

The line segment starting from the center of the graph going to the right (called the positive x-axis in the Cartesian

system) is the polar axis. The center point is the pole, or origin, of the coordinate system, and corresponds to        The
42 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

innermost circle shown in Figure 1.28 contains all points a distance of 1 unit from the pole, and is represented by the

equation  Then                   is the set of points 2 units from the pole, and so on. The line segments emanating from the

pole correspond to fixed angles. To plot a point in the polar coordinate system, start with the angle. If the angle is

positive, then measure the angle from the polar axis in a counterclockwise direction. If it is negative, then measure it

clockwise. If the value of is positive, move that distance along the terminal ray of the angle. If it is negative, move along

the ray that is opposite the terminal ray of the given angle.

EXAMPLE 1.11

Plotting Points in the Polar Plane
Plot each of the following points on the polar plane.

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
The three points are plotted in the following figure.

                                 Figure 1.29 Three points plotted in the polar coordinate system.

1.11 Plot                        and               on the polar plane.

Polar Curves

Now that we know how to plot points in the polar coordinate system, we can discuss how to plot curves. In the

rectangular coordinate system, we can graph a function                  and create a curve in the Cartesian plane. In a similar

fashion, we can graph a curve that is generated by a function

The general idea behind graphing a function in polar coordinates is the same as graphing a function in rectangular
coordinates. Start with a list of values for the independent variable in this case) and calculate the corresponding
values of the dependent variable This process generates a list of ordered pairs, which can be plotted in the polar
coordinate system. Finally, connect the points, and take advantage of any patterns that may appear. The function may be
periodic, for example, which indicates that only a limited number of values for the independent variable are needed.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Plotting a Curve in Polar Coordinates                                   and the second column is for
 1. Create a table with two columns. The first column is for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1.3 · Polar Coordinates 43

2. Create a list of values for

3. Calculate the corresponding values for each

4. Plot each ordered pair       on the coordinate axes.

5. Connect the points and look for a pattern.

MEDIA
Watch this video (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_polarcurves) for more information on sketching polar curves.

EXAMPLE 1.12

Graphing a Function in Polar Coordinates          Identify the curve and rewrite the equation in rectangular
Graph the curve defined by the function
coordinates.

     Solution
Because the function is a multiple of a sine function, it is periodic with period so use values for between 0 and
The result of steps 1-3 appear in the following table. Figure 1.30 shows the graph based on this table.

                                0              0         0

                                                         0
44 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                 Figure 1.30 The graph of the function         is a circle.

This is the graph of a circle. The equation        can be converted into rectangular coordinates by first multiplying

both sides by This gives the equation              Next use the facts that                   and  This gives

              To put this equation into standard form, subtract from both sides of the equation and complete the

square:

This is the equation of a circle with radius 2 and center  in the rectangular coordinate system.

    1.12 Create a graph of the curve defined by the function

The graph in Example 1.12 was that of a circle. The equation of the circle can be transformed into rectangular
coordinates using the coordinate transformation formulas in Equation 1.8. Example 1.14 gives some more examples of
functions for transforming from polar to rectangular coordinates.

EXAMPLE 1.13

Transforming Polar Equations to Rectangular Coordinates
Rewrite each of the following equations in rectangular coordinates and identify the graph.

a.

b.
c.

    Solution

a. Take the tangent of both sides. This gives                           Since  we can replace the left-hand side

    of this equation by This gives                 which can be rewritten as   This is the equation of a straight

    line passing through the origin with slope In general, any polar equation of the form         represents a

    straight line through the pole with slope equal to

b. First, square both sides of the equation. This gives    Next replace with                 This gives the equation

              which is the equation of a circle centered at the origin with radius 3. In general, any polar equation of

    the form  where k is a positive constant represents a circle of radius k centered at the origin. (Note: when

    squaring both sides of an equation it is possible to introduce new points unintentionally. This should always be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     1.3 · Polar Coordinates 45

taken into consideration. However, in this case we do not introduce new points. For example,         is the same

point as

c. Multiply both sides of the equation by This leads to  Next use the formulas

This gives

To put this equation into standard form, first move the variables from the right-hand side of the equation to the left-
hand side, then complete the square.

This is the equation of a circle with center at  and radius 5. Notice that the circle passes through the origin
since the center is 5 units away.

1.13 Rewrite the equation                        in rectangular coordinates and identify its graph.

We have now seen several examples of drawing graphs of curves defined by polar equations. A summary of some
common curves is given in the tables below. In each equation, a and b are arbitrary constants.
46 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                                                   Figure 1.31

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.3 · Polar Coordinates 47

                                             Figure 1.32

A cardioid is a special case of a limaçon (pronounced "lee-mah-son"), in which  or   The rose is a very
                                                                                                  has three
interesting curve. Notice that the graph of  has four petals. However, the graph of

petals as shown.
48 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                                   Figure 1.33 Graph of
     If the coefficient of is even, the graph has twice as many petals as the coefficient. If the coefficient of is odd, then the
     number of petals equals the coefficient. You are encouraged to explore why this happens. Even more interesting graphs
     emerge when the coefficient of is not an integer. For example, if it is rational, then the curve is closed; that is, it
     eventually ends where it started (Figure 1.34(a)). However, if the coefficient is irrational, then the curve never closes
     (Figure 1.34(b)). Although it may appear that the curve is closed, a closer examination reveals that the petals just above
     the positive x axis are slightly thicker. This is because the petal does not quite match up with the starting point.

     Figure 1.34 Polar rose graphs of functions with (a) rational coefficient and (b) irrational coefficient. Note that the rose in
     part (b) does not fill the disk of radius 3 centered at the origin, even though it appears to. To see this, just note that for
     any fixed ray from the origin, there are only a countable number of values of theta for which we get a point on the graph
     along that ray. What we can say, though, is that for any point in the disk, there are points as close as you please to that
     point on the given graph.

        EXAMPLE 1.14
     Chapter Opener: Describing a Spiral
     Recall the chambered nautilus introduced in the chapter opener. This creature displays a spiral when half the outer shell
     is cut away. It is possible to describe a spiral using rectangular coordinates. Figure 1.35 shows a spiral in rectangular
     coordinates. How can we describe this curve mathematically?

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1.3 · Polar Coordinates 49

             Figure 1.35 How can we describe a spiral graph mathematically?

Solution

As the point P travels around the spiral in a counterclockwise direction, its distance d from the origin increases. Assume

that the distance d is a constant multiple k of the angle that the line segment OP makes with the positive x-axis.

Therefore    where is the origin. Now use the distance formula and some trigonometry:

Although this equation describes the spiral, it is not possible to solve it directly for either x or y. However, if we use polar

coordinates, the equation becomes much simpler. In particular,               and is the second coordinate. Therefore

the equation for the spiral becomes  Note that when             we also have  so the spiral emanates from the

origin. We can remove this restriction by adding a constant to the equation. Then the equation for the spiral becomes

           for arbitrary constants and This is referred to as an Archimedean spiral, after the Greek mathematician

Archimedes.

Another type of spiral is the logarithmic spiral, described by the function   A graph of the function

             is given in Figure 1.36. This spiral describes the shell shape of the chambered nautilus.
50 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Figure 1.36 A logarithmic spiral is similar to the shape of the chambered nautilus shell. (credit: modification of work by
Jitze Couperus, Flickr)

Suppose a curve is described in the polar coordinate system via the function           Since we have conversion
formulas from polar to rectangular coordinates given by

it is possible to rewrite these formulas using the function

This step gives a parameterization of the curve in rectangular coordinates using as the parameter. For example, the

spiral formula  from Figure 1.31 becomes

Letting range from  to  generates the entire spiral.

Symmetry in Polar Coordinates

When studying symmetry of functions in rectangular coordinates (i.e., in the form           we talk about symmetry

with respect to the y-axis and symmetry with respect to the origin. In particular, if        for all in the domain

of then is an even function and its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. If        for all in the

domain of then is an odd function and its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. By determining which types

of symmetry a graph exhibits, we can learn more about the shape and appearance of the graph. Symmetry can also

reveal other properties of the function that generates the graph. Symmetry in polar curves works in a similar fashion.

Theorem 1.5

Symmetry in Polar Curves and Equations               in polar coordinates.
Consider a curve generated by the function

i. The curve is symmetric about the polar axis if for every point  on the graph, the point   is also on the

graph. Similarly, the equation                     is unchanged by replacing with

ii. The curve is symmetric about the pole if for every point       on the graph, the point   is also on the

graph. Similarly, the equation                     is unchanged when replacing with or with

iii. The curve is symmetric about the vertical line          if for every point        on the graph, the point   is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         1.3 · Polar Coordinates 51

also on the graph. Similarly, the equation             is unchanged when is replaced by

The following table shows examples of each type of symmetry.

EXAMPLE 1.15

Using Symmetry to Graph a Polar Equation                      and create a graph.
Find the symmetry of the rose defined by the equation

     Solution      is on the graph of
Suppose the point

i. To test for symmetry about the polar axis, first try replacing with This gives

Since this changes the original equation, this test is not satisfied. However, returning to the original equation and

replacing with and with  yields
52 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Multiplying both sides of this equation by gives                    which is the original equation. This demonstrates

that the graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.

ii. To test for symmetry with respect to the pole, first replace with which yields               Multiplying both

sides by -1 gives  which does not agree with the original equation. Therefore the equation does not

pass the test for this symmetry. However, returning to the original equation and replacing with  gives

Since this agrees with the original equation, the graph is symmetric about the pole.

iii. To test for symmetry with respect to the vertical line  first replace both with  and with

Multiplying both sides of this equation by         gives            which is the original equation. Therefore the graph
is symmetric about the vertical line

This graph has symmetry with respect to the polar axis, the origin, and the vertical line going through the pole. To graph
the function, tabulate values of between 0 and and then reflect the resulting graph.

This gives one petal of the rose, as shown in the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.3 · Polar Coordinates 53

      Figure 1.37 The graph of the equation between                        and

Reflecting this image into the other three quadrants gives the entire graph as shown.

      Figure 1.38 The entire graph of the equation is called a four-petaled rose.

      1.14 Determine the symmetry of the graph determined by the equation              and create a graph.

        SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES                                                                                 and then

In the following exercises, plot the point whose polar coordinates are given by first constructing the angle
marking off the distance r along the ray.

125.  126.  127.

128.  129.  130.

131.
54 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

     For the following exercises, consider the polar graph below. Give two sets of polar coordinates for each point.

                                          132. Coordinates of point A.

133. Coordinates of point B.     134. Coordinates of point C.  135. Coordinates of point D.

For the following exercises, the rectangular coordinates of a point are given. Find two sets of polar coordinates for the

point in  Round to three decimal places.

136.                             137.                          138.

139.                             140.                          141.

For the following exercises, find rectangular coordinates for the given point in polar coordinates.

142.                             143.                          144.

145.                             146.                          147.

148.

For the following exercises, determine whether the graphs of the polar equation are symmetric with respect to the
 -axis, the -axis, or the origin.

149.                             150.                          151.

152.                             153.

For the following exercises, describe the graph of each polar equation. Confirm each description by converting into a
rectangular equation.

154.                             155.                          156.

157.

For the following exercises, convert the rectangular equation to polar form and sketch its graph.

158.                             159.                          160.

For the following exercises, convert the rectangular equation to polar form and sketch its graph.

161.                             162.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 55

For the following exercises, convert the polar equation to rectangular form and sketch its graph.

163.                                  164.                              165.

166.

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the polar equation and identify any symmetry.

167.                                  168.                              169.

170.                                  171.                              172.

173.                                  174.                              175.

176.                                  177.                              178. [T] The graph of
                                                                                                             is
179. [T] Use a graphing utility       180. [T] Use a graphing utility
        and sketch the graph of               to graph                          called a strophoid. Use a
                                                                                graphing utility to sketch
                                                                                the graph, and, from the
                                                                                graph, determine the
                                                                                asymptote.

                                                                        181. [T] Use technology to
                                                                                graph

182. [T] Use technology to plot       183. Without using technology,    184. [T] Use a graphing utility
                          (use the            sketch the polar curve
                                                                               to plot        for
        interval
                                      186. [T] There is a curve known   187. [T] Use the results of the
185. [T] Use technology to plot               as the "Black Hole." Use          preceding two problems
                       for                    technology to plot                to explore the graphs of
                                                              for                                 and
                                                                                                   for

1.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      1.4.1 Apply the formula for area of a region in polar coordinates.
      1.4.2 Determine the arc length of a polar curve.

In the rectangular coordinate system, the definite integral provides a way to calculate the area under a curve. In

particular, if we have a function           defined from  to            where           on this interval, the area between

the curve and the x-axis is given by                      This fact, along with the formula for evaluating this integral, is

summarized in the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Similarly, the arc length of this curve is given by

      In this section, we study analogous formulas for area and arc length in the polar coordinate

system.

Areas of Regions Bounded by Polar Curves

We have studied the formulas for area under a curve defined in rectangular coordinates and parametrically defined
curves. Now we turn our attention to deriving a formula for the area of a region bounded by a polar curve. Recall that
the proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus used the concept of a Riemann sum to approximate the area under a
curve by using rectangles. For polar curves we use the Riemann sum again, but the rectangles are replaced by sectors of
a circle.

Consider a curve defined by the function    where                       Our first step is to partition the interval  into n

equal-width subintervals. The width of each subinterval is given by the formula               and the ith partition

point is given by the formula               Each partition point        defines a line with slope                passing through

the pole as shown in the following graph.
56 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                          Figure 1.39 A partition of a typical curve in polar coordinates.

The line segments are connected by arcs of constant radius. This defines sectors whose areas can be calculated by using
a geometric formula. The area of each sector is then used to approximate the area between successive line segments.
We then sum the areas of the sectors to approximate the total area. This approach gives a Riemann sum approximation
for the total area. The formula for the area of a sector of a circle is illustrated in the following figure.

                                 Figure 1.40 The area of a sector of a circle is given by

Recall that the area of a circle is                When measuring angles in radians, 360 degrees is equal to radians.

Therefore a fraction of a circle can be measured by the central angle The fraction of the circle is given by so the

area of the sector is this fraction multiplied by the total area:

Since the radius of a typical sector in Figure 1.39 is given by    the area of the ith sector is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 57

Therefore a Riemann sum that approximates the area is given by

We take the limit as   to get the exact area:

                                                                       
This gives the following theorem.

Theorem 1.6

Area of a Region Bounded by a Polar Curve

Suppose is continuous and nonnegative on the interval                             with      The area of the region
                                                                                                                           (1.9)
bounded by the graph of            between the radial lines                  and        is

EXAMPLE 1.16

Finding an Area of a Polar Region
Find the area of one petal of the rose defined by the equation

     Solution            follows.
The graph of

                                          Figure 1.41 The graph of

When      we have                         The next value for which                is        This can be seen by solving the

equation              for Therefore the values                           to  trace out the first petal of the rose. To find the area

inside this petal, use Equation 1.9 with                                     and
58 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

To evaluate this integral, use the formula           with

1.15 Find the area inside the cardioid defined by the equation

Example 1.16 involved finding the area inside one curve. We can also use Area of a Region Bounded by a Polar Curve to
find the area between two polar curves. However, we often need to find the points of intersection of the curves and
determine which function defines the outer curve or the inner curve between these two points.

EXAMPLE 1.17

Finding the Area between Two Polar Curves          and inside the circle
Find the area outside the cardioid

     Solution
First draw a graph containing both curves as shown.

              Figure 1.42 The region between the curves                   and

To determine the limits of integration, first find the points of intersection by setting the two functions equal to each
other and solving for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 59

This gives the solutions  and         which are the limits of integration. The circle  is the red graph,

which is the outer function, and the cardioid             is the blue graph, which is the inner function. To calculate the

area between the curves, start with the area inside the circle between       and       then subtract the area inside

the cardioid between      and

1.16 Find the area inside the circle            and outside the circle

In Example 1.17 we found the area inside the circle and outside the cardioid by first finding their intersection points.

Notice that solving the equation directly for yielded two solutions:         and       However, in the graph there are

three intersection points. The third intersection point is the origin. The reason why this point did not show up as a
solution is because the origin is on both graphs but for different values of For example, for the cardioid we get

so the values for that solve this equation are            where n is any integer. For the circle we get

The solutions to this equation are of the form  for any integer value of n. These two solution sets have no points in

common. Regardless of this fact, the curves intersect at the origin. This case must always be taken into consideration.

Arc Length in Polar Curves

Here we derive a formula for the arc length of a curve defined in polar coordinates.

In rectangular coordinates, the arc length of a parameterized curve               for  is given by

In polar coordinates we define the curve by the equation              where            In order to adapt the arc length
formula for a polar curve, we use the equations

and we replace the parameter t by Then
60 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

We replace by     and the lower and upper limits of integration are and respectively. Then the arc length formula
becomes

This gives us the following theorem.

Theorem 1.7

Arc Length of a Curve Defined by a Polar Function

Let be a function whose derivative is continuous on an interval       The length of the graph of    from
                                                                                                  (1.10)
      to      is

EXAMPLE 1.18

Finding the Arc Length of a Polar Curve
Find the arc length of the cardioid

Solution

When                             Furthermore, as   goes from  to the cardioid is traced out exactly once. Therefore

these are the limits of integration. Using                       and  Equation 1.10 becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.4 · Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates 61

Next, using the identity           add 1 to both sides and multiply by 2. This gives
                                         so the integral becomes
Substituting  gives

The absolute value is necessary because the cosine is negative for some values in its domain. To resolve this issue,
change the limits from to and double the answer. This strategy works because cosine is positive between and
Thus,

1.17 Find the total arc length of

        SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine a definite integral that represents the area.

188. Region enclosed by       189. Region enclosed by      190. Region in the first
                                                                   quadrant within the
                                                                   cardioid

191. Region enclosed by one   192. Region enclosed by one  193. Region below the polar
        petal of                      petal of                     axis and enclosed by

194. Region in the first      195. Region enclosed by the  196. Region enclosed by the
        quadrant enclosed by          inner loop of                inner loop of
62 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

197. Region enclosed by            198. Region common to                         199. Region common to
                              and

        outside the inner loop

200. Region common to

For the following exercises, find the area of the described region.

201. Enclosed by                   202. Above the polar axis                203. Below the polar axis and
                                           enclosed by                              enclosed by

204. Enclosed by one petal of      205. Enclosed by one petal of            206. Enclosed by

207. Enclosed by the inner         208. Enclosed by                         209. Common interior of
        loop of                                                  and

                                           outside the inner loop

210. Common interior of                            211. Common interior of          212. Inside            and

                                                                                       outside

213. Common interior of

For the following exercises, find a definite integral that represents the arc length.

214.                                                     215.            on the

                                                               interval

216.                                                     217.

For the following exercises, find the length of the curve over the given interval.

218.                                               219.

220.                                                     221.

222.

For the following exercises, use the integration capabilities of a calculator to approximate the length of the curve.

223. [T]                                           224. [T]

225. [T]                                                 226. [T]

227. [T]

For the following exercises, use the familiar formula from geometry to find the area of the region described and then
confirm by using the definite integral.

228.                                                     229.

230.

For the following exercises, use the familiar formula from geometry to find the length of the curve and then confirm
using the definite integral.

231.                                                     232.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.5 · Conic Sections 63

233.                                                    234. Verify that if

                                                                                 then

For the following exercises, find the slope of a tangent line to a polar curve   Let              and

                     so the polar equation              is now written in parametric form.

235. Use the definition of the        236.                                 237.

      derivative

      and the product rule to
      derive the derivative of a
      polar equation.

238.                                  239.                                 240.

241.                 tips of the      242.              tips of the 243.
        leaves                                leaves

244. Find the points on the           245. For the cardioid
                                                                 find the
      interval                    at
                                              slope of the tangent line
      which the cardioid                      when

                     has a

      vertical or horizontal

      tangent line.

For the following exercises, find the slope of the tangent line to the given polar curve at the point given by the value of

246.                                  247.                                 248.

249. [T] Use technology:
                              at

For the following exercises, find the points at which the following polar curves have a horizontal or vertical tangent line.

250.                                  251.                                 252.

253. The cardioid                     254. Show that the curve

                                                        (called a

                                            cissoid of Diocles) has the

                                            line      as a vertical

                                            asymptote.

1.5 Conic Sections

Learning Objectives

      1.5.1 Identify the equation of a parabola in standard form with given focus and directrix.
      1.5.2 Identify the equation of an ellipse in standard form with given foci.
      1.5.3 Identify the equation of a hyperbola in standard form with given foci.
      1.5.4 Recognize a parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola from its eccentricity value.
      1.5.5 Write the polar equation of a conic section with eccentricity .
      1.5.6 Identify when a general equation of degree two is a parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola.

Conic sections have been studied since the time of the ancient Greeks, and were considered to be an important
mathematical concept. As early as 320 BCE, such Greek mathematicians as Menaechmus, Appollonius, and Archimedes
were fascinated by these curves. Appollonius wrote an entire eight-volume treatise on conic sections in which he was, for
example, able to derive a specific method for identifying a conic section through the use of geometry. Since then,
important applications of conic sections have arisen (for example, in astronomy), and the properties of conic sections are
used in radio telescopes, satellite dish receivers, and even architecture. In this section we discuss the three basic conic
sections, some of their properties, and their equations.

Conic sections get their name because they can be generated by intersecting a plane with a cone. A cone has two
identically shaped parts called nappes. One nappe is what most people mean by "cone," having the shape of a party hat.
64 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

     A right circular cone can be generated by revolving a line passing through the origin around the y-axis as shown.

                         Figure 1.43 A cone generated by revolving the line  around the -axis.

Conic sections are generated by the intersection of a plane with a cone (Figure 1.44). If the plane intersects both nappes,

then the conic section is a hyperbola. If the plane is parallel to the generating line, the conic section is a parabola. If the

plane is perpendicular to the axis of revolution, the conic section is a circle. If the plane intersects one nappe at an angle

to the axis (other than  then the conic section is an ellipse.

   Figure 1.44 The four conic sections. Each conic is determined by the angle the plane makes with the axis of the cone.

Parabolas

A parabola is generated when a plane intersects a cone parallel to the generating line. In this case, the plane intersects
only one of the nappes. A parabola can also be defined in terms of distances.

  Definition
  A parabola is the set of all points whose distance from a fixed point, called the focus, is equal to the distance from a
  fixed line, called the directrix. The point halfway between the focus and the directrix is called the vertex of the
  parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    1.5 · Conic Sections 65

A graph of a typical parabola appears in Figure 1.45. Using this diagram in conjunction with the distance formula, we can

derive an equation for a parabola. Recall the distance formula: Given point P with coordinates      and point Q with

coordinates  the distance between them is given by the formula

Then from the definition of a parabola and Figure 1.45, we get

Squaring both sides and simplifying yields

Figure 1.45 A typical parabola in which the distance from the focus to the vertex is represented by the variable

Now suppose we want to relocate the vertex. We use the variables  to denote the coordinates of the vertex. Then if

the focus is directly above the vertex, it has coordinates      and the directrix has the equation  Going

through the same derivation yields the formula                    Solving this equation for y leads to the following

theorem.

Theorem 1.8

Equations for Parabolas                                         and focus located at            where p is a constant,
Given a parabola opening upward with vertex located at                                                                 (1.11)
the equation for the parabola is given by

This is the standard form of a parabola.

We can also study the cases when the parabola opens down or to the left or the right. The equation for each of these
cases can also be written in standard form as shown in the following graphs.
66 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

            Figure 1.46 Four parabolas, opening in various directions, along with their equations in standard form.

In addition, the equation of a parabola can be written in the general form, though in this form the values of h, k, and p
are not immediately recognizable. The general form of a parabola is written as

The first equation represents a parabola that opens either up or down. The second equation represents a parabola that
opens either to the left or to the right. To put the equation into standard form, use the method of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 1.19

Converting the Equation of a Parabola from General into Standard Form

Put the equation                                   into standard form and graph the resulting parabola.

     Solution
Since y is not squared in this equation, we know that the parabola opens either upward or downward. Therefore we need
to solve this equation for y, which will put the equation into standard form. To do that, first add to both sides of the
equation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     1.5 · Conic Sections 67

The next step is to complete the square on the right-hand side. Start by grouping the first two terms on the right-hand
side using parentheses:

Next determine the constant that, when added inside the parentheses, makes the quantity inside the parentheses a

perfect square trinomial. To do this, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives       Add 4 inside the

parentheses and subtract 4 outside the parentheses, so the value of the equation is not changed:

Now combine like terms and factor the quantity inside the parentheses:
Finally, divide by 8:

This equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 1.11 gives                    and  The parabola

opens up, with vertex at  focus at  and directrix  The graph of this parabola appears as follows.

                                    Figure 1.47 The parabola in Example 1.19.

1.18 Put the equation               into standard form and graph the resulting parabola.

The axis of symmetry of a vertical (opening up or down) parabola is a vertical line passing through the vertex. The
parabola has an interesting reflective property. Suppose we have a satellite dish with a parabolic cross section. If a beam
of electromagnetic waves, such as light or radio waves, comes into the dish in a straight line from a satellite (parallel to
the axis of symmetry), then the waves reflect off the dish and collect at the focus of the parabola as shown.
68 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Consider a parabolic dish designed to collect signals from a satellite in space. The dish is aimed directly at the satellite,
and a receiver is located at the focus of the parabola. Radio waves coming in from the satellite are reflected off the
surface of the parabola to the receiver, which collects and decodes the digital signals. This allows a small receiver to
gather signals from a wide angle of sky. Flashlights and headlights in a car work on the same principle, but in reverse:
the source of the light (that is, the light bulb) is located at the focus and the reflecting surface on the parabolic mirror
focuses the beam straight ahead. This allows a small light bulb to illuminate a wide angle of space in front of the
flashlight or car.

Ellipses

An ellipse can also be defined in terms of distances. In the case of an ellipse, there are two foci (plural of focus), and two
directrices (plural of directrix). We look at the directrices in more detail later in this section.

  Definition

  An ellipse is the set of all points for which the sum of their distances from two fixed points (the foci) is constant.

Figure 1.48 A typical ellipse in which the sum of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the foci is constant.

A graph of a typical ellipse is shown in Figure 1.48. In this figure the foci are labeled as and Both are the same fixed

distance from the origin, and this distance is represented by the variable c. Therefore the coordinates of are  and

the coordinates of are           The points and are located at the ends of the major axis of the ellipse, and have

coordinates  and                 respectively. The major axis is always the longest distance across the ellipse, and can be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1.5 · Conic Sections 69

horizontal or vertical. Thus, the length of the major axis in this ellipse is 2a. Furthermore, and are called the vertices

of the ellipse. The points and are located at the ends of the minor axis of the ellipse, and have coordinates

and          respectively. The minor axis is the shortest distance across the ellipse. The minor axis is perpendicular to the

major axis.

According to the definition of the ellipse, we can choose any point on the ellipse and the sum of the distances from this

point to the two foci is constant. Suppose we choose the point P. Since the coordinates of point P are  the sum of

the distances is

Therefore the sum of the distances from an arbitrary point A with coordinates  is also equal to 2a. Using the
distance formula, we get

Subtract the second radical from both sides and square both sides:

Now isolate the radical on the right-hand side and square again:

Isolate the variables on the left-hand side of the equation and the constants on the right-hand side:

Divide both sides by  This gives the equation

If we refer back to Figure 1.48, then the length of each of the two green line segments is equal to a. This is true because

the sum of the distances from the point Q to the foci  is equal to 2a, and the lengths of these two line segments

are equal. This line segment forms a right triangle with hypotenuse length a and leg lengths b and c. From the

Pythagorean theorem,  and                              Therefore the equation of the ellipse becomes

Finally, if the center of the ellipse is moved from the origin to a point  we have the following standard form of an
ellipse.
70 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Theorem 1.9

Equation of an Ellipse in Standard Form

Consider the ellipse with center                   a horizontal major axis with length 2a, and a vertical minor axis with length 2b.

Then the equation of this ellipse in standard form is

                                                                                                                 (1.12)

and the foci are located at       where                The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis is vertical, then the equation of the ellipse becomes

                                                                                                                 (1.13)

and the foci are located at       where                The equations of the directrices in this case are

If the major axis is horizontal, then the ellipse is called horizontal, and if the major axis is vertical, then the ellipse is

called vertical. The equation of an ellipse is in general form if it is in the form                        where A

and B are either both positive or both negative. To convert the equation from general to standard form, use the method

of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 1.20

Finding the Standard Form of an Ellipse             into standard form and graph the resulting ellipse.
Put the equation

     Solution
First subtract 36 from both sides of the equation:

Next group the x terms together and the y terms together, and factor out the common factor:

We need to determine the constant that, when added inside each set of parentheses, results in a perfect square. In the

first set of parentheses, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives   In the second set of

parentheses, take half the coefficient of y and square it. This gives                Add these inside each pair of parentheses.

Since the first set of parentheses has a 9 in front, we are actually adding 36 to the left-hand side. Similarly, we are adding
36 to the second set as well. Therefore the equation becomes

Now factor both sets of parentheses and divide by 36:

The equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 1.14 gives                  and           This is a

vertical ellipse with center at   major axis 6, and minor axis 4. The graph of this ellipse appears as follows.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 1.5 · Conic Sections 71

                       Figure 1.49 The ellipse in Example 1.20.

1.19 Put the equation  into standard form and graph the resulting ellipse.

According to Kepler's first law of planetary motion, the orbit of a planet around the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one
of the foci as shown in Figure 1.50(a). Because Earth's orbit is an ellipse, the distance from the Sun varies throughout the
year. A commonly held misconception is that Earth is closer to the Sun in the summer. In fact, in summer for the
northern hemisphere, Earth is farther from the Sun than during winter. The difference in season is caused by the tilt of
Earth's axis in the orbital plane. Comets that orbit the Sun, such as Halley's Comet, also have elliptical orbits, as do
moons orbiting the planets and satellites orbiting Earth.

Ellipses also have interesting reflective properties: A light ray emanating from one focus passes through the other focus
after mirror reflection in the ellipse. The same thing occurs with a sound wave as well. The National Statuary Hall in the
U.S. Capitol in Washington, DC, is a famous room in an elliptical shape as shown in Figure 1.50(b). This hall served as the
meeting place for the U.S. House of Representatives for almost fifty years. The location of the two foci of this semi-
elliptical room are clearly identified by marks on the floor, and even if the room is full of visitors, when two people stand
on these spots and speak to each other, they can hear each other much more clearly than they can hear someone
standing close by. Legend has it that John Quincy Adams had his desk located on one of the foci and was able to
eavesdrop on everyone else in the House without ever needing to stand. Although this makes a good story, it is unlikely
to be true, because the original ceiling produced so many echoes that the entire room had to be hung with carpets to
dampen the noise. The ceiling was rebuilt in 1902 and only then did the now-famous whispering effect emerge. Another
famous whispering gallery--the site of many marriage proposals--is in Grand Central Station in New York City.

Figure 1.50 (a) Earth's orbit around the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one focus. (b) Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol is a
whispering gallery with an elliptical cross section.

Hyperbolas

A hyperbola can also be defined in terms of distances. In the case of a hyperbola, there are two foci and two directrices.
Hyperbolas also have two asymptotes.
72 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

       Definition
       A hyperbola is the set of all points where the difference between their distances from two fixed points (the foci) is
       constant.

     A graph of a typical hyperbola appears as follows.

Figure 1.51 A typical hyperbola in which the difference of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the foci is
constant. The transverse axis is also called the major axis, and the conjugate axis is also called the minor axis.

The derivation of the equation of a hyperbola in standard form is virtually identical to that of an ellipse. One slight hitch

lies in the definition: The difference between two numbers is always positive. Let P be a point on the hyperbola with

coordinates  Then the definition of the hyperbola gives                                       To simplify the

derivation, assume that P is on the right branch of the hyperbola, so the absolute value bars drop. If it is on the left

branch, then the subtraction is reversed. The vertex of the right branch has coordinates      so

This equation is therefore true for any point on the hyperbola. Returning to the coordinates      for P:

Add the second radical from both sides and square both sides:

Now isolate the radical on the right-hand side and square again:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5 · Conic Sections 73

Isolate the variables on the left-hand side of the equation and the constants on the right-hand side:

Finally, divide both sides by  This gives the equation

We now define b so that             This is possible because  Therefore the equation of the ellipse becomes

Finally, if the center of the hyperbola is moved from the origin to the point  we have the following standard form of
a hyperbola.

Theorem 1.10

Equation of a Hyperbola in Standard Form

Consider the hyperbola with center  a horizontal major axis, and a vertical minor axis. Then the equation of this

ellipse is

                                                                                                      (1.14)

and the foci are located at         where               The equations of the asymptotes are given by

              The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis is vertical, then the equation of the hyperbola becomes

                                                                                                      (1.15)

and the foci are located at         where               The equations of the asymptotes are given by

              The equations of the directrices are

If the major axis (transverse axis) is horizontal, then the hyperbola is called horizontal, and if the major axis is vertical
then the hyperbola is called vertical. The equation of a hyperbola is in general form if it is in the form

                                              where A and B have opposite signs. In order to convert the equation from general to
standard form, use the method of completing the square.

EXAMPLE 1.21

Finding the Standard Form of a Hyperbola      into standard form and graph the resulting hyperbola. What are
Put the equation
the equations of the asymptotes?

     Solution
First add 124 to both sides of the equation:
74 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Next group the x terms together and the y terms together, then factor out the common factors:

We need to determine the constant that, when added inside each set of parentheses, results in a perfect square. In the

first set of parentheses, take half the coefficient of x and square it. This gives        In the second set of

parentheses, take half the coefficient of y and square it. This gives               Add these inside each pair of

parentheses. Since the first set of parentheses has a 9 in front, we are actually adding 36 to the left-hand side. Similarly,
we are subtracting 16 from the second set of parentheses. Therefore the equation becomes

Next factor both sets of parentheses and divide by 144:

The equation is now in standard form. Comparing this to Equation 1.15 gives                    and                 This is a

horizontal hyperbola with center at                and asymptotes given by the equations       The graph of this

hyperbola appears in the following figure.

                                 Figure 1.52 Graph of the hyperbola in Example 1.21.

1.20 Put the equation                                    into standard form and graph the resulting hyperbola.
            What are the equations of the asymptotes?

Hyperbolas also have interesting reflective properties. A ray directed toward one focus of a hyperbola is reflected by a
hyperbolic mirror toward the other focus. This concept is illustrated in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.5 · Conic Sections 75

                                   Figure 1.53 A hyperbolic mirror used to collect light from distant stars.

This property of the hyperbola has important applications. It is used in radio direction finding (since the difference in
signals from two towers is constant along hyperbolas), and in the construction of mirrors inside telescopes (to reflect
light coming from the parabolic mirror to the eyepiece). Another interesting fact about hyperbolas is that for a comet
entering the solar system, if the speed is great enough to escape the Sun's gravitational pull, then the path that the
comet takes as it passes through the solar system is hyperbolic.

Eccentricity and Directrix

An alternative way to describe a conic section involves the directrices, the foci, and a new property called eccentricity. We
will see that the value of the eccentricity of a conic section can uniquely define that conic.

Definition

The eccentricity e of a conic section is defined to be the distance from any point on the conic section to its focus,
divided by the perpendicular distance from that point to the nearest directrix. This value is constant for any conic
section, and can define the conic section as well:

1. If       the conic is a parabola.
2. If       it is an ellipse.
3. If       it is a hyperbola.

The eccentricity of a circle is zero. The directrix of a conic section is the line that, together with the point known as the
focus, serves to define a conic section. Hyperbolas and noncircular ellipses have two foci and two associated
directrices. Parabolas have one focus and one directrix.

The three conic sections with their directrices appear in the following figure.
76 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                    Figure 1.54 The three conic sections with their foci and directrices.

Recall from the definition of a parabola that the distance from any point on the parabola to the focus is equal to the
distance from that same point to the directrix. Therefore, by definition, the eccentricity of a parabola must be 1. The

equations of the directrices of a horizontal ellipse are             The right vertex of the ellipse is located at  and the

right focus is      Therefore the distance from the vertex to the focus is  and the distance from the vertex to the

right directrix is  This gives the eccentricity as

Since  this step proves that the eccentricity of an ellipse is less than 1. The directrices of a horizontal hyperbola are

also located at      and a similar calculation shows that the eccentricity of a hyperbola is also                   However in
this case we have   so the eccentricity of a hyperbola is greater than 1.

EXAMPLE 1.22

Determining Eccentricity of a Conic Section
Determine the eccentricity of the ellipse described by the equation

Solution

From the equation we see that  and                 The value of c can be calculated using the equation              for an

ellipse. Substituting the values of a and b and solving for c gives  Therefore the eccentricity of the ellipse is

1.21 Determine the eccentricity of the hyperbola described by the equation

Polar Equations of Conic Sections

Sometimes it is useful to write or identify the equation of a conic section in polar form. To do this, we need the concept
of the focal parameter. The focal parameter of a conic section p is defined as the distance from a focus to the nearest
directrix. The following table gives the focal parameters for the different types of conics, where a is the length of the
semi-major axis (i.e., half the length of the major axis), c is the distance from the origin to the focus, and e is the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.5 · Conic Sections 77

eccentricity. In the case of a parabola, a represents the distance from the vertex to the focus.

                                         Conic         e              p

   Ellipse

   Parabola
   Hyperbola

                                                   Table 1.1 Eccentricities and Focal Parameters
                                                   of the Conic Sections

Using the definitions of the focal parameter and eccentricity of the conic section, we can derive an equation for any conic
section in polar coordinates. In particular, we assume that one of the foci of a given conic section lies at the pole. Then
using the definition of the various conic sections in terms of distances, it is possible to prove the following theorem.

  Theorem 1.11

  Polar Equation of Conic Sections
  The polar equation of a conic section with focal parameter p is given by

In the equation on the left, the major axis of the conic section is horizontal, and in the equation on the right, the major
axis is vertical. To work with a conic section written in polar form, first make the constant term in the denominator equal
to 1. This can be done by dividing both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the constant that appears
in front of the plus or minus in the denominator. Then the coefficient of the sine or cosine in the denominator is the
eccentricity. This value identifies the conic. If cosine appears in the denominator, then the conic is horizontal. If sine
appears, then the conic is vertical. If both appear then the axes are rotated. The center of the conic is not necessarily at
the origin. The center is at the origin only if the conic is a circle (i.e.,

  EXAMPLE 1.23

Graphing a Conic Section in Polar Coordinates
Identify and create a graph of the conic section described by the equation

     Solution
The constant term in the denominator is 1, so the eccentricity of the conic is 2. This is a hyperbola. The focal parameter p

can be calculated by using the equation         Since     this gives     The cosine function appears in the

denominator, so the hyperbola is horizontal. Pick a few values for and create a table of values. Then we can graph the
hyperbola (Figure 1.55).

0                                               1                        -3
78 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

                                                   3                        3

                                     Figure 1.55 Graph of the hyperbola described in Example 1.23.
    1.22 Identify and create a graph of the conic section described by the equation

General Equations of Degree Two

A general equation of degree two can be written in the form

The graph of an equation of this form is a conic section. If  then the coordinate axes are rotated. To identify the
conic section, we use the discriminant of the conic section            One of the following cases must be true:

1.      If so, the graph is an ellipse.

2.      If so, the graph is a parabola.

3.      If so, the graph is a hyperbola.

The simplest example of a second-degree equation involving a cross term is      This equation can be solved for y to

obtain  The graph of this function is called a rectangular hyperbola as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1.5 · Conic Sections 79

Figure 1.56 Graph of the equation                            The red lines indicate the rotated axes.

The asymptotes of this hyperbola are the x and y coordinate axes. To determine the angle of rotation of the conic

section, we use the formula  In this case                    and  so                                    and

The method for graphing a conic section with rotated axes involves determining the coefficients of the conic in the

rotated coordinate system. The new coefficients are labeled           and are given by the formulas

The procedure for graphing a rotated conic is the following:

 1. Identify the conic section using the discriminant
 2. Determine using the formula
 3. Calculate
 4. Rewrite the original equation using
 5. Draw a graph using the rotated equation.

  EXAMPLE 1.24

Identifying a Rotated Conic
Identify the conic and calculate the angle of rotation of axes for the curve described by the equation

     Solution                              and                    The discriminant of this equation is
In this equation,
                                           Therefore this conic is an ellipse. To calculate the angle of
rotation of the axes, use
                             This gives
80 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

Therefore  and  which is the angle of the rotation of the axes.

To determine the rotated coefficients, use the formulas given above:

The equation of the conic in the rotated coordinate system becomes
A graph of this conic section appears as follows.

Figure 1.57 Graph of the ellipse described by the equation            The axes are rotated
The red dashed lines indicate the rotated axes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               1.5 · Conic Sections 81

      1.23 Identify the conic and calculate the angle of rotation of axes for the curve described by the equation

        SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the parabola using the information given.

255. Focus       and directrix 256. Focus              and                      257. Focus       and

                                            directrix                                 directrix

258. Focus       and directrix 259. Focus              and directrix 260. Focus                  and

                                                                                      directrix

261. Focus       and                  262. Focus       and

      directrix                             directrix

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the ellipse using the information given.

263. Endpoints of major axis at       264. Endpoints of major axis at           265. Endpoints of minor axis at
                            and foci                              and foci                                  and foci

        located at                            located at                                located at

266. Endpoints of major axis at       267. Endpoints of major axis at           268. Endpoints of major axis at
                            and foci                                  and foci                           and foci

        located at                            located at                                located at

269. Foci located at                  270. Foci located at
                            and                                   and

        eccentricity of                       eccentricity of

For the following exercises, determine the equation of the hyperbola using the information given.

271. Vertices located at              272. Vertices located at                  273. Endpoints of the
                            and foci                              and foci              conjugate axis located at
                                                                                                            and foci
        located at                            located at                                located

274. Vertices located at              275. Vertices located at                  276. Endpoints of the
                         and focus                                    and               conjugate axis located at
                                                                                                         and focus
        located at                            focus located at                          located at

277. Foci located at                  278.             and
                            and
                                            eccentricity of 2.5
        eccentricity of 3

For the following exercises, consider the following polar equations of conics. Determine the eccentricity and identify the
conic.

279.                                  280.                                      281.

282.                                  283.                                      284.

For the following exercises, find a polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin and eccentricity and directrix as
given.

285.                                  286.                                      287.

288.
82 1 · Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each conic.

289.                                  290.                                  291.

292.                                  293.                                  294.

295.                                  296.                                  297.

298.                                  299.                                  300.

301.                                  302.                                  303.

304.                                  305.

For the following equations, determine which of the conic sections is described.

306.                                  307.                                  308.

309.                                  310.

311.                                               312. The mirror in an
                                                           automobile headlight has
313. A satellite dish is shaped                            a parabolic cross section,
        like a paraboloid of                               with the lightbulb at the
        revolution. The receiver is                        focus. On a schematic,
        to be located at the focus.                        the equation of the
        If the dish is 12 feet                             parabola is given as
        across at its opening and                                       At what
        4 feet deep at its center,                         coordinates should you
        where should the receiver                          place the lightbulb?
        be placed?
                                      314. Consider the satellite dish      315. A searchlight is shaped
316. Whispering galleries are                 of the preceding problem.             like a paraboloid of
        rooms designed with                   If the dish is 8 feet across          revolution. A light source
        elliptical ceilings. A                at the opening and 2 feet             is located 1 foot from the
        person standing at one                deep, where should we                 base along the axis of
        focus can whisper and be              place the receiver?                   symmetry. If the opening
        heard by a person                                                           of the searchlight is 3 feet
        standing at the other                                                       across, find the depth.
        focus because all the
        sound waves that reach        317. A person is standing 8
        the ceiling are reflected to          feet from the nearest wall
        the other person. If a                in a whispering gallery. If
        whispering gallery has a              that person is at one
        length of 120 feet and the            focus and the other focus
        foci are located 30 feet              is 80 feet away, what is
        from the center, find the             the length and the height
        height of the ceiling at              at the center of the
        the center.                           gallery?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       1.5 · Conic Sections 83

For the following exercises, determine the polar equation form of the orbit given the length of the major axis and
eccentricity for the orbits of the comets or planets. Distance is given in astronomical units (AU).

318. Halley's Comet: length of       319. Hale-Bopp Comet: length     320. Mars: length of major axis
        major axis = 35.88,                  of major axis = 525.91,          = 3.049, eccentricity =
        eccentricity = 0.967                 eccentricity = 0.995             0.0934

321. Jupiter: length of major
        axis = 10.408, eccentricity
        = 0.0484
84 1 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

angular coordinate the angle formed by a line segment connecting the origin to a point in the polar coordinate

system with the positive radial (x) axis, measured counterclockwise

cardioid a plane curve traced by a point on the perimeter of a circle that is rolling around a fixed circle of the same

radius; the equation of a cardioid is                or

conic section a conic section is any curve formed by the intersection of a plane with a cone of two nappes

cusp a pointed end or part where two curves meet

cycloid the curve traced by a point on the rim of a circular wheel as the wheel rolls along a straight line without

slippage

directrix a directrix (plural: directrices) is a line used to construct and define a conic section; a parabola has one

directrix; ellipses and hyperbolas have two

discriminant the value             which is used to identify a conic when the equation contains a term involving is

called a discriminant

eccentricity the eccentricity is defined as the distance from any point on the conic section to its focus divided by the

perpendicular distance from that point to the nearest directrix

focal parameter the focal parameter is the distance from a focus of a conic section to the nearest directrix

focus a focus (plural: foci) is a point used to construct and define a conic section; a parabola has one focus; an ellipse

and a hyperbola have two

general form an equation of a conic section written as a general second-degree equation

limaçon the graph of the equation                or                  If    then the graph is a cardioid

major axis the major axis of a conic section passes through the vertex in the case of a parabola or through the two

vertices in the case of an ellipse or hyperbola; it is also an axis of symmetry of the conic; also called the transverse

axis

minor axis the minor axis is perpendicular to the major axis and intersects the major axis at the center of the conic, or

at the vertex in the case of the parabola; also called the conjugate axis

nappe a nappe is one half of a double cone

orientation the direction that a point moves on a graph as the parameter increases

parameter an independent variable that both x and y depend on in a parametric curve; usually represented by the

variable t

parameterization of a curve rewriting the equation of a curve defined by a function      as parametric equations

parametric curve the graph of the parametric equations and over an interval                      combined with the

equations

parametric equations the equations           and         that define a parametric curve

polar axis the horizontal axis in the polar coordinate system corresponding to

polar coordinate system a system for locating points in the plane. The coordinates are the radial coordinate, and

the angular coordinate

polar equation an equation or function relating the radial coordinate to the angular coordinate in the polar coordinate

system

pole the central point of the polar coordinate system, equivalent to the origin of a Cartesian system

radial coordinate the coordinate in the polar coordinate system that measures the distance from a point in the plane

to the pole

rose graph of the polar equation             or          for a positive constant a

space-filling curve a curve that completely occupies a two-dimensional subset of the real plane

standard form an equation of a conic section showing its properties, such as location of the vertex or lengths of major

and minor axes

vertex a vertex is an extreme point on a conic section; a parabola has one vertex at its turning point. An ellipse has two

vertices, one at each end of the major axis; a hyperbola has two vertices, one at the turning point of each branch

Key Equations

Derivative of parametric equations

Second-order derivative of parametric equations

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1 · Chapter Review 85

Area under a parametric curve

Arc length of a parametric curve

Surface area generated by a parametric curve

Area of a region bounded by a polar curve

Arc length of a polar curve

Key Concepts

1.1 Parametric Equations

· Parametric equations provide a convenient way to describe a curve. A parameter can represent time or some other
    meaningful quantity.

· It is often possible to eliminate the parameter in a parameterized curve to obtain a function or relation describing
    that curve.

· There is always more than one way to parameterize a curve.
· Parametric equations can describe complicated curves that are difficult or perhaps impossible to describe using

    rectangular coordinates.

1.2 Calculus of Parametric Curves

· The derivative of the parametrically defined curve  and  can be calculated using the formula

Using the derivative, we can find the equation of a tangent line to a parametric curve.

· The area between a parametric curve and the x-axis can be determined by using the formula

· The arc length of a parametric curve can be calculated by using the formula
· The surface area of a volume of revolution revolved around the x-axis is given by

                                                               If the curve is revolved around the y-axis, then the formula is

1.3 Polar Coordinates

  · The polar coordinate system provides an alternative way to locate points in the plane.
  · Convert points between rectangular and polar coordinates using the formulas

      and

  · To sketch a polar curve from a given polar function, make a table of values and take advantage of periodic
      properties.

  · Use the conversion formulas to convert equations between rectangular and polar coordinates.
86 1 · Chapter Review

· Identify symmetry in polar curves, which can occur through the pole, the horizontal axis, or the vertical axis.

1.4 Area and Arc Length in Polar Coordinates

· The area of a region in polar coordinates defined by the equation                with         is given by the integral

· To find the area between two curves in the polar coordinate system, first find the points of intersection, then

      subtract the corresponding areas.

· The arc length of a polar curve defined by the equation               with             is given by the integral

1.5 Conic Sections

· The equation of a vertical parabola in standard form with given focus and directrix is                           where p is

      the distance from the vertex to the focus and        are the coordinates of the vertex.

· The equation of a horizontal ellipse in standard form is                         where the center has coordinates

               the major axis has length 2a, the minor axis has length 2b, and the coordinates of the foci are
      where

· The equation of a horizontal hyperbola in standard form is                             where the center has coordinates

      the vertices are located at            and the coordinates of the foci are                where

· The eccentricity of an ellipse is less than 1, the eccentricity of a parabola is equal to 1, and the eccentricity of a

      hyperbola is greater than 1. The eccentricity of a circle is 0.

· The polar equation of a conic section with eccentricity e is                 or               where p represents the

      focal parameter.

· To identify a conic generated by the equation                                                    first calculate the
                                                                                   then the conic is a parabola, and if
      discriminant                     If    then the conic is an ellipse, if

      then the conic is a hyperbola.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

322. The rectangular                   323. The equations               324. The arc length of the
        coordinates of the point
                                                                               spiral given by      for
                    are
                                                           represent a                   is

                                             hyperbola.

325. Given               and
                     if          then

        is a constant.    where C

For the following exercises, sketch the parametric curve and eliminate the parameter to find the Cartesian equation of
the curve.

326.                                   327.                             328.

329.

For the following exercises, sketch the polar curve and determine what type of symmetry exists, if any.

330.                                   331.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        1 · Chapter Review 87

For the following exercises, find the polar equation for the curve given as a Cartesian equation.

332.                                333.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the tangent line to the given curve. Graph both the function and its
tangent line.

334.                                335.                                 336. Find          and    of

For the following exercises, find the area of the region.

337.                                338.                   in the first

                                          quadrant

For the following exercises, find the arc length of the curve over the given interval.

339.                                340.

                                          Check your answer by

                                          geometry.

For the following exercises, find the Cartesian equation describing the given shapes.

341. A parabola with focus          342. An ellipse with a major         343. A hyperbola with vertices
                  and directrix
                                          axis length of 10 and foci           at       and

                                          at        and                        and foci at         and

For the following exercises, determine the eccentricity and identify the conic. Sketch the conic.

344.                                345.                                 346.

347. Determine the Cartesian        348. The C/1980 E1 comet was
        equation describing the             observed in 1980. Given
        orbit of Pluto, the most            an eccentricity of 1.057
        eccentric orbit around the          and a perihelion (point of
        Sun. The length of the              closest approach to the
        major axis is 39.26 AU              Sun) of 3.364 AU, find the
        and minor axis is 38.07             Cartesian equations
        AU. What is the                     describing the comet's
        eccentricity?                       trajectory. Are we
                                            guaranteed to see this
                                            comet again? (Hint:
                                            Consider the Sun at point
88 1 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2 · Introduction 89

2         VECTORS IN SPACE

Figure 2.1 The Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array, located in Socorro, New Mexico, consists of a large number of radio
telescopes that can collect radio waves and collate them as if they were gathering waves over a huge area with no gaps
in coverage. (credit: modification of work by CGP Grey, Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Vectors in the Plane
  2.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions
  2.3 The Dot Product
  2.4 The Cross Product
  2.5 Equations of Lines and Planes in Space
  2.6 Quadric Surfaces
  2.7 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates

      Introduction

Modern astronomical observatories often consist of a large number of parabolic reflectors, connected by computers,
used to analyze radio waves. Each dish focuses the incoming parallel beams of radio waves to a precise focal point,
where they can be synchronized by computer. If the surface of one of the parabolic reflectors is described by the

equation  where is the focal point of the reflector? (See Example 2.58.)

We are now about to begin a new part of the calculus course, when we study functions of two or three independent
variables in multidimensional space. Many of the computations are similar to those in the study of single-variable
functions, but there are also a lot of differences. In this first chapter, we examine coordinate systems for working in
three-dimensional space, along with vectors, which are a key mathematical tool for dealing with quantities in more than
one dimension. Let's start here with the basic ideas and work our way up to the more general and powerful tools of
mathematics in later chapters.
90 2 · Vectors in Space

   2.1 Vectors in the Plane

    Learning Objectives

            2.1.1 Describe a plane vector, using correct notation.
            2.1.2 Perform basic vector operations (scalar multiplication, addition, subtraction).
            2.1.3 Express a vector in component form.
            2.1.4 Explain the formula for the magnitude of a vector.
            2.1.5 Express a vector in terms of unit vectors.
            2.1.6 Give two examples of vector quantities.
     When describing the movement of an airplane in flight, it is important to communicate two pieces of information: the
     direction in which the plane is traveling and the plane's speed. When measuring a force, such as the thrust of the plane's
     engines, it is important to describe not only the strength of that force, but also the direction in which it is applied. Some
     quantities, such as velocity or force, are defined in terms of both size (also called magnitude) and direction. A quantity
     that has magnitude and direction is called a vector. In this text, we denote vectors by boldface letters, such as v.

        Definition

        A vector is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction.

    Vector Representation

     A vector in a plane is represented by a directed line segment (an arrow). The endpoints of the segment are called the
     initial point and the terminal point of the vector. An arrow from the initial point to the terminal point indicates the
     direction of the vector. The length of the line segment represents its magnitude. We use the notation to denote the
     magnitude of the vector A vector with an initial point and terminal point that are the same is called the zero vector,
     denoted The zero vector is the only vector without a direction, and by convention can be considered to have any
     direction convenient to the problem at hand.
     Vectors with the same magnitude and direction are called equivalent vectors. We treat equivalent vectors as equal, even
     if they have different initial points. Thus, if and are equivalent, we write

        Definition

        Vectors are said to be equivalent vectors if they have the same magnitude and direction.

     The arrows in Figure 2.2(b) are equivalent. Each arrow has the same length and direction. A closely related concept is the
     idea of parallel vectors. Two vectors are said to be parallel if they have the same or opposite directions. We explore this
     idea in more detail later in the chapter. A vector is defined by its magnitude and direction, regardless of where its initial
     point is located.

     Figure 2.2 (a) A vector is represented by a directed line segment from its initial point to its terminal point. (b) Vectors
     through are equivalent.
     The use of boldface, lowercase letters to name vectors is a common representation in print, but there are alternative
     notations. When writing the name of a vector by hand, for example, it is easier to sketch an arrow over the variable than
     to simulate boldface type: When a vector has initial point and terminal point the notation is useful because it

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 91

indicates the direction and location of the vector.

EXAMPLE 2.1

Sketching Vectors                                    to terminal point
Sketch a vector in the plane from initial point

     Solution                                        to point  we name it
See Figure 2.3. Because the vector goes from point

             Figure 2.3 The vector with initial point          and terminal point  is named

2.1 Sketch the vector where is point                   and is point

Combining Vectors

Vectors have many real-life applications, including situations involving force or velocity. For example, consider the forces
acting on a boat crossing a river. The boat's motor generates a force in one direction, and the current of the river
generates a force in another direction. Both forces are vectors. We must take both the magnitude and direction of each
force into account if we want to know where the boat will go.

A second example that involves vectors is a quarterback throwing a football. The quarterback does not throw the ball
parallel to the ground; instead, he aims up into the air. The velocity of his throw can be represented by a vector. If we
know how hard he throws the ball (magnitude--in this case, speed), and the angle (direction), we can tell how far the ball
will travel down the field.

A real number is often called a scalar in mathematics and physics. Unlike vectors, scalars are generally considered to
have a magnitude only, but no direction. Multiplying a vector by a scalar changes the vector's magnitude. This is called
scalar multiplication. Note that changing the magnitude of a vector does not indicate a change in its direction. For
example, wind blowing from north to south might increase or decrease in speed while maintaining its direction from
north to south.

Definition

The product of a vector v and a scalar k is a vector with a magnitude that is times the magnitude of and with

a direction that is the same as the direction of if    and opposite the direction of if      This is called scalar

multiplication. If       or  then

As you might expect, if      we denote the product as

Note that has the same magnitude as but has the opposite direction (Figure 2.4).
92 2 · Vectors in Space

Figure 2.4 (a) The original vector v has length n units. (b) The length of equals units. (c) The length of is
units. (d) The vectors and have the same length but opposite directions.

Another operation we can perform on vectors is to add them together in vector addition, but because each vector may

have its own direction, the process is different from adding two numbers. The most common graphical method for

adding two vectors is to place the initial point of the second vector at the terminal point of the first, as in Figure 2.5(a). To

see why this makes sense, suppose, for example, that both vectors represent displacement. If an object moves first from

the initial point to the terminal point of vector then from the initial point to the terminal point of vector the overall

displacement is the same as if the object had made just one movement from the initial point to the terminal point of the

vector      For obvious reasons, this approach is called the triangle method. Notice that if we had switched the order,

so that was our first vector and v was our second vector, we would have ended up in the same place. (Again, see

Figure 2.5(a).) Thus,

A second method for adding vectors is called the parallelogram method. With this method, we place the two vectors so

they have the same initial point, and then we draw a parallelogram with the vectors as two adjacent sides, as in Figure

2.5(b). The length of the diagonal of the parallelogram is the sum. Comparing Figure 2.5(b) and Figure 2.5(a), we can see

that we get the same answer using either method. The vector           is called the vector sum.

Definition

The sum of two vectors and can be constructed graphically by placing the initial point of at the terminal point

of Then, the vector sum,                is the vector with an initial point that coincides with the initial point of and has a

terminal point that coincides with the terminal point of This operation is known as vector addition.

Figure 2.5 (a) When adding vectors by the triangle method, the initial point of is the terminal point of  (b) When
adding vectors by the parallelogram method, the vectors and have the same initial point.

It is also appropriate here to discuss vector subtraction. We define  as                         The vector         is

called the vector difference. Graphically, the vector         is depicted by drawing a vector from the terminal point of

to the terminal point of (Figure 2.6).

Figure 2.6 (a) The vector difference    is depicted by drawing a vector from the terminal point of  to the terminal

point of (b) The vector          is equivalent to the vector

In Figure 2.5(a), the initial point of  is the initial point of The terminal point of  is the terminal point of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 93

These three vectors form the sides of a triangle. It follows that the length of any one side is less than the sum of the
lengths of the remaining sides. So we have

This is known more generally as the triangle inequality. There is one case, however, when the resultant vector            has

the same magnitude as the sum of the magnitudes of and This happens only when and have the same direction.

EXAMPLE 2.2

Combining Vectors      shown in Figure 2.7, sketch the vectors
Given the vectors and

 a.
b.
 c.

    Solution                                Figure 2.7 Vectors and lie in the same plane.
a. The vector    has the same direction as it is three times as long as

     Vector has the same direction as  and is three times as long.
b. Use either addition method to find

Figure 2.8 To find     align the vectors at their initial points or place the initial point of one vector at the terminal

point of the other. (a) The vector     is the diagonal of the parallelogram with sides and (b) The vector

is the third side of a triangle formed with placed at the terminal point of

c. To find       we can first rewrite the expression as         Then we can draw the vector then add it to
     the vector
94 2 · Vectors in Space

                                 Figure 2.9 To find     simply add

2.2 Using vectors and from Example 2.2, sketch the vector

Vector Components

Working with vectors in a plane is easier when we are working in a coordinate system. When the initial points and
terminal points of vectors are given in Cartesian coordinates, computations become straightforward.

EXAMPLE 2.3

Comparing Vectors
Are and equivalent vectors?

a. has initial point             and terminal point
        has initial point           and terminal point

b. has initial point             and terminal point
        has initial point           and terminal point

    Solution                                                                               are not equivalent (Figure
a. The vectors are each units long, but they are oriented in different directions. So and

     2.10).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 95

                                                        Figure 2.10 These vectors are not equivalent.
b. Based on Figure 2.11, and using a bit of geometry, it is clear these vectors have the same length and the same

     direction, so and are equivalent.

                                                          Figure 2.11 These vectors are equivalent.
      2.3 Which of the following vectors are equivalent?

We have seen how to plot a vector when we are given an initial point and a terminal point. However, because a vector

can be placed anywhere in a plane, it may be easier to perform calculations with a vector when its initial point coincides

with the origin. We call a vector with its initial point at the origin a standard-position vector. Because the initial point of

any vector in standard position is known to be  we can describe the vector by looking at the coordinates of its

terminal point. Thus, if vector v has its initial point at the origin and its terminal point at  we write the vector in
96 2 · Vectors in Space

component form as

When a vector is written in component form like this, the scalars x and y are called the components of
  Definition

The vector with initial point         and terminal point  can be written in component form as

The scalars and are called the components of

Recall that vectors are named with lowercase letters in bold type or by drawing an arrow over their name. We have also

learned that we can name a vector by its component form, with the coordinates of its terminal point in angle brackets.

However, when writing the component form of a vector, it is important to distinguish between   and      The first

ordered pair uses angle brackets to describe a vector, whereas the second uses parentheses to describe a point in a

plane. The initial point of      is   the terminal point of  is

When we have a vector not already in standard position, we can determine its component form in one of two ways. We
can use a geometric approach, in which we sketch the vector in the coordinate plane, and then sketch an equivalent
standard-position vector. Alternatively, we can find it algebraically, using the coordinates of the initial point and the
terminal point. To find it algebraically, we subtract the x-coordinate of the initial point from the x-coordinate of the
terminal point to get the x component, and we subtract the y-coordinate of the initial point from the y-coordinate of the
terminal point to get the y component.

Rule: Component Form of a Vector

Let v be a vector with initial point  and terminal point         Then we can express v in component form as

EXAMPLE 2.4

Expressing Vectors in Component Form

Express vector with initial point     and terminal point     in component form.

Solution

a. Geometric

1. Sketch the vector in the coordinate plane (Figure 2.12).

2. The terminal point is 4 units to the right and 2 units down from the initial point.

3. Find the point that is 4 units to the right and 2 units down from the origin.

4. In standard position, this vector has initial point       and terminal point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 97

                                                              Figure 2.12 These vectors are equivalent.
b. Algebraic

     In the first solution, we used a sketch of the vector to see that the terminal point lies 4 units to the right. We can
     accomplish this algebraically by finding the difference of the x-coordinates:

     Similarly, the difference of the y-coordinates shows the vertical length of the vector.

     So, in component form,

      2.4 Vector has initial point      and terminal point   Express in component form.

To find the magnitude of a vector, we calculate the distance between its initial point and its terminal point. The

magnitude of vector  is denoted         or and can be computed using the formula

Note that because this vector is written in component form, it is equivalent to a vector in standard position, with its initial

point at the origin and terminal point  Thus, it suffices to calculate the magnitude of the vector in standard

position. Using the distance formula to calculate the distance between initial point  and terminal point            we

have

Based on this formula, it is clear that for any vector  and  if and only if

The magnitude of a vector can also be derived using the Pythagorean theorem, as in the following figure.

Figure 2.13 If you use the components of a vector to define a right triangle, the magnitude of the vector is the length of
the triangle's hypotenuse.
98 2 · Vectors in Space

We have defined scalar multiplication and vector addition geometrically. Expressing vectors in component form allows
us to perform these same operations algebraically.

Definition

Let                      and          be vectors, and let be a scalar.

Scalar multiplication:

Vector addition:

EXAMPLE 2.5

Performing Operations in Component Form

Let be the vector with initial point  and terminal point                   and let

a. Express in component form and find           Then, using algebra, find

b.

c.   and

d.

    Solution                                                                            units to the left and  units down (Figure
a. To place the initial point of at the origin, we must translate the vector

     2.15). Using the algebraic method, we can express as

b. To find                                              Figure 2.14 In component form,
                         add the x-components and the y-components separately:

c. To find multiply by the scalar

d. To find               find    and add it to

     2.5 Let                     and let be the vector with initial point  and terminal point

            a. Find
            b. Express in component form.
            c. Find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 99

Now that we have established the basic rules of vector arithmetic, we can state the properties of vector operations. We
will prove two of these properties. The others can be proved in a similar manner.

Theorem 2.1

Properties of Vector Operations

Let          be vectors in a plane. Let            be scalars.

Proof of Commutative Property

Let          and                 Apply the commutative property for real numbers:



Proof of Distributive Property

Apply the distributive property for real numbers:

            Prove the additive inverse property.
       2.6

We have found the components of a vector given its initial and terminal points. In some cases, we may only have the
magnitude and direction of a vector, not the points. For these vectors, we can identify the horizontal and vertical
components using trigonometry (Figure 2.15).

     Figure 2.15 The components of a vector form the legs of a right triangle, with the vector as the hypotenuse.

Consider the angle formed by the vector v and the positive x-axis. We can see from the triangle that the components of

vector are                       Therefore, given an angle and the magnitude of a vector, we can use the cosine and

sine of the angle to find the components of the vector.
100 2 · Vectors in Space

  EXAMPLE 2.6                                                                         with the x-axis.
                                                                                                       and
Finding the Component Form of a Vector Using Trigonometry
Find the component form of a vector with magnitude 4 that forms an angle of

     Solution
Let and represent the components of the vector (Figure 2.16). Then

                                      The component form of the vector is

Figure 2.16 Use trigonometric ratios,          and                           to identify the components of the vector.

2.7 Find the component form of vector with magnitude that forms an angle of                          with the positive
           x-axis.

Unit Vectors

A unit vector is a vector with magnitude For any nonzero vector we can use scalar multiplication to find a unit
vector that has the same direction as To do this, we multiply the vector by the reciprocal of its magnitude:

Recall that when we defined scalar multiplication, we noted that                      For            it follows that

                          We say that is the unit vector in the direction of (Figure 2.17). The process of using scalar

multiplication to find a unit vector with a given direction is called normalization.

                          Figure 2.17 The vector and associated unit vector           In this case,

EXAMPLE 2.7

Finding a Unit Vector
Let

a. Find a unit vector with the same direction as
b. Find a vector with the same direction as such that

    Solution                     then divide the components of by the magnitude:
a. First, find the magnitude of

b. The vector is in the same direction as and          Use scalar multiplication to increase the length of without

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 101

changing direction:

2.8 Let                Find a vector with magnitude in the opposite direction as

We have seen how convenient it can be to write a vector in component form. Sometimes, though, it is more convenient

to write a vector as a sum of a horizontal vector and a vertical vector. To make this easier, let's look at standard unit

vectors. The standard unit vectors are the vectors      and      (Figure 2.18).

                                                     Figure 2.18 The standard unit vectors and

By applying the properties of vectors, it is possible to express any vector in terms of and in what we call a linear
combination:

Thus, is the sum of a horizontal vector with magnitude  and a vertical vector with magnitude    as in the following
figure.

                             Figure 2.19 The vector is the sum of and

EXAMPLE 2.8

Using Standard Unit Vectors

a. Express the vector        in terms of standard unit vectors.

b. Vector is a unit vector that forms an angle of with the positive x-axis. Use standard unit vectors to describe

    Solution       into a vector with a zero y-component and a vector with a zero x-component:
a. Resolve vector

b. Because is a unit vector, the terminal point lies on the unit circle when the vector is placed in standard position
     (Figure 2.20).
102 2 · Vectors in Space

                                 Figure 2.20 The terminal point of lies on the unit circle

2.9 Let                          and let be a unit vector that forms an angle of            with the positive x-axis. Express

          and in terms of the standard unit vectors.

Applications of Vectors

Because vectors have both direction and magnitude, they are valuable tools for solving problems involving such
applications as motion and force. Recall the boat example and the quarterback example we described earlier. Here we
look at two other examples in detail.

  EXAMPLE 2.9

Finding Resultant Force
Jane's car is stuck in the mud. Lisa and Jed come along in a truck to help pull her out. They attach one end of a tow strap
to the front of the car and the other end to the truck's trailer hitch, and the truck starts to pull. Meanwhile, Jane and Jed
get behind the car and push. The truck generates a horizontal force of lb on the car. Jane and Jed are pushing at a
slight upward angle and generate a force of lb on the car. These forces can be represented by vectors, as shown in
Figure 2.21. The angle between these vectors is Find the resultant force (the vector sum) and give its magnitude to
the nearest tenth of a pound and its direction angle from the positive x-axis.

                                 Figure 2.21 Two forces acting on a car in different directions.

Solution

To find the effect of combining the two forces, add their representative vectors. First, express each vector in component

form or in terms of the standard unit vectors. For this purpose, it is easiest if we align one of the vectors with the positive

x-axis. The horizontal vector, then, has initial point  and terminal point                  It can be expressed as  or

The second vector has magnitude                and makes an angle of  with the first, so we can express it as
                                           or           and we have   Then, the sum of the vectors, or resultant vector, is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 103

The angle made by and the positive x-axis has                             so                                       which

means the resultant force has an angle of above the horizontal axis.

  EXAMPLE 2.10                                                                                mph. What is the

Finding Resultant Velocity
An airplane flies due west at an airspeed of mph. The wind is blowing from the northeast at
ground speed of the airplane? What is the bearing of the airplane?

     Solution
Let's start by sketching the situation described (Figure 2.22).

Figure 2.22 Initially, the plane travels due west. The wind is from the northeast, so it is blowing to the southwest. The
angle between the plane's course and the wind is (Figure not drawn to scale.)

Set up a sketch so that the initial points of the vectors lie at the origin. Then, the plane's velocity vector is         The

vector describing the wind makes an angle of   with the positive x-axis:

When the airspeed and the wind act together on the plane, we can add their vectors to find the resultant force:

The magnitude of the resultant vector shows the effect of the wind on the ground speed of the airplane:

As a result of the wind, the plane is traveling at approximately mph relative to the ground.
To determine the bearing of the airplane, we want to find the direction of the vector

The overall direction of the plane is  south of west.

2.10 An airplane flies due north at an airspeed of mph. The wind is blowing from the northwest at mph.
104 2 · Vectors in Space

                           What is the ground speed of the airplane?

          SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, consider points                               and        Determine the requested vectors and

express each of them a. in component form and b. by using the standard unit vectors.

1.                                    2.                                          3.

4.                                    5.                                          6.

7.                                    8.                                          9. The unit vector in the

10. The unit vector in the            11. A vector has initial point                  direction of
      direction of
                                                  and terminal                    12. A vector has initial point
                                                                                                   and terminal point
                                           point        Find the unit                               Find the unit

                                           vector in the direction of                   vector in the direction of
                                                                                        Express the answer in
                                           Express the answer in                        component form.

                                           component form.

13. The vector has initial            14. The vector has initial

     point      and terminal               point        and terminal

     point that is on the                  point that is on the
     y-axis and above the initial          x-axis and left of the initial

     point. Find the coordinates           point. Find the coordinates

     of terminal point such                of terminal point such

     that the magnitude of the             that the magnitude of the

     vector is                             vector is

For the following exercises, use the given vectors and

a. Determine the vector sum           and express it in both the component form and by using the standard unit vectors.

b. Find the vector difference         and express it in both the component form and by using the standard unit vectors.

c. Verify that the vectors       and      and, respectively,               and    satisfy the triangle inequality.

d. Determine the vectors         and       Express the vectors in both the component form and by using standard unit

vectors.

15.                                   16.                                         17. Let be a standard-

                                                                                      position vector with

                                                                                      terminal point

                                                                                      Let be a vector with

                                                                                      initial point     and

                                                                                      terminal point

                                                                                      Find the magnitude of

                                                                                      vector

18. Let be a standard-                19. Let and be two nonzero                  20. Let and be two nonzero

     position vector with                  vectors that are                           vectors that are

     terminal point at           Let       nonequivalent. Consider                    nonequivalent. Consider

     be a vector with initial              the vectors                                the vectors

     point      and terminal               and                        defined in      and               defined in

     point      Find the                   terms of and Find the                      terms of and Find the

     magnitude of vector                   scalar such that vectors                   scalars and such that

                                                  and                 are             vectors           and

                                           equivalent.                                are equivalent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 105

21. Consider the vector                    22. Consider vector                23. Show that vectors
                                                                                                               and
                       with                                             with
                                                                                                                    are
     components that depend                     components that depend

     on a real number As the                    on a real number                   equivalent for         and
                                                                                               where  is an
     number varies, the                                     As the number
                                                                                   integer.
     components of change                       varies, the components

     as well, depending on the                  of  change as well,

     functions that define them.                depending on the

     a. Write the vectors                       functions that define them.

     and           in component                 a. Write the vectors

     form.                                          and in component

     b. Show that the                               form.

     magnitude              of                  b. Show that the

     vector remains                                 magnitude           of

     constant for any real                          vector      remains

     number                                         constant for any real

     c. As varies, show that                        number

     the terminal point of                      c. As varies, show that if

     vector describes a                             is in standard

     circle centered at the                         position, then its

     origin of radius                               terminal point describes

                                                    a semicircle. Why is it

                                                    only a semicircle?

24. Show that vectors
                                 and

                                      are

     opposite for      and

                   where is an

     integer.

For the following exercises, find vector with the given magnitude and in the same direction as vector

25.                                        26.                                27.

28.

For the following exercises, find the component form of vector           given its magnitude and the angle the vector makes
with the positive x-axis. Give exact answers when possible.
                                                                                 31.
29.                                        30.                                   34.

32.                                        33.

For the following exercises, vector is given. Find the angle                  that vector makes with the positive direction of
the x-axis, in a counter-clockwise direction.
                                                                              37. Let
35.                                        36.                                                          and

                                                                                                     be three
                                                                                    nonzero vectors. If

                                                                                                              then
                                                                                    show there are two scalars,

                                                                                       and such that
106 2 · Vectors in Space

38. Consider vectors                    39. Let                  be a fixed  40. Consider the function

      and c = 0 Determine the           point on the graph of the                              where 
      scalars and such that
                                        differentiable function              a. Determine the real

                                        with a domain that is the                  number such that

                                        set of real numbers.                       point     s

                                        a. Determine the real                      situated on the line

                                                 number such that                  tangent to the graph of

                                                 point                 is          at point

                                                 situated on the line        b. Determine the unit

                                                 tangent to the graph of           vector with initial

                                                 at point                          point and terminal

                                        b. Determine the unit                      point

                                                 vector with initial

                                                 point in the direction

                                                 of vector

41. Consider and two                    42. Find  such that                  43. Calculate the coordinates

functions defined on the                vectors                  and         of point such that

same set of real numbers                                    are                    is a parallelogram,

Let                               and   equivalent.                          with                    and

                          be two

vectors that describe the

graphs of the functions,

where                     Show that if

the graphs of the functions

and do not intersect,

then the vectors and

are not equivalent.

44. Consider the points                 45. The speed of an object is the    46. A baseball player throws a

                                        magnitude of its related velocity          baseball at an angle of

and                       Determine     vector. A football thrown by a             with the horizontal. If the

the component form of                   quarterback has an initial speed of        initial speed of the ball is

vector                                  mph and an angle of elevation of           mph, find the

                                                 Determine the velocity vector in horizontal and vertical

                                        mph and express it in component            components of the initial

                                        form. (Round to two decimal places.) velocity vector of the

                                                                                   baseball. (Round to two

                                                                                   decimal places.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2.1 · Vectors in the Plane 107

47. A bullet is fired with an initial  48. [T] A 65-kg sprinter exerts    49. [T] Two forces, a horizontal
                                             a force of N at a                  force of lb and another of
velocity of  ft/sec at an                    angle with respect to the              lb, act on the same object.
                                             ground on the starting             The angle between these
angle of with the horizontal.                block at the instant a race        forces is Find the
                                             begins. Find the horizontal        magnitude and direction angle
Find the horizontal and vertical             component of the force.            from the positive x-axis of the
                                             (Round to two decimal              resultant force that acts on the
components of the velocity                   places.)                           object. (Round to two decimal
                                                                                places.)
vector of the bullet. (Round to

two decimal places.)

50. [T] Two forces, a vertical         51. [T] Three forces act on  52. Three forces with magnitudes
      force of lb and another                                                 lb, lb, and lb act on
      of lb, act on the same           object. Two of the forces
      object. The angle between                                           an object at angles of
      these forces is Find             have the magnitudes N              and respectively, with the
      the magnitude and                                                   positive x-axis. Find the
      direction angle from the         and N, and make angles             magnitude and direction angle
      positive x-axis of the                                              from the positive x-axis of the
      resultant force that acts on     and  respectively,                 resultant force. (Round to two
      the object. (Round to two                                           decimal places.)
      decimal places.)                 with the positive x-axis.

                                       Find the magnitude and

                                       the direction angle from

                                       the positive x-axis of the

                                       third force such that the

                                       resultant force acting on

                                       the object is zero. (Round

                                       to two decimal places.)
108 2 · Vectors in Space

53. [T] An airplane is flying in the       54. [T] A boat is traveling in the   55. [T] A 50-lb weight is hung by a cable
                                                                                      so that the two portions of the cable
direction of east of north                 water at mph in a direction                make angles of and
                                                                                      respectively, with the horizontal.
(also abbreviated as                 at a  of  (that is, east of                      Find the magnitudes of the forces of
                                                                                      tension and in the cables if
speed of mph. A wind with                  north). A strong current is                the resultant force acting on the
                                                                                      object is zero. (Round to two
speed mph comes from the                   moving at mph in a                         decimal places.)

southwest at a bearing of                  direction of              What are

What are the ground                        the new speed and direction of

speed and new direction of the             the boat?

airplane?

56. [T] A 62-lb weight hangs          57. [T] A 1500-lb boat is parked on a 58. [T] An 85-lb box is at rest
      from a rope that makes the
      angles of and                        ramp that makes an angle of          on a incline. Determine
      respectively, with the
      horizontal. Find the                 with the horizontal. The boat's      the magnitude of the force
      magnitudes of the forces
      of tension and in the                weight vector points downward        parallel to the incline
      cables if the resultant force
      acting on the object is zero.        and is a sum of two vectors: a       necessary to keep the box
      (Round to two decimal
      places.)                             horizontal vector that is            from sliding. (Round to the

                                           parallel to the ramp and a vertical  nearest integer.)

                                           vector that is perpendicular to

                                           the inclined surface. The

                                           magnitudes of vectors and

                                           are the horizontal and vertical

                                           component, respectively, of the

                                           boat's weight vector. Find the

                                           magnitudes of and (Round

                                           to the nearest integer.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 109

59. A guy-wire supports a pole that is 60. A telephone pole guy-wire

ft high. One end of the wire is       has an angle of elevation

attached to the top of the pole and of with respect to the

the other end is anchored to the      ground. The force of

ground ft from the base of the        tension in the guy-wire is

pole. Determine the horizontal and    lb. Find the horizontal

vertical components of the force of and vertical components of

tension in the wire if its magnitude  the force of tension.

is lb. (Round to the nearest          (Round to the nearest

integer.)                             integer.)

2.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions

Learning Objectives

      2.2.1 Describe three-dimensional space mathematically.
      2.2.2 Locate points in space using coordinates.
      2.2.3 Write the distance formula in three dimensions.
      2.2.4 Write the equations for simple planes and spheres.

     2.2.5 Perform vector operations in 

Vectors are useful tools for solving two-dimensional problems. Life, however, happens in three dimensions. To expand
the use of vectors to more realistic applications, it is necessary to create a framework for describing three-dimensional
space. For example, although a two-dimensional map is a useful tool for navigating from one place to another, in some
cases the topography of the land is important. Does your planned route go through the mountains? Do you have to
cross a river? To appreciate fully the impact of these geographic features, you must use three dimensions. This section
presents a natural extension of the two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate plane into three dimensions.

Three-Dimensional Coordinate Systems

As we have learned, the two-dimensional rectangular coordinate system contains two perpendicular axes: the horizontal
x-axis and the vertical y-axis. We can add a third dimension, the z-axis, which is perpendicular to both the x-axis and the
y-axis. We call this system the three-dimensional rectangular coordinate system. It represents the three dimensions we
encounter in real life.

  Definition

  The three-dimensional rectangular coordinate system consists of three perpendicular axes: the x-axis, the y-axis,
  the z-axis, and an origin at the point of intersection (0) of the axes. Because each axis is a number line representing all

 real numbers in  the three-dimensional system is often denoted by 

In Figure 2.23(a), the positive z-axis is shown above the plane containing the x- and y-axes. The positive x-axis appears to
the left and the positive y-axis is to the right. A natural question to ask is: How was arrangement determined? The
110 2 · Vectors in Space

      system displayed follows the right-hand rule. If we take our right hand and align the fingers with the positive x-axis,
      then curl the fingers so they point in the direction of the positive y-axis, our thumb points in the direction of the positive
      z-axis. In this text, we always work with coordinate systems set up in accordance with the right-hand rule. Some systems
      do follow a left-hand rule, but the right-hand rule is considered the standard representation.

Figure 2.23 (a) We can extend the two-dimensional rectangular coordinate system by adding a third axis, the z-axis, that
is perpendicular to both the x-axis and the y-axis. (b) The right-hand rule is used to determine the placement of the
coordinate axes in the standard Cartesian plane.

In two dimensions, we describe a point in the plane with the coordinates  Each coordinate describes how the point

aligns with the corresponding axis. In three dimensions, a new coordinate, is appended to indicate alignment with the

z-axis:  A point in space is identified by all three coordinates (Figure 2.24). To plot the point        go x units

along the x-axis, then units in the direction of the y-axis, then units in the direction of the z-axis.

Figure 2.24 To plot the point    go units along the x-axis, then units in the direction of the y-axis, then units in
the direction of the z-axis.

EXAMPLE 2.11

Locating Points in Space

Sketch the point                 in three-dimensional space.

     Solution
To sketch a point, start by sketching three sides of a rectangular prism along the coordinate axes: one unit in the positive

  direction, units in the negative direction, and units in the positive direction. Complete the prism to plot the
point (Figure 2.25).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 111

                       Figure 2.25 Sketching the point

2.11 Sketch the point  in three-dimensional space.

In two-dimensional space, the coordinate plane is defined by a pair of perpendicular axes. These axes allow us to name

any location within the plane. In three dimensions, we define coordinate planes by the coordinate axes, just as in two

dimensions. There are three axes now, so there are three intersecting pairs of axes. Each pair of axes forms a coordinate

plane: the xy-plane, the xz-plane, and the yz-plane (Figure 2.26). We define the xy-plane formally as the following set:

 Similarly, the xz-plane and the yz-plane are defined as   and

 respectively.

To visualize this, imagine you're building a house and are standing in a room with only two of the four walls finished.
(Assume the two finished walls are adjacent to each other.) If you stand with your back to the corner where the two
finished walls meet, facing out into the room, the floor is the xy-plane, the wall to your right is the xz-plane, and the wall
to your left is the yz-plane.

Figure 2.26 The plane containing the x- and y-axes is called the xy-plane. The plane containing the x- and z-axes is called
the xz-plane, and the y- and z-axes define the yz-plane.

In two dimensions, the coordinate axes partition the plane into four quadrants. Similarly, the coordinate planes divide

space between them into eight regions about the origin, called octants. The octants fill  in the same way that
quadrants fill  as shown in Figure 2.27.
112 2 · Vectors in Space

                          Figure 2.27 Points that lie in octants have three nonzero coordinates.

Most work in three-dimensional space is a comfortable extension of the corresponding concepts in two dimensions. In
this section, we use our knowledge of circles to describe spheres, then we expand our understanding of vectors to three
dimensions. To accomplish these goals, we begin by adapting the distance formula to three-dimensional space.

If two points lie in the same coordinate plane, then it is straightforward to calculate the distance between them. We that

the distance between two points   and          in the xy-coordinate plane is given by the formula

The formula for the distance between two points in space is a natural extension of this formula.

Theorem 2.2

The Distance between Two Points in Space

The distance between points       and          is given by the formula

                                                                                                     (2.1)

The proof of this theorem is left as an exercise. (Hint: First find the distance between the points  and

as shown in Figure 2.28.)

Figure 2.28 The distance between and is the length of the diagonal of the rectangular prism having and as
opposite corners.

EXAMPLE 2.12

Distance in Space

Find the distance between points          and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 113

                                               Figure 2.29 Find the distance between the two points.

     Solution
Substitute values directly into the distance formula:

2.12 Find the distance between points  and

Before moving on to the next section, let's get a feel for how  differs from  For example, in  lines that are not
parallel must always intersect. This is not the case in  For example, consider the line shown in Figure 2.30. These two

lines are not parallel, nor do they intersect.
114 2 · Vectors in Space

                                     Figure 2.30 These two lines are not parallel, but still do not intersect.
You can also have circles that are interconnected but have no points in common, as in Figure 2.31.

                          Figure 2.31 These circles are interconnected, but have no points in common.

We have a lot more flexibility working in three dimensions than we do if we stick with only two dimensions.

Writing Equations in 3

Now that we can represent points in space and find the distance between them, we can learn how to write equations of

geometric objects such as lines, planes, and curved surfaces in  First, we start with a simple equation. Compare the

graphs of the equation           in     (Figure 2.32). From these graphs, we can see the same equation can

describe a point, a line, or a plane.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 115

Figure 2.32 (a) In  the equation      describes a single point. (b) In     the equation  describes a line, the
y-axis. (c) In  the equation
                                  describes a plane, the yz-plane.

In space, the equation   describes all points            This equation defines the yz-plane. Similarly, the xy-plane

contains all points of the form         The equation     defines the xy-plane and the equation  describes the

xz-plane (Figure 2.33).

Figure 2.33 (a) In space, the equation  describes the xy-plane. (b) All points in the xz-plane satisfy the equation

Understanding the equations of the coordinate planes allows us to write an equation for any plane that is parallel to one
of the coordinate planes. When a plane is parallel to the xy-plane, for example, the z-coordinate of each point in the
plane has the same constant value. Only the x- and y-coordinates of points in that plane vary from point to point.

Rule: Equations of Planes Parallel to Coordinate Planes

1. The plane in space that is parallel to the xy-plane and contains point  can be represented by the equation

2. The plane in space that is parallel to the xz-plane and contains point  can be represented by the equation

3. The plane in space that is parallel to the yz-plane and contains point  can be represented by the equation
116 2 · Vectors in Space

EXAMPLE 2.13

Writing Equations of Planes Parallel to Coordinate Planes     that is parallel to the yz-plane.
 a. Write an equation of the plane passing through point                       and
b. Find an equation of the plane passing through points

Solution

a. When a plane is parallel to the yz-plane, only the y- and z-coordinates may vary. The x-coordinate has the same

constant value for all points in this plane, so this plane can be represented by the equation

b. Each of the points               and               has the same y-coordinate. This plane can be represented

by the equation

2.13 Write an equation of the plane passing through point             that is parallel to the xy-plane.

As we have seen, in  the equation   describes the vertical line passing through point            This line is parallel to

the y-axis. In a natural extension, the equation      in  describes the plane passing through point               which is

parallel to the yz-plane. Another natural extension of a familiar equation is found in the equation of a sphere.

Definition

A sphere is the set of all points in space equidistant from a fixed point, the center of the sphere (Figure 2.34), just as
the set of all points in a plane that are equidistant from the center represents a circle. In a sphere, as in a circle, the
distance from the center to a point on the sphere is called the radius.

            Figure 2.34 Each point  on the surface of a sphere is units away from the center

The equation of a circle is derived using the distance formula in two dimensions. In the same way, the equation of a
sphere is based on the three-dimensional formula for distance.

Rule: Equation of a Sphere

The sphere with center           and radius can be represented by the equation

                                                                                                                  (2.2)

This equation is known as the standard equation of a sphere.

  EXAMPLE 2.14                                             and point            as shown in Figure 2.35.

Finding an Equation of a Sphere
Find the standard equation of the sphere with center

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 117

                                 Figure 2.35 The sphere centered at  containing point

     Solution
Use the distance formula to find the radius of the sphere:

The standard equation of the sphere is

     2.14 Find the standard equation of the sphere with center       containing point

EXAMPLE 2.15

Finding the Equation of a Sphere

Let           and                 and suppose line segment           forms the diameter of a sphere (Figure 2.36). Find

the equation of the sphere.
118 2 · Vectors in Space

                                                                Figure 2.36 Line segment      Then,

     Solution
Since is a diameter of the sphere, we know the center of the sphere is the midpoint of

Furthermore, we know the radius of the sphere is half the length of the diameter. This gives

Then, the equation of the sphere is

2.15      Find the equation of the sphere with diameter  where                  and

EXAMPLE 2.16

Graphing Other Equations in Three Dimensions  and graph the set.
Describe the set of points that satisfies

Solution

We must have either              or  so the set of points forms the two planes                and    (Figure 2.37).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 119

Figure 2.37 The set of points satisfying                              forms the two planes  and

2.16 Describe the set of points that satisfies                        and graph the set.

EXAMPLE 2.17

Graphing Other Equations in Three Dimensions                                              and graph the set.
Describe the set of points in three-dimensional space that satisfies

Solution

The x- and y-coordinates form a circle in the xy-plane of radius centered at  Since there is no restriction on the

z-coordinate, the three-dimensional result is a circular cylinder of radius centered on the line with         The

cylinder extends indefinitely in the z-direction (Figure 2.38).
120 2 · Vectors in Space

Figure 2.38 The set of points satisfying            This is a cylinder of radius centered on the line with

2.17 Describe the set of points in three dimensional space that satisfies                 and graph the
            surface.

Working with Vectors in 3

Just like two-dimensional vectors, three-dimensional vectors are quantities with both magnitude and direction, and they
are represented by directed line segments (arrows). With a three-dimensional vector, we use a three-dimensional arrow.

Three-dimensional vectors can also be represented in component form. The notation              is a natural extension
                                                                                          and terminal point
of the two-dimensional case, representing a vector with the initial point at the origin,
                                                                                                 is represented by a
The zero vector is                        So, for example, the three dimensional vector

directed line segment from point          to point  (Figure 2.39).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 121

    Figure 2.39 Vector   is represented by a directed line segment from point                      to point

Vector addition and scalar multiplication are defined analogously to the two-dimensional case. If            and

                  are vectors, and is a scalar, then

If  then                 is written as and vector subtraction is defined by

The standard unit vectors extend easily into three dimensions as well--                            and       --and

we use them in the same way we used the standard unit vectors in two dimensions. Thus, we can represent a vector in

 in the following ways:

    EXAMPLE 2.18

Vector Representations

Let be the vector with initial point                  and terminal point     as shown in Figure 2.40. Express

    in both component form and using standard unit vectors.
122 2 · Vectors in Space

                      Figure 2.40 The vector with initial point  and terminal point
     Solution
In component form,

In standard unit form,

     2.18 Let                    and  Express in component form and in standard unit form.

As described earlier, vectors in three dimensions behave in the same way as vectors in a plane. The geometric
interpretation of vector addition, for example, is the same in both two- and three-dimensional space (Figure 2.41).

      Figure 2.41 To add vectors in three dimensions, we follow the same procedures we learned for two dimensions.

We have already seen how some of the algebraic properties of vectors, such as vector addition and scalar multiplication,
can be extended to three dimensions. Other properties can be extended in similar fashion. They are summarized here
for our reference.

Rule: Properties of Vectors in Space

Let                       and         be vectors, and let be a scalar.

Scalar multiplication:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 123

Vector addition:
Vector subtraction:
Vector magnitude:

Unit vector in the direction of v:                                                if

We have seen that vector addition in two dimensions satisfies the commutative, associative, and additive inverse
properties. These properties of vector operations are valid for three-dimensional vectors as well. Scalar multiplication of
vectors satisfies the distributive property, and the zero vector acts as an additive identity. The proofs to verify these
properties in three dimensions are straightforward extensions of the proofs in two dimensions.

EXAMPLE 2.19

Vector Operations in Three Dimensions

Let           and                     (Figure 2.42). Find the following vectors.

a.
b.
c.
d. A unit vector in the direction of

                     Figure 2.42 The vectors                        and

    Solution
a. First, use scalar multiplication of each vector, then subtract:

b. Write the equation for the magnitude of the vector, then use scalar multiplication:

c. First, use scalar multiplication, then find the magnitude of the new vector. Note that the result is the same as for
     part b.:
124 2 · Vectors in Space

        d. Recall that to find a unit vector in two dimensions, we divide a vector by its magnitude. The procedure is the same in
             three dimensions:

2.19 Let  and  Find a unit vector in the direction of

  EXAMPLE 2.20

Throwing a Forward Pass
A quarterback is standing on the football field preparing to throw a pass. His receiver is standing 20 yd down the field
and 15 yd to the quarterback's left. The quarterback throws the ball at a velocity of 60 mph toward the receiver at an
upward angle of (see the following figure). Write the initial velocity vector of the ball, in component form.

     Solution
The first thing we want to do is find a vector in the same direction as the velocity vector of the ball. We then scale the
vector appropriately so that it has the right magnitude. Consider the vector extending from the quarterback's arm to a
point directly above the receiver's head at an angle of (see the following figure). This vector would have the same
direction as but it may not have the right magnitude.

The receiver is 20 yd down the field and 15 yd to the quarterback's left. Therefore, the straight-line distance from the
quarterback to the receiver is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 125

We have                  Then the magnitude of is given by

and the vertical distance from the receiver to the terminal point of is

Then                     and has the same direction as

Recall, though, that we calculated the magnitude of to be                and has magnitude mph. So, we need to

multiply vector by an appropriate constant, We want to find a value of so that  mph. We have

so we want

Then

Let's double-check that  We have

So, we have found the correct components for

       2.20 Assume the quarterback and the receiver are in the same place as in the previous example. This time,
                    however, the quarterback throws the ball at velocity of mph and an angle of Write the initial
                    velocity vector of the ball, in component form.
126 2 · Vectors in Space

     SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES

61. Consider a rectangular box with        62. Find the coordinates of point and
                                                 determine its distance to the origin.
     one of the vertices at the origin,

     as shown in the following figure.

     If point             is the opposite

     vertex to the origin, then find

     a. the coordinates of the other

     six vertices of the box and

     b. the length of the diagonal of

     the box determined by the

     vertices and

For the following exercises, describe and graph the set of points that satisfies the given equation.

63.                                   64.                             65.

66.                                   67. Write the equation of the   68. Write the equation of the

                                           plane passing through           plane passing through

                                           point   that is                 point        that is

                                           parallel to the xy-plane.       parallel to the xz-plane.

69. Find an equation of the           70. Find an equation of the
      plane passing through                 plane passing through
      points                                points
                     and                    and

For the following exercises, find the equation of the sphere in standard form that satisfies the given conditions.

71. Center                and         72. Center   and                73. Diameter      where
      radius
                                           radius                                       and

74. Diameter              where
                          and

For the following exercises, find the center and radius of the sphere with an equation in general form that is given.

75.                                   76.

     For the following exercises, express vector   with the initial point at and the terminal point at

a. in component form and
b. by using standard unit vectors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 127

77.           and                    78.  and                         79.                and

                                                                                         where is

                                                                           the midpoint of the line

                                                                           segment

80.           and                    81. Find terminal point of       82. Find initial point of

                 where is                  vector                           vector
                                           with the initial point at        with the terminal point at
     the midpoint of the line

     segment

For the following exercises, use the given vectors and to find and express the vectors            and        in

component form.

83.                                  84.                              85.

86.

For the following exercises, vectors u and v are given. Find the magnitudes of vectors     and

87.                                  88.                              89.

                                                                                         where is a

                                                                           real number.

90.
                         where is a

      real number.

For the following exercises, find the unit vector in the direction of the given vector and express it using standard unit
vectors.

91.                                  92.                              93.           where

                                                                           and

94.           where                  95.       where                  96.                  where
                                                                                            and

                                               and

97. Determine whether and                 98. Determine whether the
      are equivalent vectors, where             vectors and are
                                                equivalent, where
      and
                                                                and

For the following exercises, find vector with a magnitude that is given and satisfies the given conditions.

99.                                  100.                             101.
      and have the same                      and have the same                                and have
      direction                              direction
                                                                              opposite directions for
                                                                              any where is a real
                                                                              number
128 2 · Vectors in Space

102.                                        103. Determine a vector of      104. Find a vector of
                        and have                    magnitude in the                magnitude that points
                                                                                    in the opposite direction
        opposite directions for             direction of vector
        any where is a real                                                         than vector where
        number                              where                and                                  and

                                                                                                  Express the
                                                                                    answer in component
                                                                                    form.

105. Consider the points                    106. Consider points
                                       and                                         and

                        where and are                               where and are
        negative real numbers. Find                 positive real numbers. Find and
        and such that                               such that

107. Let                  be a point        108. Let   be a point           109. The points      and

situated at an equal                        situated at an equal            are collinear (in this

distance from points                        distance from the origin        order) if the relation

                          and               and point                                                          is
                                                                            satisfied. Show that
                          Show that         Show that the coordinates

point lies on the plane                     of point satisfy the

of equation                                 equation                        and                  are

                                                                            collinear points.

110. Show that points                       111. [T] A force of       acts  112. [T] A force of       acts
                                     and
                                            on a particle in the            on a box in the direction
                      are not collinear.
                                            direction of the vector         of the vector where

                                                 where                      a. Express the force as a
                                            a. Express the force as a            vector by using
                                                                                 standard unit vectors.
                                                 vector in component
                                                 form.                      b. Find the angle
                                            b. Find the angle                    between force and
                                                 between force and               the positive direction
                                                 the positive direction          of the x-axis.
                                                 of the x-axis. Express
                                                 the answer in degrees
                                                 rounded to the nearest
                                                 integer.

113. If is a force that moves an object from           114. A box is pulled yd
                                                               horizontally in the
point                            to another point              x-direction by a constant
                                                               force Find the
                               then the displacement           displacement vector in
                                                               component form.
vector is defined as

A metal container is lifted m vertically by
a constant force Express the
displacement vector by using standard
unit vectors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 129

115. The sum of the forces            116. [T] Let                             117. The force of gravity acting on an
        acting on an object is                               be forces
        called the resultant or net                                            object is given by  where m is
        force. An object is said to           acting on a particle, with
        be in static equilibrium if                                            the mass of the object (expressed in
        the resultant force of the             a. Find the net force
        forces that act on it is                                               kilograms) and is acceleration
        zero. Let                                                     Express
                             and                                               resulting from gravity, with
                                  be                the answer using
        three forces acting on a                    standard unit vectors.     A 2-kg disco ball hangs by a
        box. Find the force                    b. Use a computer
        acting on the box such                      algebra system (CAS)       chain from the ceiling of a room.
        that the box is in static                   to find n such that
        equilibrium. Express the                                               a. Find the force of gravity acting
        answer in component
        form.                                                                  on the disco ball and find its

                                                                               magnitude.

                                                                               b. Find the force of tension in the

                                                                               chain and its magnitude.

                                                                               Express the answers using

                                                                               standard unit vectors.

                                                                               Figure 2.43 (credit: modification of
                                                                               work by Kenneth Lu, Flickr)
130 2 · Vectors in Space

118. A 5-kg pendant chandelier            119. [T] A 30-kg block of cement is  120. Two soccer players are practicing for
        is designed such that the
        alabaster bowl is held by         suspended by three cables of equal        an upcoming game. One of them
        four chains of equal
        length, as shown in the           length that are anchored at points        runs 10 m from point A to point B.
        following figure.
         a. Find the magnitude of                                       and         She then turns left at and runs 10
              the force of gravity                        The load is located at    m until she reaches point C. Then she
              acting on the                                                         kicks the ball with a speed of 10 m/
              chandelier.
         b. Find the magnitudes of                        as shown in the           sec at an upward angle of to her
              the forces of tension                                                 teammate, who is located at point A.
              for each of the four
              chains (assume chains       following figure. Let         and         Write the velocity of the ball in
              are essentially vertical).
                                          be the forces of tension resulting        component form.

                                          from the load in cables              and

                                          respectively.

                                          a. Find the gravitational force

                                          acting on the block of cement that

                                          counterbalances the sum

                                                          of the forces of

                                          tension in the cables.

                                          b. Find forces           and

                                          Express the answer in component

                                          form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.2 · Vectors in Three Dimensions 131

121. Let                            122. [T] Let

be the position vector of a                 be the position vector of a
                                            particle at time (in
particle at the time                        seconds), where

           where           and                             (here the
                                            components of are
are smooth functions                        expressed in
                                            centimeters).
on         The                               a. Find the instantaneous

instantaneous velocity of                         velocity, speed, and
                                                  acceleration of the
the particle at time is                           particle after the first
                                                  two seconds. Round
defined by vector                                 your answer to two
                                                  decimal places.
with components that are                     b. Use a CAS to visualize
                                                  the path of the particle
the derivatives with                              defined by the points

respect to of the                                                    where

functions x, y, and z,

respectively. The

magnitude              of the

instantaneous velocity

vector is called the speed

of the particle at time t.

Vector

with components that are

the second derivatives

with respect to of the

functions          and

respectively, gives the

acceleration of the

particle at time

Consider

                           the

position vector of a

particle at time

           where the

components of are

expressed in centimeters

and time is expressed in

seconds.

a. Find the instantaneous

          velocity, speed, and

          acceleration of the

          particle after the first

          second. Round your

          answer to two decimal

          places.

b. Use a CAS to visualize

          the path of the

          particle--that is, the

          set of all points of

          coordinates

                           where
132 2 · Vectors in Space

2.3 The Dot Product

Learning Objectives

      2.3.1 Calculate the dot product of two given vectors.
      2.3.2 Determine whether two given vectors are perpendicular.
      2.3.3 Find the direction cosines of a given vector.
      2.3.4 Explain what is meant by the vector projection of one vector onto another vector, and describe how to

               compute it.
      2.3.5 Calculate the work done by a given force.

If we apply a force to an object so that the object moves, we say that work is done by the force. In Introduction to
Applications of Integration (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/2-introduction) on integration
applications, we looked at a constant force and we assumed the force was applied in the direction of motion of the
object. Under those conditions, work can be expressed as the product of the force acting on an object and the distance
the object moves. In this chapter, however, we have seen that both force and the motion of an object can be represented
by vectors.

In this section, we develop an operation called the dot product, which allows us to calculate work in the case when the
force vector and the motion vector have different directions. The dot product essentially tells us how much of the force
vector is applied in the direction of the motion vector. The dot product can also help us measure the angle formed by a
pair of vectors and the position of a vector relative to the coordinate axes. It even provides a simple test to determine
whether two vectors meet at a right angle.

The Dot Product and Its Properties

We have already learned how to add and subtract vectors. In this chapter, we investigate two types of vector
multiplication. The first type of vector multiplication is called the dot product, based on the notation we use for it, and it
is defined as follows:

Definition

The dot product of vectors       and             is given by the sum of the products of the

components

                                                                                                           (2.3)

Note that if and are two-dimensional vectors, we calculate the dot product in a similar fashion. Thus, if

and                       then

When two vectors are combined under addition or subtraction, the result is a vector. When two vectors are combined
using the dot product, the result is a scalar. For this reason, the dot product is often called the scalar product. It may also
be called the inner product.

EXAMPLE 2.21

Calculating Dot Products         and
 a. Find the dot product of                 and
b. Find the scalar product of

    Solution
a. Substitute the vector components into the formula for the dot product:

b. The calculation is the same if the vectors are written using standard unit vectors. We still have three components for
     each vector to substitute into the formula for the dot product:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.3 · The Dot Product 133

     2.21 Find       where                  and

Like vector addition and subtraction, the dot product has several algebraic properties. We prove three of these
properties and leave the rest as exercises.

Theorem 2.3

Properties of the Dot Product

Let    and be vectors, and let c be a scalar.

Proof

Let             and                  Then

The associative property looks like the associative property for real-number multiplication, but pay close attention to the
difference between scalar and vector objects:

The proof that                 is similar.

The fourth property shows the relationship between the magnitude of a vector and its dot product with itself:

                                                    By property iv., if  then
Note that the definition of the dot product yields

EXAMPLE 2.22

Using Properties of the Dot Product

Let                            and                  Find each of the following products.

a.
b.
c.
134 2 · Vectors in Space

            Solution
        a. Note that this expression asks for the scalar multiple of c by

b. This expression is a dot product of vector a and scalar multiple 2c:

c. Simplifying this expression is a straightforward application of the dot product:

2.22 Find the following products for                                       and

             a.
             b.

Using the Dot Product to Find the Angle between Two Vectors

When two nonzero vectors are placed in standard position, whether in two dimensions or three dimensions, they form
an angle between them (Figure 2.44). The dot product provides a way to find the measure of this angle. This property is a
result of the fact that we can express the dot product in terms of the cosine of the angle formed by two vectors.

             Figure 2.44 Let  be the angle between two nonzero vectors and such that

Theorem 2.4

Evaluating a Dot Product

The dot product of two vectors is the product of the magnitude of each vector and the cosine of the angle between

them:

                                                                                                                      (2.4)

Proof                                                                      (Figure 2.45). These three vectors form a

Place vectors and in standard position and consider the vector
triangle with side lengths

  Figure 2.45 The lengths of the sides of the triangle are given by the magnitudes of the vectors that form the triangle.
Recall from trigonometry that the law of cosines describes the relationship among the side lengths of the triangle and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             2.3 · The Dot Product 135

the angle . Applying the law of cosines here gives
The dot product provides a way to rewrite the left side of this equation:

Substituting into the law of cosines yields



We can use this form of the dot product to find the measure of the angle between two nonzero vectors. The following
equation rearranges Equation 2.3 to solve for the cosine of the angle:

                                                                                                                                                                   (2.5)

Using this equation, we can find the cosine of the angle between two nonzero vectors. Since we are considering the

smallest angle between the vectors, we assume                (or           if we are working in radians). The inverse

cosine is unique over this range, so we are then able to determine the measure of the angle

EXAMPLE 2.23

Finding the Angle between Two Vectors
Find the measure of the angle between each pair of vectors.

a. i + j + k and 2i - j - 3k

b.        and

    Solution
a. To find the cosine of the angle formed by the two vectors, substitute the components of the vectors into Equation

     2.5:

    Therefore,                rad.

b. Start by finding the value of the cosine of the angle between the vectors:

    Now,        and           so
136 2 · Vectors in Space

2.23 Find the measure of the angle, in radians, formed by vectors                 and          Round to the

            nearest hundredth.

The angle between two vectors can be acute               obtuse                   or straight                If

          then both vectors have the same direction. If  then the vectors, when placed in standard position,

form a right angle (Figure 2.46). We can formalize this result into a theorem regarding orthogonal (perpendicular)

vectors.

Figure 2.46 (a) An acute angle has                (b) An obtuse angle has         (c) A straight line has

          (d) If the vectors have the same direction,    (e) If the vectors are orthogonal (perpendicular),

Theorem 2.5

Orthogonal Vectors
The nonzero vectors and are orthogonal vectors if and only if

Proof                                                                                  Then

Let and be nonzero vectors, and let denote the angle between them. First, assume

However,                  and    so we must have             Hence,        and the vectors are orthogonal.
Now assume                                        and we have
            and are orthogonal. Then



The terms orthogonal, perpendicular, and normal each indicate that mathematical objects are intersecting at right
angles. The use of each term is determined mainly by its context. We say that vectors are orthogonal and lines are
perpendicular. The term normal is used most often when measuring the angle made with a plane or other surface.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   2.3 · The Dot Product 137

EXAMPLE 2.24

Identifying Orthogonal Vectors

Determine whether  and                        are orthogonal vectors.

     Solution
Using the definition, we need only check the dot product of the vectors:

Because       the vectors are orthogonal (Figure 2.47).

              Figure 2.47 Vectors p and form a right angle when their initial points are aligned.

     2.24 For which value of x is             orthogonal to

EXAMPLE 2.25

Measuring the Angle Formed by Two Vectors

Let           Find the measures of the angles formed by the following vectors.

a. and i
b. and j
c. and k

    Solution
a. Let  be the angle formed by and i:

b. Let  represent the angle formed by and j:
138 2 · Vectors in Space

c. Let  represent the angle formed by and k:

2.25 Let                  Find the measure of the angles formed by each pair of vectors.

              a. and i
              b. and j
              c. and k

The angle a vector makes with each of the coordinate axes, called a direction angle, is very important in practical
computations, especially in a field such as engineering. For example, in astronautical engineering, the angle at which a
rocket is launched must be determined very precisely. A very small error in the angle can lead to the rocket going
hundreds of miles off course. Direction angles are often calculated by using the dot product and the cosines of the
angles, called the direction cosines. Therefore, we define both these angles and their cosines.

  Definition

  The angles formed by a nonzero vector and the coordinate axes are called the direction angles for the vector (Figure
  2.48). The cosines for these angles are called the direction cosines.

Figure 2.48 Angle  is formed by vector and unit vector i. Angle  is formed by vector and unit vector j. Angle  is
formed by vector and unit vector k.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        2.3 · The Dot Product 139

In Example 2.25, the direction cosines of       are                              and                    The direction

angles of are                              and

So far, we have focused mainly on vectors related to force, movement, and position in three-dimensional physical space.
However, vectors are often used in more abstract ways. For example, suppose a fruit vendor sells apples, bananas, and
oranges. On a given day, he sells 30 apples, 12 bananas, and 18 oranges. He might use a quantity vector,

                        to represent the quantity of fruit he sold that day. Similarly, he might want to use a price vector,
                            to indicate that he sells his apples for 50¢ each, bananas for 25¢ each, and oranges for $1 apiece. In

this example, although we could still graph these vectors, we do not interpret them as literal representations of position
in the physical world. We are simply using vectors to keep track of particular pieces of information about apples,
bananas, and oranges.

This idea might seem a little strange, but if we simply regard vectors as a way to order and store data, we find they can

be quite a powerful tool. Going back to the fruit vendor, let's think about the dot product,  We compute it by

multiplying the number of apples sold (30) by the price per apple (50¢), the number of bananas sold by the price per

banana, and the number of oranges sold by the price per orange. We then add all these values together. So, in this

example, the dot product tells us how much money the fruit vendor had in sales on that particular day.

When we use vectors in this more general way, there is no reason to limit the number of components to three. What if
the fruit vendor decides to start selling grapefruit? In that case, he would want to use four-dimensional quantity and
price vectors to represent the number of apples, bananas, oranges, and grapefruit sold, and their unit prices. As you
might expect, to calculate the dot product of four-dimensional vectors, we simply add the products of the components
as before, but the sum has four terms instead of three.

EXAMPLE 2.26

Using Vectors in an Economic Context
AAA Party Supply Store sells invitations, party favors, decorations, and food service items such as paper plates and
napkins. When AAA buys its inventory, it pays 25¢ per package for invitations and party favors. Decorations cost AAA 50¢
each, and food service items cost 20¢ per package. AAA sells invitations for $2.50 per package and party favors for $1.50
per package. Decorations sell for $4.50 each and food service items for $1.25 per package.

During the month of May, AAA Party Supply Store sells 1258 invitations, 342 party favors, 2426 decorations, and 1354
food service items. Use vectors and dot products to calculate how much money AAA made in sales during the month of
May. How much did the store make in profit?

     Solution
The cost, price, and quantity vectors are

AAA sales for the month of May can be calculated using the dot product           We have

So, AAA took in $16,267.50 during the month of May.                                                             to get
To calculate the profit, we must first calculate how much AAA paid for the items sold. We use the dot product

So, AAA paid $1,883.80 for the items they sold. Their profit, then, is given by
140 2 · Vectors in Space

       Therefore, AAA Party Supply Store made $14,383.70 in May.

              2.26 On June 1, AAA Party Supply Store decided to increase the price they charge for party favors to $2 per
                           package. They also changed suppliers for their invitations, and are now able to purchase invitations for
                           only 10¢ per package. All their other costs and prices remain the same. If AAA sells 1408 invitations, 147
                           party favors, 2112 decorations, and 1894 food service items in the month of June, use vectors and dot
                           products to calculate their total sales and profit for June.

    Projections

       As we have seen, addition combines two vectors to create a resultant vector. But what if we are given a vector and we
       need to find its component parts? We use vector projections to perform the opposite process; they can break down a
       vector into its components. The magnitude of a vector projection is a scalar projection. For example, if a child is pulling
       the handle of a wagon at a 55° angle, we can use projections to determine how much of the force on the handle is
       actually moving the wagon forward (Figure 2.49). We return to this example and learn how to solve it after we see how to
       calculate projections.

Figure 2.49 When a child pulls a wagon, only the horizontal component of the force propels the wagon forward.

Definition

The vector projection of onto is the vector labeled projuv in Figure 2.50. It has the same initial point as and

and the same direction as , and represents the component of that acts in the direction of . If represents the

angle between and , then, by properties of triangles, we know the length of  is             Note

that when the angle between and is an obtuse angle, the projection will be in the opposite direction of . When

expressing  in terms of the dot product, this becomes

We now multiply by a unit vector in the direction of to get                                 (2.6)
The length of this vector is also known as the scalar projection of onto and is denoted by  (2.7)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  2.3 · The Dot Product 141

              Figure 2.50 The projection of onto shows the component of vector in the direction of .

EXAMPLE 2.27

Finding Projections
Find the projection of onto u.

a.            and

b.            and

    Solution
a. Substitute the components of and into the formula for the projection:

b. To find the two-dimensional projection, simply adapt the formula to the two-dimensional case:

Sometimes it is useful to decompose vectors--that is, to break a vector apart into a sum. This process is called the

resolution of a vector into components. Projections allow us to identify two orthogonal vectors having a desired sum. For

example, let             and let          We want to decompose the vector into orthogonal components such that

one of the component vectors has the same direction as .

We first find the component that has the same direction as by projecting onto . Let               Then, we have

Now consider the vector           We have

Clearly, by the way we defined , we have   and
142 2 · Vectors in Space

Therefore, and p are orthogonal.

EXAMPLE 2.28

Resolving Vectors into Components

Express                   as a sum of orthogonal vectors such that one of the vectors has the same direction as

     Solution
Let p represent the projection of onto :

Then,
To check our work, we can use the dot product to verify that p and are orthogonal vectors:
Then,

2.27 Express                     as a sum of orthogonal vectors such that one of the vectors has the same direction as

  EXAMPLE 2.29

Scalar Projection of Velocity
A container ship leaves port traveling north of east. Its engine generates a speed of 20 knots along that path (see the
following figure). In addition, the ocean current moves the ship northeast at a speed of 2 knots. Considering both the
engine and the current, how fast is the ship moving in the direction north of east? Round the answer to two decimal
places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                2.3 · The Dot Product 143

     Solution
Let be the velocity vector generated by the engine, and let be the velocity vector of the current. We already know

              along the desired route. We just need to add in the scalar projection of onto . We get
The ship is moving at 21.73 knots in the direction north of east.

       2.28 Repeat the previous example, but assume the ocean current is moving southeast instead of northeast, as
                    shown in the following figure.

Work

Now that we understand dot products, we can see how to apply them to real-life situations. The most common
144 2 · Vectors in Space

application of the dot product of two vectors is in the calculation of work.

From physics, we know that work is done when an object is moved by a force. When the force is constant and applied in

the same direction the object moves, then we define the work done as the product of the force and the distance the

object travels:           We saw several examples of this type in earlier chapters. Now imagine the direction of the force

is different from the direction of motion, as with the example of a child pulling a wagon. To find the work done, we need

to multiply the component of the force that acts in the direction of the motion by the magnitude of the displacement.

The dot product allows us to do just that. If we represent an applied force by a vector F and the displacement of an

object by a vector s, then the work done by the force is the dot product of F and s.

Definition

When a constant force is applied to an object so the object moves in a straight line from point P to point Q, the work
W done by the force F, acting at an angle  from the line of motion, is given by

                                                                                                                                                               (2.8)

Let's revisit the problem of the child's wagon introduced earlier. Suppose a child is pulling a wagon with a force having a
magnitude of 8 lb on the handle at an angle of 55°. If the child pulls the wagon 50 ft, find the work done by the force
(Figure 2.51).

            Figure 2.51 The horizontal component of the force is the projection of F onto the positive x-axis.

We have

In U.S. standard units, we measure the magnitude of force in pounds. The magnitude of the displacement vector

         tells us how far the object moved, and it is measured in feet. The customary unit of measure for work, then, is the
foot-pound. One foot-pound is the amount of work required to move an object weighing 1 lb a distance of 1 ft straight
up. In the metric system, the unit of measure for force is the newton (N), and the unit of measure of magnitude for work
is a newton-meter (N·m), or a joule (J).

EXAMPLE 2.30

Calculating Work

A conveyor belt generates a force                   that moves a suitcase from point  to point  along a

straight line. Find the work done by the conveyor belt. The distance is measured in meters and the force is measured in

newtons.

     Solution                    has initial point  and terminal point
The displacement vector

Work is the dot product of force and displacement:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             2.3 · The Dot Product 145

      2.29 A constant force of 30 lb is applied at an angle of 60° to pull a handcart 10 ft across the ground (Figure
                   2.52). What is the work done by this force?

                                              Figure 2.52

        SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES                 are given. Calculate the dot product

For the following exercises, the vectors and

123.                        124.              125.

126.

For the following exercises, the vectors a, b, and c are given. Determine the vectors  and  Express the

vectors in component form.

127.                        128.              129.

130.

For the following exercises, the two-dimensional vectors a and b are given.

a. Find the measure of the angle between a and b. Express the answer in radians rounded to two decimal places, if it is
     not possible to express it exactly.

b. Is an acute angle?

131. [T]                    132. [T]          133.
146 2 · Vectors in Space

134.

For the following exercises, find the measure of the angle between the three-dimensional vectors a and b. Express the
answer in radians rounded to two decimal places, if it is not possible to express it exactly.

135.                                    136.                                     137.

138.                                    139. [T]                                 140. [T]

                                                       where                                     where

                                                                 and                                     and

For the following exercises determine whether the given vectors are orthogonal.

141.                                    142.                                     143.

      where x and y are                       where x and y are

      nonzero real numbers                    nonzero real numbers

144.                                    145. Find all two-dimensional            146. Find all two-dimensional

                                              vectors a orthogonal to                  vectors a orthogonal to

                                              vector             Express               vector

                                              the answer in component                  Express the answer by

                                              form.                                    using standard unit

                                                                                       vectors.

147. Determine all three-               148. Determine all three-                149. Determine the real
        dimensional vectors                     dimensional vectors
        orthogonal to vector                    orthogonal to vector                   number such that
                           Express the                              Express the
        answer by using standard                answer in component                    vectors            and
        unit vectors.                           form.
                                                                                                    are

                                                                                       orthogonal.

150. Determine the real                 151. [T] Consider the points             152. [T] Consider points
                                                          and                                                     and
      number such that
                                                                                          a. Determine vectors
      vectors                    and          a. Determine vectors                             and Express the
                                                                                               answer in component
                          are                     and  Express the                             form.

      orthogonal.                                 answer by using                         b. Determine the
                                                                                               measure of angle B in
                                                  standard unit vectors.                       triangle ABC. Express
                                                                                               the answer in degrees
                                              b. Determine the                                 rounded to two
                                                                                               decimal places.
                                                  measure of angle O in

                                                  triangle OPQ. Express

                                                  the answer in degrees

                                                  rounded to two

                                                  decimal places.

153. Determine the measure              154. Consider points
        of angle A in triangle ABC,                             and
        where                                                    Determine
                           and
                         Express your           the angle between
        answer in degrees
        rounded to two decimal                  vectors and
        places.                                 Express the answer in
                                                degrees rounded to two
                                                decimal places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       2.3 · The Dot Product 147

For the following exercises, determine which (if any) pairs of the following vectors are orthogonal.

155.                           156.                                 157. Use vectors to show that

                                                                          a parallelogram with

                                                                          equal diagonals is a

                                                                          rectangle.

158. Use vectors to show that  159. Show that                       160. Verify the identity
        the diagonals of a
        rhombus are                    is true for any vectors ,            for vectors
        perpendicular.                  , and .                                                   and

For the following problems, the vector is given.

a. Find the direction cosines for the vector .
b. Find the direction angles for the vector expressed in degrees. (Round the answer to the nearest integer.)

161.                           162.                                 163.

164.                           165. Consider              a         166. Determine the direction

                                     nonzero three-dimensional            cosines of vector

                                     vector. Let             and                           and show

                                     be the direction                     they satisfy

                                     cosines of . Show that

For the following exercises, the vectors and are given.

a. Find the vector projection       of vector onto vector . Express your answer in component form.
b. Find the scalar projection  of vector onto vector u.

167.                           168.                                 169.

170.                           171. Consider the vectors            172. Consider vectors

                                                  and                                 and

                                     a. Find the component                a. Find the component
                                          form of vector                       form of vector
                                                           that                                 that
                                          represents the                       represents the
                                          projection of onto .                 projection of onto .

                                     b. Write the                         b. Write the
                                          decomposition                        decomposition
                                                         of vector                            of vector
                                          into the orthogonal                  into the orthogonal
                                          components and ,                     components and ,
                                          where is the                         where is the
                                          projection of onto                   projection of onto
                                          and is a vector                      and is a vector
                                          orthogonal to the                    orthogonal to the
                                          direction of .                       direction of .
148 2 · Vectors in Space

173. A methane molecule has a carbon atom situated at the                  174. [T] Find the vectors that
        origin and four hydrogen atoms located at points                           join the center of a clock
                                                                                   to the hours 1:00, 2:00,
        (see figure).                                                              and 3:00. Assume the
         a. Find the distance between the hydrogen atoms                           clock is circular with a
                                                                                   radius of 1 unit.
              located at P and R.
         b. Find the angle between vectors and that

              connect the carbon atom with the hydrogen atoms
              located at S and R, which is also called the bond angle.
              Express the answer in degrees rounded to two
              decimal places.

175. Find the work done by              176. [T] A sled is pulled by       177. [T] A father is pulling his son on a
                                                exerting a force of 100 N          sled at an angle of with the
force                                           on a rope that makes an            horizontal with a force of 25 lb (see
                                                angle of with the                  the following image). He pulls the
(measured in Newtons)                           horizontal. Find the work          sled in a straight path of 50 ft. How
                                                done in pulling the sled           much work was done by the man
that moves a particle                           40 m. (Round the answer            pulling the sled? (Round the answer
                                                to one decimal place.)             to the nearest integer.)
from point                       to

point                     along a

straight line (the distance

is measured in meters).

178. [T] A car is towed using a         179. [T] A boat sails north        180. Vector
        force of 1600 N. The rope               aided by a wind blowing
        used to pull the car                    in a direction of                  represents the price of
        makes an angle of 25°                   with a magnitude of 500            certain models of bicycles
        with the horizontal. Find               lb. How much work is               sold by a bicycle shop.
        the work done in towing                 performed by the wind as           Vector
        the car 2 km. Express the               the boat moves 100 ft?             represents the number of
        answer in joules                        (Round the answer to two           bicycles sold of each
                            rounded to          decimal places.)                   model, respectively.
        the nearest integer.                                                       Compute the dot product

                                                                                          and state its
                                                                                   meaning.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     2.4 · The Cross Product 149

181. [T] Two forces and               182. [T] Consider                 the
        are represented by
        vectors with initial points   position vector of a particle at time
        that are at the origin. The
        first force has a                 where the components of
        magnitude of 20 lb and
        the terminal point of the     r are expressed in centimeters and
        vector is point
        The second force has a        time in seconds. Let be the
        magnitude of 40 lb and        position vector of the particle after 1
        the terminal point of its     sec.
        vector is point
        Let F be the resultant        a. Show that all vectors          where
        force of forces and
         a. Find the magnitude of                        is an arbitrary point,
              F. (Round the answer
              to one decimal place.)      orthogonal to the instantaneous
         b. Find the direction
              angles of F. (Express       velocity vector of the particle
              the answer in degrees
              rounded to one              after 1 sec, can be expressed as
              decimal place.)
                                           where
                                                                                       The

                                           set of point Q describes a plane
                                           called the normal plane to the
                                           path of the particle at point P.
                                      b. Use a CAS to visualize the
                                           instantaneous velocity vector and
                                           the normal plane at point P along
                                           with the path of the particle.

2.4 The Cross Product

Learning Objectives

      2.4.1 Calculate the cross product of two given vectors.
      2.4.2 Use determinants to calculate a cross product.
      2.4.3 Find a vector orthogonal to two given vectors.
      2.4.4 Determine areas and volumes by using the cross product.
      2.4.5 Calculate the torque of a given force and position vector.

Imagine a mechanic turning a wrench to tighten a bolt. The mechanic applies a force at the end of the wrench. This
creates rotation, or torque, which tightens the bolt. We can use vectors to represent the force applied by the mechanic,
and the distance (radius) from the bolt to the end of the wrench. Then, we can represent torque by a vector oriented
along the axis of rotation. Note that the torque vector is orthogonal to both the force vector and the radius vector.

In this section, we develop an operation called the cross product, which allows us to find a vector orthogonal to two
given vectors. Calculating torque is an important application of cross products, and we examine torque in more detail
later in the section.

The Cross Product and Its Properties

The dot product is a multiplication of two vectors that results in a scalar. In this section, we introduce a product of two

vectors that generates a third vector orthogonal to the first two. Consider how we might find such a vector. Let

              and                     be nonzero vectors. We want to find a vector                   orthogonal to both

and --that is, we want to find such that                 and            Therefore,          and must satisfy

If we multiply the top equation by    and the bottom equation by        and subtract, we can eliminate the variable
which gives

If we select

we get a possible solution vector. Substituting these values back into the original equations gives
150 2 · Vectors in Space

That is, vector

is orthogonal to both and which leads us to define the following operation, called the cross product.

Definition

Let                             Then, the cross product  is vector

                                                                                                        (2.9)

From the way we have developed  it should be clear that the cross product is orthogonal to both and

However, it never hurts to check. To show that  is orthogonal to we calculate the dot product of and

In a similar manner, we can show that the cross product is also orthogonal to

EXAMPLE 2.31

Finding a Cross Product         (Figure 2.53). Find
Let

                                             Figure 2.53 Finding a cross product to two given vectors.
     Solution
Substitute the components of the vectors into Equation 2.9:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              2.4 · The Cross Product 151

     2.30 Find             for          and            Express the answer using standard unit vectors.

Although it may not be obvious from Equation 2.9, the direction of  is given by the right-hand rule. If we hold the

right hand out with the fingers pointing in the direction of then curl the fingers toward vector the thumb points in

the direction of the cross product, as shown.

                   Figure 2.54 The direction of        is determined by the right-hand rule.

Notice what this means for the direction of    If we apply the right-hand rule to  we start with our fingers

pointed in the direction of then curl our fingers toward the vector In this case, the thumb points in the opposite

direction of    (Try it!)

EXAMPLE 2.32

Anticommutativity of the Cross Product

Let           and               Calculate        and   and graph them.

                   Figure 2.55 Are the cross products  and          in the same direction?
152 2 · Vectors in Space          (Figure 2.56). We prove this in general later in this section.

            Solution
      We have

      We see that, in this case,

Figure 2.56 The cross products    and  are both orthogonal to and but in opposite directions.

       2.31 Suppose vectors and lie in the xy-plane (the z-component of each vector is zero). Now suppose the x-
                   and y-components of and the y-component of are all positive, whereas the x-component of is
                    negative. Assuming the coordinate axes are oriented in the usual positions, in which direction does
                    point?

The cross products of the standard unit vectors and can be useful for simplifying some calculations, so let's
consider these cross products. A straightforward application of the definition shows that

(The cross product of two vectors is a vector, so each of these products results in the zero vector, not the scalar  It's up
to you to verify the calculations on your own.

Furthermore, because the cross product of two vectors is orthogonal to each of these vectors, we know that the cross
product of and is parallel to Similarly, the vector product of and is parallel to and the vector product of and
is parallel to We can use the right-hand rule to determine the direction of each product. Then we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.4 · The Cross Product 153

These formulas come in handy later.

EXAMPLE 2.33

Cross Product of Standard Unit Vectors
Find

     Solution          Therefore,
We know that

     2.32 Find

As we have seen, the dot product is often called the scalar product because it results in a scalar. The cross product results
in a vector, so it is sometimes called the vector product. These operations are both versions of vector multiplication, but
they have very different properties and applications. Let's explore some properties of the cross product. We prove only a
few of them. Proofs of the other properties are left as exercises.

Theorem 2.6

Properties of the Cross Product

Let  and be vectors in space, and let be a scalar.

Proof          we want to show          We have

For property

Unlike most operations we've seen, the cross product is not commutative. This makes sense if we think about the right-
hand rule.

For property this follows directly from the definition of the cross product. We have

Then, by property i.,  as well. Remember that the dot product of a vector and the zero vector is the scalar

whereas the cross product of a vector with the zero vector is the vector

Property looks like the associative property, but note the change in operations:
154 2 · Vectors in Space

      
         EXAMPLE 2.34

      Using the Properties of the Cross Product
      Use the cross product properties to calculate

            Solution

     2.33 Use the properties of the cross product to calculate

So far in this section, we have been concerned with the direction of the vector         but we have not discussed its
magnitude. It turns out there is a simple expression for the magnitude of        involving the magnitudes of and
and the sine of the angle between them.

Theorem 2.7

Magnitude of the Cross Product
Let and be vectors, and let be the angle between them. Then,

Proof

Let           and                    be vectors, and let denote the angle between them. Then

Taking square roots and noting that                  for        we have the desired result:



This definition of the cross product allows us to visualize or interpret the product geometrically. It is clear, for example,
that the cross product is defined only for vectors in three dimensions, not for vectors in two dimensions. In two
dimensions, it is impossible to generate a vector simultaneously orthogonal to two nonparallel vectors.

EXAMPLE 2.35

Calculating the Cross Product

Use Properties of the Cross Product to find the magnitude of the cross product of  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.4 · The Cross Product 155

     Solution
We have

     2.34 Use Properties of the Cross Product to find the magnitude of                where     and

Determinants and the Cross Product

Using Equation 2.9 to find the cross product of two vectors is straightforward, and it presents the cross product in the
useful component form. The formula, however, is complicated and difficult to remember. Fortunately, we have an
alternative. We can calculate the cross product of two vectors using determinant notation.

A    determinant is defined by

For example,

A    determinant is defined in terms of  determinants as follows:

                                                                                                          (2.10)

Equation 2.10 is referred to as the expansion of the determinant along the first row. Notice that the multipliers of each of

the  determinants on the right side of this expression are the entries in the first row of the  determinant.

Furthermore, each of the  determinants contains the entries from the                  determinant that would remain if you

crossed out the row and column containing the multiplier. Thus, for the first term on the right, is the multiplier, and

the  determinant contains the entries that remain if you cross out the first row and first column of the

determinant. Similarly, for the second term, the multiplier is and the  determinant contains the entries that

remain if you cross out the first row and second column of the  determinant. Notice, however, that the coefficient

of the second term is negative. The third term can be calculated in similar fashion.

   EXAMPLE 2.36

Using Expansion Along the First Row to Compute a  Determinant

Evaluate the determinant

     Solution
We have
156 2 · Vectors in Space

     2.35 Evaluate the determinant

Technically, determinants are defined only in terms of arrays of real numbers. However, the determinant notation
provides a useful mnemonic device for the cross product formula.

Rule: Cross Product Calculated by a Determinant

Let                       and       be vectors. Then the cross product    is given by

EXAMPLE 2.37

Using Determinant Notation to find

Let                       and  Find

     Solution                                                                                             in the second
We set up our determinant by putting the standard unit vectors across the first row, the components of
row, and the components of in the third row. Then, we have

Notice that this answer confirms the calculation of the cross product in Example 2.31.

     2.36 Use determinant notation to find       where              and

Using the Cross Product

The cross product is very useful for several types of calculations, including finding a vector orthogonal to two given
vectors, computing areas of triangles and parallelograms, and even determining the volume of the three-dimensional
geometric shape made of parallelograms known as a parallelepiped. The following examples illustrate these calculations.

EXAMPLE 2.38

Finding a Unit Vector Orthogonal to Two Given Vectors

Let                       and  Find a unit vector orthogonal to both and

     Solution                  is orthogonal to both vectors and We can calculate it with a determinant:
The cross product

Normalize this vector to find a unit vector in the same direction:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.4 · The Cross Product 157

Thus,                    is a unit vector orthogonal to and

2.37 Find a unit vector orthogonal to both and where         and

To use the cross product for calculating areas, we state and prove the following theorem.

Theorem 2.8

Area of a Parallelogram

If we locate vectors and such that they form adjacent sides of a parallelogram, then the area of the parallelogram

is given by  (Figure 2.57).

                   Figure 2.57 The parallelogram with adjacent sides and has base and height

Proof

We show that the magnitude of the cross product is equal to the base times height of the parallelogram.

                                be the vertices of a triangle (Figure 2.58). Find its area.

  EXAMPLE 2.39

Finding the Area of a Triangle
Let
158 2 · Vectors in Space

                                 Figure 2.58 Finding the area of a triangle by using the cross product.

Solution

We have                                  and                                           The area of the

parallelogram with adjacent sides and is given by

The area of               is half the area of the parallelogram, or

2.38 Find the area of the parallelogram       with vertices                                              and

The Triple Scalar Product

Because the cross product of two vectors is a vector, it is possible to combine the dot product and the cross product. The
dot product of a vector with the cross product of two other vectors is called the triple scalar product because the result is
a scalar.

Definition

The triple scalar product of vectors  and is

Theorem 2.9

Calculating a Triple Scalar Product

The triple scalar product of vectors                                              and                         is the

determinant of the               matrix formed by the components of the vectors:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      2.4 · The Cross Product 159

Proof

The calculation is straightforward.

                                                     Calculate the triple scalar product

  EXAMPLE 2.40

Calculating the Triple Scalar Product
Let

     Solution
Apply Calculating a Triple Scalar Product directly:

2.39 Calculate the triple scalar product             where                                            and

When we create a matrix from three vectors, we must be careful about the order in which we list the vectors. If we list
them in a matrix in one order and then rearrange the rows, the absolute value of the determinant remains unchanged.
However, each time two rows switch places, the determinant changes sign:

Verifying this fact is straightforward, but rather messy. Let's take a look at this with an example:

Switching the top two rows we have

Rearranging vectors in the triple products is equivalent to reordering the rows in the matrix of the determinant. Let

                                     and                    Applying Calculating a Triple Scalar Product, we
160 2 · Vectors in Space

       have

We can obtain the determinant for calculating           by switching the bottom two rows of                  Therefore,

Following this reasoning and exploring the different ways we can interchange variables in the triple scalar product lead
to the following identities:

Let and be two vectors in standard position. If and are not scalar multiples of each other, then these vectors form

adjacent sides of a parallelogram. We saw in Area of a Parallelogram that the area of this parallelogram is        Now

suppose we add a third vector that does not lie in the same plane as and but still shares the same initial point.

Then these vectors form three edges of a parallelepiped, a three-dimensional prism with six faces that are each

parallelograms, as shown in Figure 2.59. The volume of this prism is the product of the figure's height and the area of its

base. The triple scalar product of  and provides a simple method for calculating the volume of the parallelepiped

defined by these vectors.

Theorem 2.10

Volume of a Parallelepiped                                                                 is the absolute value of the triple
The volume of a parallelepiped with adjacent edges given by the vectors
scalar product:

See Figure 2.59.

Note that, as the name indicates, the triple scalar product produces a scalar. The volume formula just presented uses the
absolute value of a scalar quantity.

                                 Figure 2.59 The height of the parallelepiped is given by

Proof

The area of the base of the parallelepiped is given by  The height of the figure is given by                     The

volume of the parallelepiped is the product of the height and the area of the base, so we have



Access for free at openstax.org
  EXAMPLE 2.41                                                                                                                   2.4 · The Cross Product 161

Calculating the Volume of a Parallelepiped          Find the volume of the parallelepiped with adjacent edges
Let

                (Figure 2.60).

                                                    Figure 2.60

     Solution
We have

Thus, the volume of the parallelepiped is           units3.

2.40 Find the volume of the parallelepiped formed by the vectors  and

Applications of the Cross Product

The cross product appears in many practical applications in mathematics, physics, and engineering. Let's examine some
of these applications here, including the idea of torque, with which we began this section. Other applications show up in
later chapters, particularly in our study of vector fields such as gravitational and electromagnetic fields (Introduction to
Vector Calculus).

EXAMPLE 2.42

Using the Triple Scalar Product                                   are coplanar--that is,
Use the triple scalar product to show that vectors
show that these vectors lie in the same plane.
162 2 · Vectors in Space

            Solution
       Start by calculating the triple scalar product to find the volume of the parallelepiped defined by

The volume of the parallelepiped is units3, so one of the dimensions must be zero. Therefore, the three vectors all lie in
the same plane.

2.41 Are the vectors                                      and  coplanar?

EXAMPLE 2.43

Finding an Orthogonal Vector

Only a single plane can pass through any set of three noncolinear points. Find a vector orthogonal to the plane

containing points                   and

     Solution
The plane must contain vectors and

The cross product     produces a vector orthogonal to both and  Therefore, the cross product is

orthogonal to the plane that contains these two vectors:

We have seen how to use the triple scalar product and how to find a vector orthogonal to a plane. Now we apply the
cross product to real-world situations.
Sometimes a force causes an object to rotate. For example, turning a screwdriver or a wrench creates this kind of
rotational effect, called torque.

  Definition
  Torque, (the Greek letter tau), measures the tendency of a force to produce rotation about an axis of rotation. Let
  be a vector with an initial point located on the axis of rotation and with a terminal point located at the point where the
  force is applied, and let vector represent the force. Then torque is equal to the cross product of and
  See Figure 2.61.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             2.4 · The Cross Product 163

                                     Figure 2.61 Torque measures how a force causes an object to rotate.
Think about using a wrench to tighten a bolt. The torque applied to the bolt depends on how hard we push the wrench
(force) and how far up the handle we apply the force (distance). The torque increases with a greater force on the wrench
at a greater distance from the bolt. Common units of torque are the newton-meter or foot-pound. Although torque is
dimensionally equivalent to work (it has the same units), the two concepts are distinct. Torque is used specifically in the
context of rotation, whereas work typically involves motion along a line.

  EXAMPLE 2.44
Evaluating Torque
A bolt is tightened by applying a force of N to a 0.15-m wrench (Figure 2.62). The angle between the wrench and the
force vector is Find the magnitude of the torque about the center of the bolt. Round the answer to two decimal
places.

                                         Figure 2.62 Torque describes the twisting action of the wrench.

     Solution
Substitute the given information into the equation defining torque:

      2.42 Calculate the force required to produce       torque at an angle of from a 150-cm rod.

        SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, the vectors and are given.

a. Find the cross product       of the vectors and  Express the answer in component form.

b. Sketch the vectors      and

183.                            184.                     185.

186.                            187. Simplify
164 2 · Vectors in Space

188. Simplify

In the following exercises, vectors and are given. Find unit vector            in the direction of the cross product vector
          Express your answer using standard unit vectors.

189.                                    190.                                   191.                 where

                                                                                                         and

192.                           where 193. Determine the real                   194. Show that       and

                          and                 number such that                                   cannot be

                                                   and are                           orthogonal for any real

                                              orthogonal, where                      number, where

                                                             and                                 and

195. Show that                 is       196. Show that       is                197. Calculate the determinant

      orthogonal to                and        orthogonal to

      where and are                                                  where

      nonzero vectors.                        and are nonzero

                                              vectors.

198. Calculate the determinant

For the following exercises, the vectors and are given. Use determinant notation to find vector              orthogonal to
vectors and

199.                                    200.                                   201. Find vector
                               where                                 where is          where

        is a real number                        a nonzero real number

                                                                                                        and

202. Find vector                        203. [T] Use the cross product 204. [T] Use the cross product
        where
                                                   to find the acute                      to find the obtuse

                                              angle between vectors                  angle between vectors

                                              and where                              and where

                                              and            Express the                            and

                               and            answer in degrees                                Express the

                                              rounded to the nearest                 answer in degrees

                                              integer.                               rounded to the nearest

                                                                                     integer.

205. Use the sine and cosine of the           206. Verify Lagrange's identity
        angle between two nonzero
        vectors and to prove                            for vectors                  and
        Lagrange's identity:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            2.4 · The Cross Product 165

207. Nonzero vectors and             208. Nonzero vectors and            209. Find the area of the
        are called collinear if              are called collinear if             parallelogram with
        there exists a nonzero               there exists a nonzero              adjacent sides
        scalar such that                     scalar such that                                      and
        Show that and are
        collinear if and only if             Show that vectors and

210. Find the area of the                          are collinear, where
        parallelogram with
        adjacent sides                       and                         212. Consider points
        and                          211. Consider points

                                           and                           and
                                            a. Find the area of           a. Find the area of

                                                 parallelogram                 parallelogram

                                                 with adjacent sides           with adjacent sides

                                                 and                           and
                                           b. Find the area of           b. Find the area of

                                                 triangle                      triangle
                                            c. Find the distance from     c. Find the distance from

                                                 point to line                 point to line

In the following exercises, vectors        are given.

a. Find the triple scalar product
b. Find the volume of the parallelepiped with the adjacent edges

213.                   and           214.                                215. Calculate the triple scalar

                                                       and               products                       and

                                                                                     where

                                                                                     and

216. Calculate the triple scalar     217. Find vectors                   218. The triple scalar product
                                             with a triple scalar
      products         and                   product given by the        of vectors                     is
                                             determinant
                where                                                    given by the determinant
                                                            Determine
                and                                                                  Find vector

                                           their triple scalar product.
166 2 · Vectors in Space

219. Consider the                           220. Consider points               221. Let   be three-dimensional
        parallelepiped with edges
                     and where                                    and          vectors and be a real number. Prove
                                       and
                                                 with             and          the following properties of the cross

                                            positive real numbers.             product.

                                            a. Determine the volume            a.

a. Find the real number                          of the parallelepiped         b.

                          such that the          with adjacent sides           c.

volume of the                                                  and             d.
                                            b. Find the volume of the
parallelepiped is
units3.                                          tetrahedron with
                                                 vertices
b. For                    find the
                                                                       (Hint:
height from vertex                               The volume of the
                                                 tetrahedron is of
of the parallelepiped                            the volume of the
                                                 parallelepiped.)
to the plane formed by                      c. Find the distance from
                                                 the origin to the plane
the edges and .                                  determined by

                                                                    Sketch
                                                 the parallelepiped and
                                                 tetrahedron.

222. Show that vectors                           223. Nonzero vectors                     224. Consider vectors
                           and                                           are said to be
                                                                                                                          and
        satisfy the following properties of the          linearly dependent if one
        cross product.                                   of the vectors is a linear                a. Show that
         a.                                              combination of the other                       are coplanar by using
         b.                                              two. For instance, there                       their triple scalar
         c.                                              exist two nonzero real                         product
         d.                                              numbers and such
                                                         that                                      b. Show that
                                                         Otherwise, the vectors                         are coplanar, using the
                                                         are called linearly                            definition that there
                                                         independent. Show that                         exist two nonzero real
                                                                                                        numbers and such
                                                                         are coplanar if                that
                                                         and only if they are linear
                                                         dependent.                                c. Show that
                                                                                                        are linearly
                                                                                                        independent--that is,
                                                                                                        none of the vectors is
                                                                                                        a linear combination
                                                                                                        of the other two.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                          2.4 · The Cross Product 167

225. Consider points                        226. Show that vectors               227. Let  and
                                       and
                                            and            are linearly          be two-dimensional vectors. The
                        Are vectors
                                            independent--that is, there          cross product of vectors and is
                     and linearly
        dependent (that is, one of          do not exist two nonzero real        not defined. However, if the
        the vectors is a linear
        combination of the other            numbers and such that                vectors are regarded as the three-
        two)?
                                                                                 dimensional vectors

                                                                                           and

                                                                                           respectively, then,

                                                                                 in this case, we can define the

                                                                                 cross product of and In

                                                                                 particular, in determinant

                                                                                 notation, the cross product of

                                                                                 and is given by

228. Consider points                        229. Determine a vector of                         Use this result to compute
                     and                            magnitude
                                                    perpendicular to the                       where is a real number.
         a. Find the area of                        plane passing through
              triangle                              the x-axis and point         230. Determine a unit vector
                                                                                         perpendicular to the
         b. Determine the                                                                plane passing through
              distance from point                                                        the z-axis and point
              to the line passing
              through

231. Consider and two                       232. [T] Assume that the             233. Find all vectors
                                                    magnitudes of two                                               that
three-dimensional                                   nonzero vectors and
                                                    are known. The function              satisfy the equation
vectors. If the magnitude

of the cross product

vector  is times

larger than the                             defines the magnitude of

magnitude of vector                         the cross product vector

show that the magnitude                            where                     is

of is greater than or                       the angle between

equal to where is a

natural number.                             a. Graph the function

                                            b. Find the absolute

                                                 minimum and

                                                 maximum of function

                                                   Interpret the

                                                 results.

                                            c. If          and

                                                           find the

                                                 angle between

                                                 if the magnitude of

                                                 their cross product

                                                 vector is equal to
168 2 · Vectors in Space

234. Solve the equation                235. [T] A mechanic uses a 12-in.       236. [T] A boy applies the brakes on a
                                               wrench to turn a bolt. The              bicycle by applying a downward force
        where                                  wrench makes a angle                    of lb on the pedal when the 6-in.
        is a nonzero vector with a             with the horizontal. If the             crank makes a angle with the
        magnitude of                           mechanic applies a vertical             horizontal (see the following figure).
                                               force of lb on the wrench               Find the torque at point Express
                                               handle, what is the                     your answer in foot-pounds rounded
                                               magnitude of the torque at              to two decimal places.
                                               point (see the following
                                               figure)? Express the answer in
                                               foot-pounds rounded to two
                                               decimal places.

237. [T] Find the magnitude of         238. [T] What is the magnitude      239. [T] The force vector
        the force that needs to be             of the force required to            acting on a proton with
        applied to the end of a                be applied to the end of a          an electric charge of
        20-cm wrench located on                1-ft wrench at an angle of                               (in
        the positive direction of                   to produce a torque            coulombs) moving in a
        the y-axis if the force is             of N·m?                             magnetic field where
        applied in the direction                                                   the velocity vector is
                      and it produces                                              given by
        a N·m torque to the
        bolt located at the origin.                                                (here, is expressed in
                                                                                   meters per second, is in
                                                                                   tesla [T], and is in
                                                                                   newtons [N]). Find the
                                                                                   force that acts on a
                                                                                   proton that moves in the
                                                                                   xy-plane at velocity

                                                                                                          (in
                                                                                   meters per second) in a
                                                                                   magnetic field given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 169

240. [T] The force vector               241. [T] Consider                           242. A solar panel is mounted on the roof
        acting on a proton with                                                the          of a house. The panel may be
        an electric charge of                                                               regarded as positioned at the points
                             moving in          position vector of a                        of coordinates (in meters)
        a magnetic field where                  particle at time                                                             and
        the velocity vector v is                                                            (see the following figure).
        given by                                                where the
                                                components of are
        (here, is expressed in                  expressed in centimeters
        meters per second, in                   and time in seconds. Let

            and in If the               be the position vector
        magnitude of force
        acting on a proton is           of the particle after sec.

                           N and the    a. Determine unit vector
        proton is moving at the
        speed of 300 m/sec in           (called the
        magnetic field of
        magnitude 2.4 T, find the       binormal unit vector)
        angle between velocity
        vector of the proton and        that has the direction
        magnetic field Express
        the answer in degrees           of cross product vector
        rounded to the nearest
        integer.                                       where                        a. Find vector
                                                                                         perpendicular to the surface of
                                        and are the                                      the solar panels. Express the
                                                                                         answer using standard unit
                                        instantaneous velocity                           vectors.

                                        vector and,                                 b. Assume unit vector
                                                                                                                            points
                                        respectively, the

                                        acceleration vector of

                                        the particle after

                                        seconds.                                    toward the Sun at a particular

                                        b. Use a CAS to visualize                   time of the day and the flow of

                                        vectors               and                   solar energy is           (in watts

                                        as vectors                                  per square meter [        ]). Find

                                        starting at point                           the predicted amount of electrical

                                        along with the path of                      power the panel can produce,

                                        the particle.                               which is given by the dot product

                                                                                    of vectors and (expressed in

                                                                                    watts).

                                                                                    c. Determine the angle of elevation

                                                                                    of the Sun above the solar panel.

                                                                                    Express the answer in degrees

                                                                                    rounded to the nearest whole

                                                                                    number. (Hint: The angle between

                                                                                    vectors and and the angle of

                                                                                    elevation are complementary.)

2.5 Equations of Lines and Planes in Space

Learning Objectives

      2.5.1 Write the vector, parametric, and symmetric equations of a line through a given point in a given
               direction, and a line through two given points.

      2.5.2 Find the distance from a point to a given line.
      2.5.3 Write the vector and scalar equations of a plane through a given point with a given normal.
      2.5.4 Find the distance from a point to a given plane.
      2.5.5 Find the angle between two planes.

By now, we are familiar with writing equations that describe a line in two dimensions. To write an equation for a line, we
must know two points on the line, or we must know the direction of the line and at least one point through which the
line passes. In two dimensions, we use the concept of slope to describe the orientation, or direction, of a line. In three
dimensions, we describe the direction of a line using a vector parallel to the line. In this section, we examine how to use
equations to describe lines and planes in space.

Equations for a Line in Space

Let's first explore what it means for two vectors to be parallel. Recall that parallel vectors must have the same or

opposite directions. If two nonzero vectors, and are parallel, we claim there must be a scalar, such that                           If
170 2 · Vectors in Space

and have the same direction, simply choose            If and have opposite directions, choose                  Note

that the converse holds as well. If  for some scalar then either and have the same direction                   or

opposite directions              so and are parallel. Therefore, two nonzero vectors and are parallel if and only if

         for some scalar By convention, the zero vector is considered to be parallel to all vectors.

As in two dimensions, we can describe a line in space using a point on the line and the direction of the line, or a parallel

vector, which we call the direction vector (Figure 2.63). Let be a line in space passing through point                Let

         be a vector parallel to Then, for any point            on line , we know that is parallel to Thus, as

we just discussed, there is a scalar, such that       which gives

                                                                                                               (2.11)

                                                 Figure 2.63 Vector v is the direction vector for
Using vector operations, we can rewrite Equation 2.11 as

Setting                   and        we now have the vector equation of a line:

                                                                                                               (2.12)

Equating components, Equation 2.11 shows that the following equations are simultaneously true:

         and                     If we solve each of these equations for the component variables        we get a set of

equations in which each variable is defined in terms of the parameter t and that, together, describe the line. This set of

three equations forms a set of parametric equations of a line:

If we solve each of the equations for assuming        are nonzero, we get a different description of the same line:

Because each expression equals t, they all have the same value. We can set them equal to each other to create
symmetric equations of a line:

We summarize the results in the following theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 171

Theorem 2.11

Parametric and Symmetric Equations of a Line

A line parallel to vector          and passing through point                      can be described by the following
                                                                                                                              (2.13)
parametric equations:

If the constants           are all nonzero, then can be described by the symmetric equation of the line:

                                                                                                          (2.14)

The parametric equations of a line are not unique. Using a different parallel vector or a different point on the line leads
to a different, equivalent representation. Each set of parametric equations leads to a related set of symmetric equations,
so it follows that a symmetric equation of a line is not unique either.

EXAMPLE 2.45

Equations of a Line in Space

Find parametric and symmetric equations of the line passing through points        and

     Solution
First, identify a vector parallel to the line:

Use either of the given points on the line to complete the parametric equations:

Solve each equation for to create the symmetric equation of the line:

2.43 Find parametric and symmetric equations of the line passing through points        and

Sometimes we don't want the equation of a whole line, just a line segment. In this case, we limit the values of our

parameter For example, let                      and  be points on a line, and let           and

              be the associated position vectors. In addition, let                We want to find a vector equation for

the line segment between and Using as our known point on the line, and                                               as

the direction vector equation, Equation 2.12 gives

Using properties of vectors, then

Thus, the vector equation of the line passing through and is

Remember that we didn't want the equation of the whole line, just the line segment between and Notice that when

we have           and when         we have           Therefore, the vector equation of the line segment between and
172 2 · Vectors in Space                                                                                 (2.15)

          is
      Going back to Equation 2.12, we can also find parametric equations for this line segment. We have

Then, the parametric equations are

                                                                                                         (2.16)

EXAMPLE 2.46

Parametric Equations of a Line Segment

Find parametric equations of the line segment between the points  and

     Solution
By Equation 2.16, we have

Working with each component separately, we get

and

Therefore, the parametric equations for the line segment are

     2.44 Find parametric equations of the line segment between points  and

Distance between a Point and a Line

We already know how to calculate the distance between two points in space. We now expand this definition to describe
the distance between a point and a line in space. Several real-world contexts exist when it is important to be able to
calculate these distances. When building a home, for example, builders must consider "setback" requirements, when
structures or fixtures have to be a certain distance from the property line. Air travel offers another example. Airlines are
concerned about the distances between populated areas and proposed flight paths.

Let be a line in the plane and let be any point not on the line. Then, we define distance from           to as the length

of line segment  where is a point on such that  is perpendicular to (Figure 2.64).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 173

                                    Figure 2.64 The distance from point to line is the length of

When we're looking for the distance between a line and a point in space, Figure 2.64 still applies. We still define the
distance as the length of the perpendicular line segment connecting the point to the line. In space, however, there is no
clear way to know which point on the line creates such a perpendicular line segment, so we select an arbitrary point on
the line and use properties of vectors to calculate the distance. Therefore, let be an arbitrary point on line and let
be a direction vector for (Figure 2.65).

Figure 2.65 Vectors  and v form two sides of a parallelogram with base  and height which is the distance

between a line and a point in space.

By Area of a Parallelogram, vectors   and form two sides of a parallelogram with area        Using a formula

from geometry, the area of this parallelogram can also be calculated as the product of its base and height:

We can use this formula to find a general formula for the distance between a line in space and any point not on the line.

Theorem 2.12

Distance from a Point to a Line                                         is any point not on  then the distance
Let be a line in space passing through point with direction vector If
from to is

EXAMPLE 2.47

Calculating the Distance from a Point to a Line

Find the distance between t point           and line

     Solution                                                           is a direction vector for the line. Setting the
From the symmetric equations of the line, we know that vector           lies on the line. Then,
symmetric equations of the line equal to zero, we see that point

To calculate the distance, we need to find
174 2 · Vectors in Space

       Therefore, the distance between the point and the line is (Figure 2.66)

Figure 2.66 Point                is approximately units from the line with symmetric equations

2.45 Find the distance between point  and the line with parametric equations

Relationships between Lines

Given two lines in the two-dimensional plane, the lines are equal, they are parallel but not equal, or they intersect in a
single point. In three dimensions, a fourth case is possible. If two lines in space are not parallel, but do not intersect,
then the lines are said to be skew lines (Figure 2.67).

    Figure 2.67 In three dimensions, it is possible that two lines do not cross, even when they have different directions.

To classify lines as parallel but not equal, equal, intersecting, or skew, we need to know two things: whether the direction
vectors are parallel and whether the lines share a point (Figure 2.68).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 175

Figure 2.68 Determine the relationship between two lines based on whether their direction vectors are parallel and
whether they share a point.

  EXAMPLE 2.48

Classifying Lines in Space
For each pair of lines, determine whether the lines are equal, parallel but not equal, skew, or intersecting.
 a.

b.

 c.

Solution

a. Line has direction vector    line has direction vector                     Because the direction

vectors are not parallel vectors, the lines are either intersecting or skew. To determine whether the lines intersect,

we see if there is a point,     that lies on both lines. To find this point, we use the parametric equations to

create a system of equalities:

By the first equation,          Substituting into the second equation yields

Substitution into the third equation, however, yields a contradiction:

There is no single point that satisfies the parametric equations for          simultaneously. These lines do not
intersect, so they are skew (see the following figure).
176 2 · Vectors in Space

b. Line L1 has direction vector        and passes through the origin,  Line has a different direction

vector,                          so these lines are not parallel or equal. Let represent the parameter for line and let

represent the parameter for

Solve the system of equations to find  and                    If we need to find the point of intersection, we can

substitute these parameters into the original equations to get  (see the following figure).

c. Lines and              have equivalent direction vectors:    These two lines are parallel (see the following
     figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 177

2.46 Describe the relationship between the lines with the following parametric equations:

Equations for a Plane

We know that a line is determined by two points. In other words, for any two distinct points, there is exactly one line that
passes through those points, whether in two dimensions or three. Similarly, given any three points that do not all lie on
the same line, there is a unique plane that passes through these points. Just as a line is determined by two points, a
plane is determined by three.

This may be the simplest way to characterize a plane, but we can use other descriptions as well. For example, given two
distinct, intersecting lines, there is exactly one plane containing both lines. A plane is also determined by a line and any
point that does not lie on the line. These characterizations arise naturally from the idea that a plane is determined by
three points. Perhaps the most surprising characterization of a plane is actually the most useful.

Imagine a pair of orthogonal vectors that share an initial point. Visualize grabbing one of the vectors and twisting it. As
you twist, the other vector spins around and sweeps out a plane. Here, we describe that concept mathematically. Let

be a vector and  be a point. Then the set of all points  such that is

orthogonal to forms a plane (Figure 2.69). We say that is a normal vector, or perpendicular to the plane. Remember,

the dot product of orthogonal vectors is zero. This fact generates the vector equation of a plane:  Rewriting
this equation provides additional ways to describe the plane:

Figure 2.69 Given a point and vector the set of all points with orthogonal to forms a plane.
178 2 · Vectors in Space

Definition

Given a point and vector the set of all points satisfying the equation                 forms a plane. The equation
                                                                                                                        (2.17)

is known as the vector equation of a plane.                      with normal vector         is
The scalar equation of a plane containing point                                                               (2.18)

This equation can be expressed as                       where                          This form of the equation is

sometimes called the general form of the equation of a plane.

As described earlier in this section, any three points that do not all lie on the same line determine a plane. Given three
such points, we can find an equation for the plane containing these points.

EXAMPLE 2.49

Writing an Equation of a Plane Given Three Points in the Plane

Write an equation for the plane containing points                       and                 in both standard

and general forms.

     Solution
To write an equation for a plane, we must find a normal vector for the plane. We start by identifying two vectors in the
plane:

The cross product                is orthogonal to both and       so it is normal to the plane that contains these two
vectors:

Thus,                     and we can choose any of the three given points to write an equation of the plane:

The scalar equations of a plane vary depending on the normal vector and point chosen.

EXAMPLE 2.50

Writing an Equation for a Plane Given a Point and a Line    and contains the line given by
Find an equation of the plane that passes through point

Solution

Symmetric equations describe the line that passes through point  parallel to vector                           (see the

following figure). Use this point and the given point,      to identify a second vector parallel to the plane:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 179

Use the cross product of these vectors to identify a normal vector for the plane:

The scalar equations for the plane are  and

2.47 Find an equation of the plane containing the lines and

Now that we can write an equation for a plane, we can use the equation to find the distance  between a point  and the
plane. It is defined as the shortest possible distance from to a point on the plane.

Figure 2.70 We want to find the shortest distance from point P to the plane. Let point  be the point in the plane such
that, for any other point in the plane

Just as we find the two-dimensional distance between a point and a line by calculating the length of a line segment
perpendicular to the line, we find the three-dimensional distance between a point and a plane by calculating the length
180 2 · Vectors in Space

of a line segment perpendicular to the plane. Let be the point in the plane such that is orthogonal to the plane,
and let be an arbitrary point in the plane. Then the projection of vector onto the normal vector describes vector

      as shown in Figure 2.70.

Theorem 2.13

The Distance between a Plane and a Point                 The distance from the plane to a point not in the
Suppose a plane with normal vector passes through point                                                                     (2.19)
plane is given by

  EXAMPLE 2.51                        and the plane given by                     (see the following figure).

Distance between a Point and a Plane
Find the distance between point

Solution

The coefficients of the plane's equation provide a normal vector for the plane:  To find vector               we

need a point in the plane. Any point will work, so set   to see that point       lies in the plane. Find the

component form of the vector from

Apply the distance formula from Equation 2.19:

       2.48 Find the distance between point              and the plane given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 181

Parallel and Intersecting Planes

We have discussed the various possible relationships between two lines in two dimensions and three dimensions. When
we describe the relationship between two planes in space, we have only two possibilities: the two distinct planes are
parallel or they intersect. When two planes are parallel, their normal vectors are parallel. When two planes intersect, the
intersection is a line (Figure 2.71).

                                    Figure 2.71 The intersection of two nonparallel planes is always a line.
We can use the equations of the two planes to find parametric equations for the line of intersection.

EXAMPLE 2.52

Finding the Line of Intersection for Two Planes

Find parametric and symmetric equations for the line formed by the intersection of the planes given by

and           (see the following figure).

     Solution
Note that the two planes have nonparallel normals, so the planes intersect. Further, the origin satisfies each equation, so
we know the line of intersection passes through the origin. Add the plane equations so we can eliminate the one of the
variables, in this case,
182 2 · Vectors in Space

This gives us             We substitute this value into the first equation to express in terms of

We now have the first two variables, and in terms of the third variable, Now we define in terms of To eliminate

the need for fractions, we choose to define the parameter as        Then,  Substituting the parametric

representation of back into the other two equations, we see that the parametric equations for the line of intersection

are                       The symmetric equations for the line are

     2.49 Find parametric equations for the line formed by the intersection of planes              and

In addition to finding the equation of the line of intersection between two planes, we may need to find the angle formed
by the intersection of two planes. For example, builders constructing a house need to know the angle where different
sections of the roof meet to know whether the roof will look good and drain properly. We can use normal vectors to
calculate the angle between the two planes. We can do this because the angle between the normal vectors is the same
as the angle between the planes. Figure 2.72 shows why this is true.

Figure 2.72 The angle between two planes has the same measure as the angle between the normal vectors for the
planes.
We can find the measure of the angle  between two intersecting planes by first finding the cosine of the angle, using
the following equation:

We can then use the angle to determine whether two planes are parallel or orthogonal or if they intersect at some other
angle.

  EXAMPLE 2.53
Finding the Angle between Two Planes
Determine whether each pair of planes is parallel, orthogonal, or neither. If the planes are intersecting, but not

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 183

orthogonal, find the measure of the angle between them. Give the answer in radians and round to two decimal places.

a.
b.
c.

    Solution

a. The normal vectors for these planes are               and                      These two vectors are scalar multiples
                                                                                  Taking the dot product of these
     of each other. The normal vectors are parallel, so the planes are parallel.

b. The normal vectors for these planes are               and

     vectors, we have

     The normal vectors are orthogonal, so the corresponding planes are orthogonal as well.

c. The normal vectors for these planes are               and

     The angle between the two planes is    rad, or approximately

     2.50 Find the measure of the angle between planes             and                         Give the answer in

              radians and round to two decimal places.

When we find that two planes are parallel, we may need to find the distance between them. To find this distance, we
simply select a point in one of the planes. The distance from this point to the other plane is the distance between the
planes.

Previously, we introduced the formula for calculating this distance in Equation 2.19:

where is a point on the plane, is a point not on the plane, and    is the normal vector that passes through point

Consider the distance from point            to plane               Let            be any point in the plane.

Substituting into the formula yields

We state this result formally in the following theorem.

Theorem 2.14

Distance from a Point to a Plane

Let           be a point. The distance from  to plane                             is given by
184 2 · Vectors in Space

EXAMPLE 2.54

Finding the Distance between Parallel Planes

Find the distance between the two parallel planes given by         and

Solution

Point     lies in the first plane. The desired distance, then, is

2.51 Find the distance between parallel planes                     and

STUDENT PROJECT
Distance between Two Skew Lines

  Figure 2.73 Industrial pipe installations often feature pipes running in different directions. How can we find the
  distance between two skew pipes?
  Finding the distance from a point to a line or from a line to a plane seems like a pretty abstract procedure. But, if the
  lines represent pipes in a chemical plant or tubes in an oil refinery or roads at an intersection of highways, confirming
  that the distance between them meets specifications can be both important and awkward to measure. One way is to
  model the two pipes as lines, using the techniques in this chapter, and then calculate the distance between them. The
  calculation involves forming vectors along the directions of the lines and using both the cross product and the dot
  product.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 185

The symmetric forms of two lines, and are

You are to develop a formula for the distance between these two lines, in terms of the values
                                                                  The distance between two lines is usually taken to mean the minimum

distance, so this is the length of a line segment or the length of a vector that is perpendicular to both lines and
intersects both lines.

1. First, write down two vectors, and that lie along and respectively.

2. Find the cross product of these two vectors and call it This vector is perpendicular to  and hence is

perpendicular to both lines.

3. From vector form a unit vector in the same direction.

4. Use symmetric equations to find a convenient vector that lies between any two points, one on each line.

Again, this can be done directly from the symmetric equations.

5. The dot product of two vectors is the magnitude of the projection of one vector onto the other times the

magnitude of the other vector--that is,                         where is the angle between the vectors. Using

the dot product, find the projection of vector found in step onto unit vector found in step 3. This

projection is perpendicular to both lines, and hence its length must be the perpendicular distance between

them. Note that the value of may be negative, depending on your choice of vector or the order of the cross

product, so use absolute value signs around the numerator.

6. Check that your formula gives the correct distance of        between the following two lines:

7. Is your general expression valid when the lines are parallel? If not, why not? (Hint: What do you know about the

value of the cross product of two parallel vectors? Where would that result show up in your expression for

8. Demonstrate that your expression for the distance is zero when the lines intersect. Recall that two lines intersect

if they are not parallel and they are in the same plane. Hence, consider the direction of and What is the

result of their dot product?

9. Consider the following application. Engineers at a refinery have determined they need to install support struts

between many of the gas pipes to reduce damaging vibrations. To minimize cost, they plan to install these struts

at the closest points between adjacent skewed pipes. Because they have detailed schematics of the structure,

they are able to determine the correct lengths of the struts needed, and hence manufacture and distribute them

to the installation crews without spending valuable time making measurements.

The rectangular frame structure has the dimensions              (height, width, and depth). One sector

has a pipe entering the lower corner of the standard frame unit and exiting at the diametrically opposed corner

(the one farthest away at the top); call this A second pipe enters and exits at the two different opposite lower

corners; call this (Figure 2.74).
186 2 · Vectors in Space

                                           Figure 2.74 Two pipes cross through a standard frame unit.

      Write down the vectors along the lines representing those pipes, find the cross product between them from
      which to create the unit vector define a vector that spans two points on each line, and finally determine the
      minimum distance between the lines. (Take the origin to be at the lower corner of the first pipe.) Similarly, you
      may also develop the symmetric equations for each line and substitute directly into your formula.

        SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, points and are given. Let be the line passing through points and

a. Find the vector equation of line
b. Find parametric equations of line
c. Find symmetric equations of line
d. Find parametric equations of the line segment determined by and

243.                             244.                               245.

246.

     For the following exercises, point and vector are given. Let  be the line passing through point  with direction

a. Find parametric equations of line
b. Find symmetric equations of line
c. Find the intersection of the line with the xy-plane.

247.                             248.                               249.       where

                                                                          and

250.                      where

      and

     For the following exercises, line is given.

a. Find point that belongs to the line and direction vector of the line. Express in component form.
b. Find the distance from the origin to line

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 187

251.                                        252.                             253. Find the distance
                                                                                     between point
                                                                                                      and the line of
                                                                                     symmetric equations

254. Find the distance
        between point
        and the line of parametric
        equations

          

For the following exercises, lines and are given.

a. Verify whether lines   and are parallel.
b. If the lines and      are parallel, then find the distance between them.

255.                                        256.                                    257. Show that the line passing

                                                                                    through points                     and

                                                                                      is perpendicular to

                                                                                    the line with equation

                                                                                    

258. Are the lines of equations             259. Find the point of intersection of
        and                                         the lines of equations
                                                                         and

       perpendicular to each                            

      other?

260. Find the intersection point of the
        x-axis with the line of parametric
        equations

      

For the following exercises, lines  and are given. Determine whether the lines are equal, parallel but not equal,
skew, or intersecting.

261.                     and        262.                    

                                            and

                                                  

263.                                              264.                       and

           and                                            
188 2 · Vectors in Space

265. Consider line of                   266. Consider line of
        symmetric equations                     parametric equations
                                and
        point                                     
         a. Find parametric
              equations for a line               a. Find parametric
              parallel to that                        equations for a line
              passes through point                    parallel to that
                                                      passes through the
         b. Find symmetric                            origin.
              equations of a line
              skew to and that                   b. Find parametric
              passes through point                    equations of a line
                                                      skew to that passes
         c. Find symmetric                            through the origin.
              equations of a line that
              intersects and                     c. Find symmetric
              passes through point                    equations of a line that
                                                      intersects and
                                                      passes through the
                                                      origin.

For the following exercises, point and vector are given.

a. Find the scalar equation of the plane that passes through and has normal vector
b. Find the general form of the equation of the plane that passes through and has normal vector

267.                                    268.                                    269.

270.

For the following exercises, the equation of a plane is given.

a. Find normal vector to the plane. Express using standard unit vectors.
b. Find the intersections of the plane with the coordinate axes.
c. Sketch the plane.

271. [T]                                272.                                    273.

274.                                    275. Given point        and             276. Show there is no plane

277. Find parametric                          vector      find                        perpendicular to
        equations of the line
        passing through point                 point on the x-axis such                that passes through
                        that is
        perpendicular to the                  that and are                            points            and
        plane of equation                     orthogonal.

                                        278. Find symmetric equations           279. Show that line
                                                of the line passing                                                is
                                                through point
                                                that is perpendicular to                parallel to plane
                                                the plane of equation

280. Find the real number
        such that the line of
        parametric equations

           is parallel to the

        plane of equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 189

For the following exercises, points                 are given.

a. Find the general equation of the plane passing through

b. Write the vector equation                   of the plane at a., where                  is an arbitrary point of the plane.

c. Find parametric equations of the line passing through the origin that is perpendicular to the plane passing through

281.                          and 282.                                       283. Consider the planes of
                                                                                     equations
                                               and                                   and
                                                                                      a. Show that the planes
                                                                                           intersect.
                                                                                      b. Find symmetric
                                                                                           equations of the line
                                                                                           passing through point
                                                                                                         that is
                                                                                           parallel to the line of
                                                                                           intersection of the
                                                                                           planes.

284. Consider the planes of             285. Find the scalar equation        286. Find the general equation
        equations                               of the plane that passes             of the plane that passes
        and                                     through point                        through the origin and is
         a. Show that the planes                and is perpendicular to              perpendicular to the line
              intersect.                        the line of intersection of          of intersection of planes
         b. Find parametric                     planes                                                     and
              equations of the line             and
              passing through point
                               that is
              parallel to the line of
              intersection of the
              planes.

287. Determine whether the line of             288. Determine whether the                 289. Find the distance from
        parametric equations                           line of parametric
                                                       equations                          point  to the
           intersects the plane
                                                          intersects the plane            plane of equation
        with equation
                                        If it          with equation
                                                                              If it does
        does intersect, find the point
        of intersection.                               intersect, find the point of
                                                       intersection.
290. Find the distance from point
                         to the plane of

        equation

For the following exercises, the equations of two planes are given.

a. Determine whether the planes are parallel, orthogonal, or neither.
b. If the planes are neither parallel nor orthogonal, then find the measure of the angle between the planes. Express the

     answer in degrees rounded to the nearest integer.

291. [T]                                292.                                 293.
190 2 · Vectors in Space

294. [T]                                295. Show that the lines of              296. Show that the lines of
                                                equations                                equations

                                                   and                                and

                                                                          are         are skew, and find the
                                                skew, and find the
                                                distance between them.           distance between them.

297. Consider point                     298. Consider the plane of
                         and the plane          equation

        of equation                              a. Find the equation of
                                                      the sphere with center
         a. Find the radius of the                        at the origin that is
              sphere with center                      tangent to the given
              tangent to the given                    plane.
              plane.
                                                 b. Find parametric
         b. Find point P of                           equations of the line
              tangency.                               passing through the
                                                      origin and the point of
                                                      tangency.

299. Two children are playing with a ball. The girl throws
        the ball to the boy. The ball travels in
        the air, curves ft to the right, and falls ft away from
        the girl (see the following figure). If the plane that
        contains the trajectory of the ball is perpendicular to
        the ground, find its equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    2.5 · Equations of Lines and Planes in Space 191

300. [T] John allocates dollars to consume monthly  301. [T] Consider
                                                                                           the
three goods of prices      In this context,
                                                            position vector of a
the budget equation is defined as                           particle at time
                                                            where the components of
                    where             and                   r are expressed in
                                                            centimeters and time is
represent the number of items bought from                   measured in seconds. Let

each of the goods. The budget set is given by                     be the position vector
                                                            of the particle after sec.
and the budget plane is the part of the plane of             a. Determine the velocity

equation                   for which                              vector of the
                                                                  particle after sec.
               and     Consider                              b. Find the scalar
                                                                  equation of the plane
          and                                                     that is perpendicular
                                                                  to and passes
a. Use a CAS to graph the budget set and                          through point This
                                                                  plane is called the
budget plane.                                                     normal plane to the
                                                                  path of the particle at
b. For         find the new budget equation and                   point
                                                             c. Use a CAS to visualize
graph the budget set in the same system of                        the path of the particle
                                                                  along with the velocity
coordinates.                                                      vector and normal
                                                                  plane at point
192 2 · Vectors in Space

       302. [T] A solar panel is mounted on the
               roof of a house. The panel may be
               regarded as positioned at the points
               of coordinates (in meters)
                                                and
               (see the following figure).

a. Find the general form of the

equation of the plane that

contains the solar panel by using

points                           and show that

its normal vector is equivalent to

b. Find parametric equations of line
          that passes through the center

     of the solar panel and has
     direction vector

                                        which

     points toward the position of the
     Sun at a particular time of day.
c. Find symmetric equations of line

          that passes through the center
     of the solar panel and is
     perpendicular to it.
d. Determine the angle of elevation
     of the Sun above the solar panel
     by using the angle between lines

          and

2.6 Quadric Surfaces

Learning Objectives

      2.6.1 Identify a cylinder as a type of three-dimensional surface.
      2.6.2 Recognize the main features of ellipsoids, paraboloids, and hyperboloids.
      2.6.3 Use traces to draw the intersections of quadric surfaces with the coordinate planes.

We have been exploring vectors and vector operations in three-dimensional space, and we have developed equations to
describe lines, planes, and spheres. In this section, we use our knowledge of planes and spheres, which are examples of
three-dimensional figures called surfaces, to explore a variety of other surfaces that can be graphed in a three-
dimensional coordinate system.

Identifying Cylinders

The first surface we'll examine is the cylinder. Although most people immediately think of a hollow pipe or a soda straw
when they hear the word cylinder, here we use the broad mathematical meaning of the term. As we have seen,
cylindrical surfaces don't have to be circular. A rectangular heating duct is a cylinder, as is a rolled-up yoga mat, the cross-
section of which is a spiral shape.

In the two-dimensional coordinate plane, the equation  describes a circle centered at the origin with radius

In three-dimensional space, this same equation represents a surface. Imagine copies of a circle stacked on top of each

other centered on the z-axis (Figure 2.75), forming a hollow tube. We can then construct a cylinder from the set of lines

parallel to the z-axis passing through circle          in the xy-plane, as shown in the figure. In this way, any curve in

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 193

one of the coordinate planes can be extended to become a surface.

Figure 2.75 In three-dimensional space, the graph of equation               is a cylinder with radius centered on the
z-axis. It continues indefinitely in the positive and negative directions.

  Definition

A set of lines parallel to a given line passing through a given curve is known as a cylindrical surface, or cylinder. The
parallel lines are called rulings.

From this definition, we can see that we still have a cylinder in three-dimensional space, even if the curve is not a circle.
Any curve can form a cylinder, and the rulings that compose the cylinder may be parallel to any given line (Figure 2.76).

Figure 2.76 In three-dimensional space, the graph of equation               is a cylinder, or a cylindrical surface with rulings
parallel to the y-axis.

  EXAMPLE 2.55

Graphing Cylindrical Surfaces
Sketch the graphs of the following cylindrical surfaces.
 a.
194 2 · Vectors in Space

        b.
        c.

            Solution
        a. The variable can take on any value without limit. Therefore, the lines ruling this surface are parallel to the y-axis.

             The intersection of this surface with the xz-plane forms a circle centered at the origin with radius (see the
             following figure).

          Figure 2.77 The graph of equation                 is a cylinder with radius centered on the y-axis.

b. In this case, the equation contains all three variables  and so none of the variables can vary arbitrarily.

The easiest way to visualize this surface is to use a computer graphing utility (see the following figure).

                                             Figure 2.78

c. In this equation, the variable z can take on any value without limit. Therefore, the lines composing this surface are

parallel to the z-axis. The intersection of this surface with the xy-plane outlines curve  (see the following

figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 195

Figure 2.79 The graph of equation  is formed by a set of lines parallel to the z-axis passing through curve
             in the xy-plane.

       2.52 Sketch or use a graphing tool to view the graph of the cylindrical surface defined by equation

When sketching surfaces, we have seen that it is useful to sketch the intersection of the surface with a plane parallel to
one of the coordinate planes. These curves are called traces. We can see them in the plot of the cylinder in Figure 2.80.

  Definition

  The traces of a surface are the cross-sections created when the surface intersects a plane parallel to one of the
  coordinate planes.
196 2 · Vectors in Space

Figure 2.80 (a) This is one view of the graph of equation       (b) To find the trace of the graph in the xz-plane, set
         The trace is simply a two-dimensional sine wave.

Traces are useful in sketching cylindrical surfaces. For a cylinder in three dimensions, though, only one set of traces is

useful. Notice, in Figure 2.80, that the trace of the graph of  in the xz-plane is useful in constructing the graph.

The trace in the xy-plane, though, is just a series of parallel lines, and the trace in the yz-plane is simply one line.

Cylindrical surfaces are formed by a set of parallel lines. Not all surfaces in three dimensions are constructed so simply,
however. We now explore more complex surfaces, and traces are an important tool in this investigation.

Quadric Surfaces

We have learned about surfaces in three dimensions described by first-order equations; these are planes. Some other
common types of surfaces can be described by second-order equations. We can view these surfaces as three-
dimensional extensions of the conic sections we discussed earlier: the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola. We call
these graphs quadric surfaces.

Definition

Quadric surfaces are the graphs of equations that can be expressed in the form

When a quadric surface intersects a coordinate plane, the trace is a conic section.

An ellipsoid is a surface described by an equation of the form                       Set  to see the trace of the

ellipsoid in the yz-plane. To see the traces in the xy- and xz-planes, set  and           respectively. Notice that, if

the trace in the xy-plane is a circle. Similarly, if  the trace in the xz-plane is a circle and, if  then the trace in the

yz-plane is a circle. A sphere, then, is an ellipsoid with

EXAMPLE 2.56

Sketching an Ellipsoid
Sketch the ellipsoid

Access for free at openstax.org
Solution                                                                                          2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 197

Start by sketching the traces. To find the trace in the xy-plane, set  (see Figure 2.81). To find the other

traces, first set  and then set

Figure 2.81 (a) This graph represents the trace of equation            in the xy-plane, when we set                 (b)

When we set        we get the trace of the ellipsoid in the xz-plane, which is an ellipse. (c) When we set  we get the

trace of the ellipsoid in the yz-plane, which is also an ellipse.

Now that we know what traces of this solid look like, we can sketch the surface in three dimensions (Figure 2.82).

          Figure 2.82 (a) The traces provide a framework for the surface. (b) The center of this ellipsoid is the origin.

The trace of an ellipsoid is an ellipse in each of the coordinate planes. However, this does not have to be the case for all
quadric surfaces. Many quadric surfaces have traces that are different kinds of conic sections, and this is usually
indicated by the name of the surface. For example, if a surface can be described by an equation of the form

                     then we call that surface an elliptic paraboloid. The trace in the xy-plane is an ellipse, but the traces in
the xz-plane and yz-plane are parabolas (Figure 2.83). Other elliptic paraboloids can have other orientations simply by
198 2 · Vectors in Space

interchanging the variables to give us a different variable in the linear term of the equation             or

                                 Figure 2.83 This quadric surface is called an elliptic paraboloid.

EXAMPLE 2.57

Identifying Traces of Quadric Surfaces
Describe the traces of the elliptic paraboloid

Solution

To find the trace in the xy-plane, set              The trace in the plane  is simply one point, the origin.

Since a single point does not tell us what the shape is, we can move up the z-axis to an arbitrary plane to find the shape
of other traces of the figure.

The trace in plane        is the graph of equation  which is an ellipse. In the xz-plane, the equation becomes

The trace is a parabola in this plane and in any plane with the equation

In planes parallel to the yz-plane, the traces are also parabolas, as we can see in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 199

Figure 2.84 (a) The paraboloid  (b) The trace in plane  (c) The trace in the xz-plane. (d) The trace in the
yz-plane.

2.53 A hyperboloid of one sheet is any surface that can be described with an equation of the form
                                         Describe the traces of the hyperboloid of one sheet given by equation

Hyperboloids of one sheet have some fascinating properties. For example, they can be constructed using straight lines,
such as in the sculpture in Figure 2.85(a). In fact, cooling towers for nuclear power plants are often constructed in the
shape of a hyperboloid. The builders are able to use straight steel beams in the construction, which makes the towers
very strong while using relatively little material (Figure 2.85(b)).
200 2 · Vectors in Space

Figure 2.85 (a) A sculpture in the shape of a hyperboloid can be constructed of straight lines. (b) Cooling towers for
nuclear power plants are often built in the shape of a hyperboloid.

EXAMPLE 2.58

Chapter Opener: Finding the Focus of a Parabolic Reflector
Energy hitting the surface of a parabolic reflector is concentrated at the focal point of the reflector (Figure 2.86). If the

surface of a parabolic reflector is described by equation  where is the focal point of the reflector?

Figure 2.86 Energy reflects off of the parabolic reflector and is collected at the focal point. (credit: modification of CGP
Grey, Wikimedia Commons)

Solution

Since z is the first-power variable, the axis of the reflector corresponds to the z-axis. The coefficients of and are

equal, so the cross-section of the paraboloid perpendicular to the z-axis is a circle. We can consider a trace in the

xz-plane or the yz-plane; the result is the same. Setting  the trace is a parabola opening up along the z-axis, with

standard equation                where is the focal length of the parabola. In this case, this equation becomes

                          or     So p is  m, which tells us that the focus of the paraboloid is  m up the axis from

the vertex. Because the vertex of this surface is the origin, the focal point is

Seventeen standard quadric surfaces can be derived from the general equation

The following figures summarizes the most important ones.

In the following two figures, the "axis" of a quadric surface may or may not be an axis of symmetry. However, all traces
on the surface formed by any plane perpendicular to an "axis" will be of the same conic section type.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 201

Figure 2.87 Characteristics of Common Quadratic Surfaces: Ellipsoid, Hyperboloid of One Sheet, Hyperboloid of Two
Sheets.
202 2 · Vectors in Space

          Figure 2.88 Characteristics of Common Quadratic Surfaces: Elliptic Cone, Elliptic Paraboloid, Hyperbolic Paraboloid.
         EXAMPLE 2.59
       Identifying Equations of Quadric Surfaces
       Identify the surfaces represented by the given equations.
        a.
        b.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 203

Solution

a. The    and terms are all squared, and are all positive, so this is probably an ellipsoid. However, let's put the

equation into the standard form for an ellipsoid just to be sure. We have

Dividing through by 144 gives

     So, this is, in fact, an ellipsoid, centered at the origin.
b. We first notice that the term is raised only to the first power, so this is either an elliptic paraboloid or a hyperbolic

     paraboloid. We also note there are terms and terms that are not squared, so this quadric surface is not centered
     at the origin. We need to complete the square to put this equation in one of the standard forms. We have

This is an elliptic paraboloid centered at
2.54 Identify the surface represented by equation

        SECTION 2.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, sketch and describe the cylindrical surface of the given equation.

303. [T]                       304. [T]                                     305. [T]

306. [T]                       307. [T]                                     308. [T]

     For the following exercises, the graph of a quadric surface is given.

a. Specify the name of the quadric surface.
b. Determine the axis of the quadric surface.
204 2 · Vectors in Space               310.

       309.

311.                                   312.

For the following exercises, match the given quadric surface with its corresponding equation in standard form.

a.                               314. Ellipsoid  315. Elliptic paraboloid

b.                               317. Hyperboloid of one sheet 318. Elliptic cone

c.
d.
e.
f.

     313. Hyperboloid of two
             sheets

     316. Hyperbolic paraboloid

For the following exercises, rewrite the given equation of the quadric surface in standard form. Identify the surface.

319.                             320.            321.

322.                             323.            324.

325.                             326.            327.

328.                             329.            330.

For the following exercises, find the trace of the given quadric surface in the specified plane of coordinates and sketch it.

331. [T]                         332. [T]        333. [T]

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 205

334. [T]                  335. [T]                                        336. [T]

337. Use the graph of the given quadric surface to answer the
        questions.

      a. Specify the name of the quadric surface.
      b. Which of the equations--

          or              --corresponds to the

          graph?

      c. Use b. to write the equation of the quadric surface in

          standard form.

338. Use the graph of the given quadric surface to answer the
        questions.

      a. Specify the name of the quadric surface.
      b. Which of the equations--

           --corresponds to the graph above?
      c. Use b. to write the equation of the quadric surface in

           standard form.

For the following exercises, the equation of a quadric surface is given.

a. Use the method of completing the square to write the equation in standard form.
b. Identify the surface.

339.                      340.

341.                                               342.
206 2 · Vectors in Space

343.                                        344.                                       345. Write the standard form
                                                                                               of the equation of the
                                                                                               ellipsoid centered at the
                                                                                               origin that passes
                                                                                               through points
                                                                                                                              and

346. Write the standard form                347. Determine the                         348. Determine the
        of the equation of the                      intersection points of                     intersection points of
        ellipsoid centered at point                 elliptic cone                              parabolic hyperboloid
                      that passes                                            with the                               with the
        through points                              line of symmetric                          line of parametric
                                      and           equations                                  equations

349. Find the equation of the               350. Find the equation of the                    where 

      quadric surface with                  quadric surface with                       351. If the surface of a
                                                                                               parabolic reflector is
      points              that are          points        that are                             described by equation
                                                                                                                       find the
      equidistant from point                equidistant from point                             focal point of the reflector.

                          and plane of                and plane of

      equation            Identify          equation      Identify

      the surface.                          the surface.

352. Consider the parabolic                 353. Show that quadric surface
        reflector described by
        equation                            reduces to two parallel planes.
                                  Find its
        focal point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       2.6 · Quadric Surfaces 207

354. Show that quadric surface                   355. [T] The intersection between cylinder
        reduces to two parallel planes passing.                                    and sphere
                                                                                  is called a Viviani

                                                         curve.

                                                           a. Solve the system consisting of the
                                                                equations of the surfaces to find
                                                                the equations of the intersection
                                                                curve. (Hint: Find and in terms
                                                                of

                                                           b. Use a computer algebra system
                                                                (CAS) to visualize the intersection
                                                                curve on sphere

356. Hyperboloid of one sheet         357. [T] Use a CAS to create the      358. [T] A spheroid is an ellipsoid
                                                                                    with two equal semiaxes. For
      and elliptic                               intersection between               instance, the equation of a
                                                                                    spheroid with the z-axis as its
cone                           are               cylinder                           axis of symmetry is given by

represented in the following figure              and ellipsoid

along with their intersection curves.

Identify the intersection curves and             and find the equations of                             where

find their equations (Hint: Find y from the intersection curves.            and are positive real

the system consisting of the                                                numbers. The spheroid is

equations of the surfaces.)                                                 called oblate if           and

                                                                            prolate for

                                                                            a. The eye cornea is

                                                                            approximated as a prolate

                                                                            spheroid with an axis that is

                                                                            the eye, where

                                                                                 Write the equation of the
                                                                                 spheroid that models the
                                                                                 cornea and sketch the
                                                                                 surface.
                                                                            b. Give two examples of
                                                                                 objects with prolate
                                                                                 spheroid shapes.
208 2 · Vectors in Space

359. [T] In cartography, Earth            360. [T] A set of buzzing stunt

is approximated by an                     magnets (or "rattlesnake

oblate spheroid rather                    eggs") includes two

than a sphere. The radii at               sparkling, polished,

the equator and poles are                 superstrong spheroid-

approximately                    mi       shaped magnets well-

and  mi, respectively.                    known for children's

a. Write the equation in                  entertainment. Each

     standard form of the                 magnet is  in. long

     ellipsoid that                       and in. wide at the

     represents the shape                 middle. While tossing

     of Earth. Assume the                 them into the air, they

     center of Earth is at                create a buzzing sound as

     the origin and that the              they attract each other.

     trace formed by plane                a. Write the equation of

                          corresponds to  the prolate spheroid

     the equator.                         centered at the origin

b. Sketch the graph.                      that describes the

c. Find the equation of                   shape of one of the

     the intersection curve               magnets.

     of the surface with                  b. Write the equations of

     plane                       that is  the prolate spheroids

     parallel to the                      that model the shape

     xy-plane. The                        of the buzzing stunt

     intersection curve is                magnets. Use a CAS to

     called a parallel.                   create the graphs.

d. Find the equation of

     the intersection curve

     of the surface with

     plane                       that

     passes through the

     z-axis. The intersection

     curve is called a

     meridian.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 209

361. [T] A heart-shaped surface is given by          362. [T] The ring torus symmetric about the z-axis
        equation                                             is a special type of surface in topology and its
                                                             equation is given by
         a. Use a CAS to graph the surface that
              models this shape.                     where  The numbers and are

         b. Determine and sketch the trace of the    called are the major and minor radii,
              heart-shaped surface on the xz-plane.
                                                     respectively, of the surface. The following

                                                     figure shows a ring torus for which

                                                                                        a. Write the equation of the ring torus with
                                                                                                                      and use a CAS to graph

                                                                                             the surface. Compare the graph with the
                                                                                             figure given.
                                                                                        b. Determine the equation and sketch the
                                                                                             trace of the ring torus from a. on the
                                                                                           xy-plane.
                                                                                        c. Give two examples of objects with ring
                                                                                             torus shapes.

2.7 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      2.7.1 Convert from cylindrical to rectangular coordinates.
      2.7.2 Convert from rectangular to cylindrical coordinates.
      2.7.3 Convert from spherical to rectangular coordinates.
      2.7.4 Convert from rectangular to spherical coordinates.

The Cartesian coordinate system provides a straightforward way to describe the location of points in space. Some
surfaces, however, can be difficult to model with equations based on the Cartesian system. This is a familiar problem;
recall that in two dimensions, polar coordinates often provide a useful alternative system for describing the location of a
point in the plane, particularly in cases involving circles. In this section, we look at two different ways of describing the
location of points in space, both of them based on extensions of polar coordinates. As the name suggests, cylindrical
coordinates are useful for dealing with problems involving cylinders, such as calculating the volume of a round water
tank or the amount of oil flowing through a pipe. Similarly, spherical coordinates are useful for dealing with problems
involving spheres, such as finding the volume of domed structures.

Cylindrical Coordinates

When we expanded the traditional Cartesian coordinate system from two dimensions to three, we simply added a new
axis to model the third dimension. Starting with polar coordinates, we can follow this same process to create a new
three-dimensional coordinate system, called the cylindrical coordinate system. In this way, cylindrical coordinates
provide a natural extension of polar coordinates to three dimensions.
210 2 · Vectors in Space

Definition

In the cylindrical coordinate system, a point in space (Figure 2.89) is represented by the ordered triple
where

·             are the polar coordinates of the point's projection in the xy-plane

· is the usual                   in the Cartesian coordinate system

Figure 2.89 The right triangle lies in the xy-plane. The length of the hypotenuse is and is the measure of the angle
formed by the positive x-axis and the hypotenuse. The
z-coordinate describes the location of the point above or below the xy-plane.

In the xy-plane, the right triangle shown in Figure 2.89 provides the key to transformation between cylindrical and
Cartesian, or rectangular, coordinates.

Theorem 2.15

Conversion between Cylindrical and Cartesian Coordinates

The rectangular coordinates      and the cylindrical coordinates                   of a point are related as follows:

As when we discussed conversion from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates in two dimensions, it should be

noted that the equation          has an infinite number of solutions. However, if we restrict to values between and

then we can find a unique solution based on the quadrant of the xy-plane in which original point           is located.

Note that if              then the value of is either  or depending on the value of

Notice that these equations are derived from properties of right triangles. To make this easy to see, consider point in

the xy-plane with rectangular coordinates              and with cylindrical coordinates  as shown in the following

figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 211

Figure 2.90 The Pythagorean theorem provides equation             Right-triangle relationships tell us that
                                 and

Let's consider the differences between rectangular and cylindrical coordinates by looking at the surfaces generated

when each of the coordinates is held constant. If is a constant, then in rectangular coordinates, surfaces of the form

           or  are all planes. Planes of these forms are parallel to the yz-plane, the xz-plane, and the xy-plane,

respectively. When we convert to cylindrical coordinates, the z-coordinate does not change. Therefore, in cylindrical

coordinates, surfaces of the form     are planes parallel to the xy-plane. Now, let's think about surfaces of the form

      The points on these surfaces are at a fixed distance from the z-axis. In other words, these surfaces are vertical

circular cylinders. Last, what about         The points on a surface of the form      are at a fixed angle from the x-axis,

which gives us a half-plane that starts at the z-axis (Figure 2.91 and Figure 2.92).

Figure 2.91 In rectangular coordinates, (a) surfaces of the form  are planes parallel to the yz-plane, (b) surfaces of

the form   are planes parallel to the xz-plane, and (c) surfaces of the form          are planes parallel to the xy-plane.

Figure 2.92 In cylindrical coordinates, (a) surfaces of the form  are vertical cylinders of radius (b) surfaces of the

form       are half-planes at angle from the x-axis, and (c) surfaces of the form     are planes parallel to the

xy-plane.

EXAMPLE 2.60

Converting from Cylindrical to Rectangular Coordinates

Plot the point with cylindrical coordinates  and express its location in rectangular coordinates.
212 2 · Vectors in Space

            Solution
       Conversion from cylindrical to rectangular coordinates requires a simple application of the equations listed in
       Conversion between Cylindrical and Cartesian Coordinates:

The point with cylindrical coordinates  has rectangular coordinates                            (see the following figure).

Figure 2.93 The projection of the point in the xy-plane is 4 units from the origin. The line from the origin to the point's
projection forms an angle of with the positive x-axis. The point lies units below the xy-plane.

2.55 Point has cylindrical coordinates  . Plot and describe its location in space using rectangular, or
             Cartesian, coordinates.

If this process seems familiar, it is with good reason. This is exactly the same process that we followed in Introduction to
Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates to convert from polar coordinates to two-dimensional rectangular
coordinates.

EXAMPLE 2.61

Converting from Rectangular to Cylindrical Coordinates

Convert the rectangular coordinates     to cylindrical coordinates.

     Solution
Use the second set of equations from Conversion between Cylindrical and Cartesian Coordinates to translate from
rectangular to cylindrical coordinates:

We choose the positive square root, so  Now, we apply the formula to find  In this case, is negative and is

positive, which means we must select the value of between and

In this case, the z-coordinates are the same in both rectangular and cylindrical coordinates:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 213

The point with rectangular coordinates       has cylindrical coordinates approximately equal to

2.56 Convert point                      from Cartesian coordinates to cylindrical coordinates.

The use of cylindrical coordinates is common in fields such as physics. Physicists studying electrical charges and the

capacitors used to store these charges have discovered that these systems sometimes have a cylindrical symmetry.

These systems have complicated modeling equations in the Cartesian coordinate system, which make them difficult to

describe and analyze. The equations can often be expressed in more simple terms using cylindrical coordinates. For

example, the cylinder described by equation     in the Cartesian system can be represented by cylindrical

equation

EXAMPLE 2.62

Identifying Surfaces in the Cylindrical Coordinate System
Describe the surfaces with the given cylindrical equations.

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
 a. When the angle is held constant while and are allowed to vary, the result is a half-plane (see the following

      figure).

Figure 2.94 In polar coordinates, the equation  describes the ray extending diagonally through the first

quadrant. In three dimensions, this same equation describes a half-plane.

b. Substitute       into equation               to express the rectangular form of the equation:

               This equation describes a sphere centered at the origin with radius (see the following figure).
214 2 · Vectors in Space

Figure 2.95 The sphere centered at the origin with radius can be described by the cylindrical equation

c. To describe the surface defined by equation  is it useful to examine traces parallel to the xy-plane. For

example, the trace in plane      is circle      the trace in plane  is circle  and so on. Each trace is a

circle. As the value of increases, the radius of the circle also increases. The resulting surface is a cone (see the

following figure).

Figure 2.96 The traces in planes parallel to the xy-plane are circles. The radius of the circles increases as increases.

2.57 Describe the surface with cylindrical equation

Spherical Coordinates

In the Cartesian coordinate system, the location of a point in space is described using an ordered triple in which each

coordinate represents a distance. In the cylindrical coordinate system, location of a point in space is described using two

distances                 and an angle measure In the spherical coordinate system, we again use an ordered triple to

describe the location of a point in space. In this case, the triple describes one distance and two angles. Spherical

coordinates make it simple to describe a sphere, just as cylindrical coordinates make it easy to describe a cylinder. Grid

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 215

lines for spherical coordinates are based on angle measures, like those for polar coordinates.

Definition

In the spherical coordinate system, a point  in space (Figure 2.97) is represented by the ordered triple
where

· (the Greek letter rho) is the distance between and the origin                                 where is the origin and
· is the same angle used to describe the location in cylindrical coordinates;
· (the Greek letter phi) is the angle formed by the positive z-axis and line segment

              Figure 2.97 The relationship among spherical, rectangular, and cylindrical coordinates.

By convention, the origin is represented as  in spherical coordinates.

Theorem 2.16

Converting among Spherical, Cylindrical, and Rectangular Coordinates

Rectangular coordinates  and spherical coordinates  of a point are related as follows:

If a point has cylindrical coordinates       then these equations define the relationship between cylindrical and
spherical coordinates.
216 2 · Vectors in Space

The formulas to convert from spherical coordinates to rectangular coordinates may seem complex, but they are

straightforward applications of trigonometry. Looking at Figure 2.98, it is easy to see that           Then, looking at

the triangle in the xy-plane with as its hypotenuse, we have                 The derivation of the formula

for is similar. Figure 2.96 also shows that                        and                        Solving this last equation for

and then substituting            (from the first equation) yields                             Also, note that, as before,

we must be careful when using the formula    to choose the correct value of

Figure 2.98 The equations that convert from one system to another are derived from right-triangle relationships.

As we did with cylindrical coordinates, let's consider the surfaces that are generated when each of the coordinates is held

constant. Let be a constant, and consider surfaces of the form     Points on these surfaces are at a fixed distance

from the origin and form a sphere. The coordinate in the spherical coordinate system is the same as in the cylindrical

coordinate system, so surfaces of the form   are half-planes, as before. Last, consider surfaces of the form

The points on these surfaces are at a fixed angle from the z-axis and form a half-cone (Figure 2.99).

Figure 2.99 In spherical coordinates, surfaces of the form      are spheres of radius (a), surfaces of the form          are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 217

half-planes at an angle from the x-axis (b), and surfaces of the form         are half-cones at an angle from the z-axis
(c).

EXAMPLE 2.63

Converting from Spherical Coordinates            and express its location in both rectangular and cylindrical
Plot the point with spherical coordinates
coordinates.

     Solution
Use the equations in Converting among Spherical, Cylindrical, and Rectangular Coordinates to translate between
spherical and cylindrical coordinates (Figure 2.100):

Figure 2.100 The projection of the point in the xy-plane is units from the origin. The line from the origin to the point's

projection forms an angle of with the positive x-axis. The point lies         units above the xy-plane.

The point with spherical coordinates             has rectangular coordinates

Finding the values in cylindrical coordinates is equally straightforward:

Thus, cylindrical coordinates for the point are
218 2 · Vectors in Space

    2.58 Plot the point with spherical coordinates                    and describe its location in both rectangular and
                 cylindrical coordinates.

EXAMPLE 2.64

Converting from Rectangular Coordinates        to both spherical and cylindrical coordinates.
Convert the rectangular coordinates

     Solution
Start by converting from rectangular to spherical coordinates:

Because                   then the correct choice for is

There are actually two ways to identify We can use the equation                                     A more simple
                                                                                         so
approach, however, is to use equation          We know that               and

and therefore             The spherical coordinates of the point are

To find the cylindrical coordinates for the point, we need only find

The cylindrical coordinates for the point are

EXAMPLE 2.65

Identifying Surfaces in the Spherical Coordinate System
Describe the surfaces with the given spherical equations.

a.

b.
c.
d.

    Solution

a. The variable represents the measure of the same angle in both the cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems.

    Points with coordinates            lie on the plane that forms angle       with the positive x-axis. Because

    the surface described by equation          is the half-plane shown in Figure 2.101.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 219

             Figure 2.101 The surface described by equation    is a half-plane.

b. Equation  describes all points in the spherical coordinate system that lie on a line from the origin forming an

angle measuring rad with the positive z-axis. These points form a half-cone (Figure 2.102). Because there is only

one value for that is measured from the positive z-axis, we do not get the full cone (with two pieces).

             Figure 2.102 The equation                         describes a cone.

To find the equation in rectangular coordinates, use equation
220 2 · Vectors in Space

This is the equation of a cone centered on the z-axis.

c. Equation               describes the set of all points units away from the origin--a sphere with radius (Figure 2.103).

                                 Figure 2.103 Equation  describes a sphere with radius

d. To identify this surface, convert the equation from spherical to rectangular coordinates, using equations
                             and

The equation describes a sphere centered at point       with radius

2.59 Describe the surfaces defined by the following equations.

              a.
              b.
              c.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 221

Spherical coordinates are useful in analyzing systems that have some degree of symmetry about a point, such as the

volume of the space inside a domed stadium or wind speeds in a planet's atmosphere. A sphere that has Cartesian

equation                has the simple equation  in spherical coordinates.

In geography, latitude and longitude are used to describe locations on Earth's surface, as shown in Figure 2.104.

Although the shape of Earth is not a perfect sphere, we use spherical coordinates to communicate the locations of points

on Earth. Let's assume Earth has the shape of a sphere with radius  mi. We express angle measures in degrees

rather than radians because latitude and longitude are measured in degrees.

Figure 2.104 In the latitude-longitude system, angles describe the location of a point on Earth relative to the equator
and the prime meridian.

Let the center of Earth be the center of the sphere, with the ray from the center through the North Pole representing the
positive z-axis. The prime meridian represents the trace of the surface as it intersects the xz-plane. The equator is the
trace of the sphere intersecting the xy-plane.

EXAMPLE 2.66

Converting Latitude and Longitude to Spherical Coordinates
The latitude of Columbus, Ohio, is N and the longitude is W, which means that Columbus is north of the
equator. Imagine a ray from the center of Earth through Columbus and a ray from the center of Earth through the
equator directly south of Columbus. The measure of the angle formed by the rays is In the same way, measuring
from the prime meridian, Columbus lies to the west. Express the location of Columbus in spherical coordinates.

Solution

The radius of Earth is  mi, so  The intersection of the prime meridian and the equator lies on the positive

x-axis. Movement to the west is then described with negative angle measures, which shows that         Because

Columbus lies north of the equator, it lies south of the North Pole, so      In spherical coordinates,

Columbus lies at point

2.60 Sydney, Australia is at    and              Express Sydney's location in spherical coordinates.

Cylindrical and spherical coordinates give us the flexibility to select a coordinate system appropriate to the problem at
hand. A thoughtful choice of coordinate system can make a problem much easier to solve, whereas a poor choice can
lead to unnecessarily complex calculations. In the following example, we examine several different problems and discuss
how to select the best coordinate system for each one.
222 2 · Vectors in Space

         EXAMPLE 2.67

       Choosing the Best Coordinate System
       In each of the following situations, we determine which coordinate system is most appropriate and describe how we
       would orient the coordinate axes. There could be more than one right answer for how the axes should be oriented, but
       we select an orientation that makes sense in the context of the problem. Note: There is not enough information to set up
       or solve these problems; we simply select the coordinate system (Figure 2.105).
        a. Find the center of gravity of a bowling ball.
        b. Determine the velocity of a submarine subjected to an ocean current.
        c. Calculate the pressure in a conical water tank.
        d. Find the volume of oil flowing through a pipeline.
        e. Determine the amount of leather required to make a football.

Figure 2.105 (credit: (a) modification of work by scl hua, Wikimedia, (b) modification of work by DVIDSHUB, Flickr, (c)
modification of work by Michael Malak, Wikimedia, (d) modification of work by Sean Mack, Wikimedia, (e)
modification of work by Elvert Barnes, Flickr)

Solution

a. Clearly, a bowling ball is a sphere, so spherical coordinates would probably work best here. The origin should be

located at the physical center of the ball. There is no obvious choice for how the x-, y- and z-axes should be oriented.

Bowling balls normally have a weight block in the center. One possible choice is to align the z-axis with the axis of

symmetry of the weight block.

b. A submarine generally moves in a straight line. There is no rotational or spherical symmetry that applies in this

situation, so rectangular coordinates are a good choice. The z-axis should probably point upward. The x- and y-axes

could be aligned to point east and north, respectively. The origin should be some convenient physical location, such

as the starting position of the submarine or the location of a particular port.

c. A cone has several kinds of symmetry. In cylindrical coordinates, a cone can be represented by equation

where is a constant. In spherical coordinates, we have seen that surfaces of the form  are half-cones. Last, in

rectangular coordinates, elliptic cones are quadric surfaces and can be represented by equations of the form

                           In this case, we could choose any of the three. However, the equation for the surface is more

     complicated in rectangular coordinates than in the other two systems, so we might want to avoid that choice. In
     addition, we are talking about a water tank, and the depth of the water might come into play at some point in our
     calculations, so it might be nice to have a component that represents height and depth directly. Based on this
     reasoning, cylindrical coordinates might be the best choice. Choose the z-axis to align with the axis of the cone. The
     orientation of the other two axes is arbitrary. The origin should be the bottom point of the cone.
d. A pipeline is a cylinder, so cylindrical coordinates would be best the best choice. In this case, however, we would

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 223

     likely choose to orient our z-axis with the center axis of the pipeline. The x-axis could be chosen to point straight
     downward or to some other logical direction. The origin should be chosen based on the problem statement. Note
     that this puts the z-axis in a horizontal orientation, which is a little different from what we usually do. It may make
     sense to choose an unusual orientation for the axes if it makes sense for the problem.
e. A football has rotational symmetry about a central axis, so cylindrical coordinates would work best. The z-axis
     should align with the axis of the ball. The origin could be the center of the ball or perhaps one of the ends. The
     position of the x-axis is arbitrary.
      2.61 Which coordinate system is most appropriate for creating a star map, as viewed from Earth (see the

                  following figure)?

                  How should we orient the coordinate axes?
224 2 · Vectors in Space

             SECTION 2.7 EXERCISES

       Use the following figure as an aid in identifying the relationship between the rectangular, cylindrical, and spherical
       coordinate systems.

For the following exercises, the cylindrical coordinates  of a point are given. Find the rectangular coordinates
           of the point.                                              365.

363.                             364.                       of a point are given. Find the cylindrical coordinates
                                                                      369.
366.

For the following exercises, the rectangular coordinates
          of the point.

367.                             368.

370.

For the following exercises, the equation of a surface in cylindrical coordinates is given.

Find the equation of the surface in rectangular coordinates. Identify and graph the surface.

371. [T]                         372. [T]                 373. [T]

374. [T]                         375. [T]                 376. [T]
377. [T]                         378. [T]

For the following exercises, the equation of a surface in rectangular coordinates is given. Find the equation of the surface
in cylindrical coordinates.

379.                             380.                     381.

382.                             383.                     384.

For the following exercises, the spherical coordinates    of a point are given. Find the rectangular coordinates
           of the point.                                               387.

385.                             386.

388.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 225

For the following exercises, the rectangular coordinates  of a point are given. Find the spherical coordinates

      of the point. Express the measure of the angles in degrees rounded to the nearest integer.

389.                                390.                                    391.

392.

For the following exercises, the equation of a surface in spherical coordinates is given. Find the equation of the surface in
rectangular coordinates. Identify and graph the surface.

393. [T]                            394. [T]                                395. [T]

396. [T]                            397. [T]                                398. [T]

For the following exercises, the equation of a surface in rectangular coordinates is given. Find the equation of the surface
in spherical coordinates. Identify the surface.

399.                                400.                                    401.

402.

For the following exercises, the cylindrical coordinates of a point are given. Find its associated spherical coordinates, with
the measure of the angle in radians rounded to four decimal places.

403. [T]                            404. [T]                                405.

406.

For the following exercises, the spherical coordinates of a point are given. Find its associated cylindrical coordinates.

407.                                408.                                    409.

410.

For the following exercises, find the most suitable system of coordinates to describe the solids.

411. The solid situated in the      412. A spherical shell                  413. A solid inside sphere
        first octant with a vertex          determined by the region                                         and
        at the origin and enclosed          between two concentric
        by a cube of edge length            spheres centered at the                 outside cylinder
           where                            origin, of radii of and
                                            respectively, where

414. A cylindrical shell of         415. [T] Use a CAS to graph the         416. [T] Use a CAS to graph in
        height determined by                region between elliptic                 spherical coordinates the
        the region between two              paraboloid                              "ice cream-cone region"
        cylinders with the same             and cone                                situated above the
        center, parallel rulings,                                     Then          xy-plane between sphere
        and radii of and                    describe the region in                                           and
        respectively                        cylindrical coordinates.                elliptical cone
226 2 · Vectors in Space

417. Washington, DC, is located at         418. San Francisco is located at         419. Find the latitude and
                                                                                            longitude of Rio de
N and W (see the following                           and                                    Janeiro if its spherical
                                                                                            coordinates are
figure). Assume the radius of              Assume the radius of

Earth is                  mi. Express the  Earth is       mi. Express

location of Washington, DC, in             the location of San

spherical coordinates.                     Francisco in spherical

                                           coordinates.

420. Find the latitude and                 421. [T] Consider the torus of equation
        longitude of Berlin if its
        spherical coordinates are          where

                                           a. Write the equation of the torus in spherical

                                           coordinates.

                                           b. If     the surface is called a horn torus.

                                           Show that the equation of a horn torus in

                                           spherical coordinates is

                                           c. Use a CAS to graph the horn torus with

                                                     in spherical coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  2.7 · Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 227

422. [T] The "bumpy sphere"
        with an equation in
        spherical coordinates is

with               and

      where and

are positive numbers and

and are positive

integers, may be used in

applied mathematics to

model tumor growth.

a. Show that the "bumpy

      sphere" is contained

      inside a sphere of

      equation

      Find the values of

      and at which the two

      surfaces intersect.

b. Use a CAS to graph the

      surface for

                     and

      along with

      sphere

c. Find the equation of

      the intersection curve

      of the surface at b.

      with the cone

      Graph the intersection
      curve in the plane of
      intersection.
228 2 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

component a scalar that describes either the vertical or horizontal direction of a vector

coordinate plane a plane containing two of the three coordinate axes in the three-dimensional coordinate system,

named by the axes it contains: the xy-plane, xz-plane, or the yz-plane

cross product                                                                     where            and

cylinder a set of lines parallel to a given line passing through a given curve

cylindrical coordinate system a way to describe a location in space with an ordered triple         where

represents the polar coordinates of the point's projection in the xy-plane, and represents the point's projection onto

the z-axis

determinant a real number associated with a square matrix

direction angles the angles formed by a nonzero vector and the coordinate axes

direction cosines the cosines of the angles formed by a nonzero vector and the coordinate axes

direction vector a vector parallel to a line that is used to describe the direction, or orientation, of the line in space

dot product or scalar product                              where                       and

ellipsoid a three-dimensional surface described by an equation of the form                         all traces of this

surface are ellipses

elliptic cone a three-dimensional surface described by an equation of the form                     traces of this

surface include ellipses and intersecting lines

elliptic paraboloid a three-dimensional surface described by an equation of the form               traces of this

surface include ellipses and parabolas

equivalent vectors vectors that have the same magnitude and the same direction

general form of the equation of a plane an equation in the form                             where         is a

normal vector of the plane,                   is a point on the plane, and

hyperboloid of one sheet a three-dimensional surface described by an equation of the form

traces of this surface include ellipses and hyperbolas

hyperboloid of two sheets a three-dimensional surface described by an equation of the form

traces of this surface include ellipses and hyperbolas

initial point the starting point of a vector

magnitude the length of a vector

normal vector a vector perpendicular to a plane

normalization using scalar multiplication to find a unit vector with a given direction

octants the eight regions of space created by the coordinate planes

orthogonal vectors vectors that form a right angle when placed in standard position

parallelepiped a three-dimensional prism with six faces that are parallelograms

parallelogram method a method for finding the sum of two vectors; position the vectors so they share the same initial

point; the vectors then form two adjacent sides of a parallelogram; the sum of the vectors is the diagonal of that

parallelogram

parametric equations of a line the set of equations                               and       describing the line with

direction vector                 passing through point

quadric surfaces surfaces in three dimensions having the property that the traces of the surface are conic sections

(ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas)

right-hand rule a common way to define the orientation of the three-dimensional coordinate system; when the right

hand is curved around the z-axis in such a way that the fingers curl from the positive x-axis to the positive y-axis, the

thumb points in the direction of the positive z-axis

rulings parallel lines that make up a cylindrical surface

scalar a real number

scalar equation of a plane the equation                                           used to describe a plane containing

point                   with normal vector                 or its alternate form                   where

scalar multiplication a vector operation that defines the product of a scalar and a vector
scalar projection the magnitude of the vector projection of a vector

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2 · Chapter Review 229

skew lines two lines that are not parallel but do not intersect

sphere the set of all points equidistant from a given point known as the center

spherical coordinate system a way to describe a location in space with an ordered triple            where is the

distance between and the origin            is the same angle used to describe the location in cylindrical

coordinates, and is the angle formed by the positive z-axis and line segment where is the origin and

standard equation of a sphere                                       describes a sphere with center  and radius
standard unit vectors unit vectors along the coordinate axes:
standard-position vector a vector with initial point

symmetric equations of line the equations                           describing the line with direction vector

      passing through point

terminal point the endpoint of a vector

three-dimensional rectangular coordinate system a coordinate system defined by three lines that intersect at right

angles; every point in space is described by an ordered triple          that plots its location relative to the defining

axes

torque the effect of a force that causes an object to rotate

trace the intersection of a three-dimensional surface with a coordinate plane

triangle inequality the length of any side of a triangle is less than the sum of the lengths of the other two sides

triangle method a method for finding the sum of two vectors; position the vectors so the terminal point of one vector

is the initial point of the other; these vectors then form two sides of a triangle; the sum of the vectors is the vector

that forms the third side; the initial point of the sum is the initial point of the first vector; the terminal point of the

sum is the terminal point of the second vector

triple scalar product the dot product of a vector with the cross product of two other vectors:

unit vector a vector with margnitude

vector a mathematical object that has both magnitude and direction

vector addition a vector operation that defines the sum of two vectors

vector difference the vector difference  is defined as

vector equation of a line the equation           used to describe a line with direction vector             passing

through point            where                                is the position vector of point

vector equation of a plane the equation          where is a given point in the plane, is any point in the plane,

and is a normal vector of the plane

vector product the cross product of two vectors

vector projection the component of a vector that follows a given direction

vector sum the sum of two vectors, and can be constructed graphically by placing the initial point of at the

terminal point of then the vector sum            is the vector with an initial point that coincides with the initial point of

and with a terminal point that coincides with the terminal point of

work done by a force work is generally thought of as the amount of energy it takes to move an object; if we represent

an applied force by a vector F and the displacement of an object by a vector s, then the work done by the force is the

dot product of F and s.

zero vector the vector with both initial point and terminal point

Key Equations

Distance between two points in space:

Sphere with center       and radius r:

Dot product of u and v

Cosine of the angle formed by and
Vector projection of onto
230 2 · Chapter Review

Scalar projection of onto
Work done by a force F to move an object through displacement vector
The cross product of two vectors in terms of the
unit vectors
Vector Equation of a Line
Parametric Equations of a Line
Vector Equation of a Plane
Scalar Equation of a Plane

Distance between a Plane and a Point

Key Concepts

2.1 Vectors in the Plane

· Vectors are used to represent quantities that have both magnitude and direction.

· We can add vectors by using the parallelogram method or the triangle method to find the sum. We can multiply a

vector by a scalar to change its length or give it the opposite direction.

· Subtraction of vectors is defined in terms of adding the negative of the vector.

· A vector is written in component form as

· The magnitude of a vector is a scalar:

· A unit vector has magnitude and can be found by dividing a vector by its magnitude:                   The standard

unit vectors are                             A vector      can be expressed in terms of the standard unit vectors

as

· Vectors are often used in physics and engineering to represent forces and velocities, among other quantities.

2.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions

· The three-dimensional coordinate system is built around a set of three axes that intersect at right angles at a single

point, the origin. Ordered triples           are used to describe the location of a point in space.

· The distance between points                and           is given by the formula

· In three dimensions, the equations                            describe planes that are parallel to the coordinate planes.
· The standard equation of a sphere with center            and radius is

· In three dimensions, as in two, vectors are commonly expressed in component form,                     or in terms of

the standard unit vectors,

· Properties of vectors in space are a natural extension of the properties for vectors in a plane. Let

and                     be vectors, and let  be a scalar.

 Scalar multiplication:

 Vector addition:

 Vector subtraction:

 Vector magnitude:

 Unit vector in the direction of v:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2 · Chapter Review 231

2.3 The Dot Product

· The dot product, or scalar product, of two vectors                  and                 is

· The dot product satisfies the following properties:
   
   
   
   

· The dot product of two vectors can be expressed, alternatively, as                      This form of the dot

product is useful for finding the measure of the angle formed by two vectors.

· Vectors and are orthogonal if

· The angles formed by a nonzero vector and the coordinate axes are called the direction angles for the vector. The

cosines of these angles are known as the direction cosines.

· The vector projection of onto is the vector                       The magnitude of this vector is known as the scalar

   projection of onto , given by

· Work is done when a force is applied to an object, causing displacement. When the force is represented by the
   vector F and the displacement is represented by the vector s, then the work done W is given by the formula

2.4 The Cross Product

· The cross product     of two vectors                 and                 is a vector orthogonal to both and

Its length is given by                                 where is the angle between and Its direction is given by the

right-hand rule.

· The algebraic formula for calculating the cross product of two vectors,

                                           is

· The cross product satisfies the following properties for vectors         and scalar
   
   
   
   
   
   

· The cross product of vectors                 and                    is the determinant

· If vectors and form adjacent sides of a parallelogram, then the area of the parallelogram is given by

· The triple scalar product of vectors         and is

· The volume of a parallelepiped with adjacent edges given by vectors          is

· If the triple scalar product of vectors      is zero, then the vectors are coplanar. The converse is also true: If

the vectors are coplanar, then their triple scalar product is zero.

· The cross product can be used to identify a vector orthogonal to two given vectors or to a plane.

· Torque measures the tendency of a force to produce rotation about an axis of rotation. If force is acting at a

distance from the axis, then torque is equal to the cross product of and

2.5 Equations of Lines and Planes in Space

· In three dimensions, the direction of a line is described by a direction vector. The vector equation of a line with

direction vector                passing through point                 is           where                 is the

position vector of point This equation can be rewritten to form the parametric equations of the line:

and                             The line can also be described with the symmetric equations

· Let be a line in space passing through point with direction vector If is any point not on then the distance

from to is

· In three dimensions, two lines may be parallel but not equal, equal, intersecting, or skew.

· Given a point and vector the set of all points satisfying equation               forms a plane. Equation
232 2 · Chapter Review

is known as the vector equation of a plane.

· The scalar equation of a plane containing point  with normal vector                               is

                                    This equation can be expressed as                               where

                                 This form of the equation is sometimes called the general form of the equation of a plane.

· Suppose a plane with normal vector n passes through point The distance from the plane to point not in the

plane is given by

· The normal vectors of parallel planes are parallel. When two planes intersect, they form a line.

· The measure of the angle between two intersecting planes can be found using the equation:

where and are normal vectors to the planes.

· The distance from point           to plane       is given by

2.6 Quadric Surfaces

· A set of lines parallel to a given line passing through a given curve is called a cylinder, or a cylindrical surface. The

parallel lines are called rulings.

· The intersection of a three-dimensional surface and a plane is called a trace. To find the trace in the xy-, yz-, or

xz-planes, set                      respectively.

· Quadric surfaces are three-dimensional surfaces with traces composed of conic sections. Every quadric surface can

be expressed with an equation of the form

· To sketch the graph of a quadric surface, start by sketching the traces to understand the framework of the surface.

· Important quadric surfaces are summarized in Figure 2.87 and Figure 2.88.

2.7 Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates

· In the cylindrical coordinate system, a point in space is represented by the ordered triple       where

represents the polar coordinates of the point's projection in the xy-plane and represents the point's projection

onto the z-axis.

· To convert a point from cylindrical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates, use equations                               and

· To convert a point from Cartesian coordinates to cylindrical coordinates, use equations                               and

· In the spherical coordinate system, a point in space is represented by the ordered triple             where is the

distance between and the origin            is the same angle used to describe the location in cylindrical

coordinates, and is the angle formed by the positive z-axis and line segment where is the origin and

· To convert a point from spherical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates, use equations
                            and

· To convert a point from Cartesian coordinates to spherical coordinates, use equations

                   and

· To convert a point from spherical coordinates to cylindrical coordinates, use equations                  and

· To convert a point from cylindrical coordinates to spherical coordinates, use equations                  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        2 · Chapter Review 233

Review Exercises

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false. Justify the answer with a proof or a
counterexample.

423. For vectors and and            424. For vectors and and                425. The symmetric equation
        any given scalar                    any given scalar                        for the line of intersection
                                                                                    between two planes
                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                            is given

                                                                                    by

426. If      then is

      perpendicular to

For the following exercises, use the given vectors to find the quantities.

427.                                428.
         a.                                  a.
         b.                                  b.
         c.                                  c.
         d.                                  d.
                                             e.

429. Find the values of such

      that vectors          and

             are orthogonal.

For the following exercises, find the unit vectors.

430. Find the unit vector that      431. Find the unit vector that
        has the same direction as           has the same direction as
        vector that begins at               vector that begins at
                  and ends at                            and ends at

For the following exercises, find the area or volume of the given shapes.

432. The parallelogram              433. The parallelepiped formed by
        spanned by vectors                  and

For the following exercises, find the vector and parametric equations of the line with the given properties.

434. The line that passes           435. The line that passes
        through point                       through points
        that is parallel to vector          and

For the following exercises, find the equation of the plane with the given properties.

436. The plane that passes          437. The plane that passes through
        through point                       points
        and has normal vector

For the following exercises, find the traces for the surfaces in planes                 Then, describe and draw
the surfaces.

438.                                439.
234 2 · Chapter Review

For the following exercises, write the given equation in cylindrical coordinates and spherical coordinates.

440.                                441.

For the following exercises, convert the given equations from cylindrical or spherical coordinates to rectangular
coordinates. Identify the given surface.

442.                                443.

For the following exercises, consider a small boat crossing a river.

444. If the boat velocity is km/h due 445. When the boat reaches the shore, 446. An airplane is flying in the

      north in still water and the water has two ropes are thrown to people to   direction of 52° east of

      a current of km/h due west (see the help pull the boat ashore. One rope is north with a speed of 450

      following figure), what is the velocity at an angle of and the other is at mph. A strong wind has a

      of the boat relative to shore? What is  If the boat must be pulled         bearing 33° east of north

      the angle that the boat is actually     straight and at a force of   find  with a speed of 50 mph.

      traveling?                              the magnitude of force for each rope What is the resultant

                                              (see the following figure).        ground speed and

                                                                                 bearing of the airplane?

447. Calculate the work done

      by moving a particle from

      position           to

      along a straight

      line with a force

The following problems consider your unsuccessful attempt to take the tire off your car using a wrench to loosen the
bolts. Assume the wrench is m long and you are able to apply a 200-N force.

448. Because your tire is flat,     449. Someone lends you a tire
        you are only able to apply          jack and you are now able
        your force at a angle.              to apply a 200-N force at
        What is the torque at the           an angle. Is your
        center of the bolt?                 resulting torque going to
        Assume this force is not            be more or less? What is
        enough to loosen the                the new resulting torque
        bolt.                               at the center of the bolt?
                                            Assume this force is not
                                            enough to loosen the
                                            bolt.

Access for free at openstax.org
                            3 · Introduction 235

3  VECTOR-VALUED FUNCTIONS

Figure 3.1 Halley's Comet appeared in view of Earth in 1986 and will appear again in 2061.

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves
  3.2 Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions
  3.3 Arc Length and Curvature
  3.4 Motion in Space

      Introduction

In 1705, using Sir Isaac Newton's new laws of motion, the astronomer Edmond Halley made a prediction. He stated that
comets that had appeared in 1531, 1607, and 1682 were actually the same comet and that it would reappear in 1758.
Halley was proved to be correct, although he did not live to see it. However, the comet was later named in his honor.

Halley's Comet follows an elliptical path through the solar system, with the Sun appearing at one focus of the ellipse. This
motion is predicted by Johannes Kepler's first law of planetary motion, which we mentioned briefly in the Introduction to
Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates. In Example 3.15, we show how to use Kepler's third law of planetary motion
along with the calculus of vector-valued functions to find the average distance of Halley's Comet from the Sun.

Vector-valued functions provide a useful method for studying various curves both in the plane and in three-dimensional
space. We can apply this concept to calculate the velocity, acceleration, arc length, and curvature of an object's trajectory.
In this chapter, we examine these methods and show how they are used.

3.1 Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves

Learning Objectives

      3.1.1 Write the general equation of a vector-valued function in component form and unit-vector form.
      3.1.2 Recognize parametric equations for a space curve.
      3.1.3 Describe the shape of a helix and write its equation.
      3.1.4 Define the limit of a vector-valued function.

Our study of vector-valued functions combines ideas from our earlier examination of single-variable calculus with our
description of vectors in three dimensions from the preceding chapter. In this section we extend concepts from earlier
chapters and also examine new ideas concerning curves in three-dimensional space. These definitions and theorems
support the presentation of material in the rest of this chapter and also in the remaining chapters of the text.

Definition of a Vector-Valued Function

Our first step in studying the calculus of vector-valued functions is to define what exactly a vector-valued function is. We
236 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

can then look at graphs of vector-valued functions and see how they define curves in both two and three dimensions.

Definition

A vector-valued function is a function of the form

                                                                                                                 (3.1)

where the component functions f, g, and h, are real-valued functions of the parameter t. Vector-valued functions are
also written in the form

                                                                                                                                                               (3.2)

In both cases, the first form of the function defines a two-dimensional vector-valued function; the second form
describes a three-dimensional vector-valued function.

The parameter t can lie between two real numbers:         Another possibility is that the value of t might take on all

real numbers. Last, the component functions themselves may have domain restrictions that enforce restrictions on the

value of t. We often use t as a parameter because t can represent time.

EXAMPLE 3.1

Evaluating Vector-Valued Functions and Determining Domains               Do any of these functions have
For each of the following vector-valued functions, evaluate
domain restrictions?

a.
b.

    Solution
a. To calculate each of the function values, substitute the appropriate value of t into the function:

    To determine whether this function has any domain restrictions, consider the component functions separately. The

    first component function is  and the second component function is    Neither of these

    functions has a domain restriction, so the domain of                 is all real numbers.

b. To calculate each of the function values, substitute the appropriate value of t into the function:

    To determine whether this function has any domain restrictions, consider the component functions separately. The

    first component function is  the second component function is        and the third component

    function is                  The first two functions are not defined for odd multiples of so the function is not defined

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      3.1 · Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves 237

for odd multiples of Therefore,                                       where n is any integer.

3.1 For the vector-valued function                                    evaluate                             Does this
           function have any domain restrictions?

Example 3.1 illustrates an important concept. The domain of a vector-valued function consists of real numbers. The
domain can be all real numbers or a subset of the real numbers. The range of a vector-valued function consists of
vectors. Each real number in the domain of a vector-valued function is mapped to either a two- or a three-dimensional
vector.

Graphing Vector-Valued Functions

Recall that a plane vector consists of two quantities: direction and magnitude. Given any point in the plane (the initial
point), if we move in a specific direction for a specific distance, we arrive at a second point. This represents the terminal
point of the vector. We calculate the components of the vector by subtracting the coordinates of the initial point from the
coordinates of the terminal point.

A vector is considered to be in standard position if the initial point is located at the origin. When graphing a vector-

valued function, we typically graph the vectors in the domain of the function in standard position, because doing so

guarantees the uniqueness of the graph. This convention applies to the graphs of three-dimensional vector-valued

functions as well. The graph of a vector-valued function of the form            consists of the set of all

        and the path it traces is called a plane curve. The graph of a vector-valued function of the form

             consists of the set of all                           and the path it traces is called a space curve. Any

representation of a plane curve or space curve using a vector-valued function is called a vector parameterization of the

curve.

EXAMPLE 3.2

Graphing a Vector-Valued Function
Create a graph of each of the following vector-valued functions:

a. The plane curve represented by
b. The plane curve represented by
c. The space curve represented by

    Solution
a. As with any graph, we start with a table of values. We then graph each of the vectors in the second column of the

     table in standard position and connect the terminal points of each vector to form a curve (Figure 3.2). This curve
     turns out to be an ellipse centered at the origin.

                                   t                              t

                                   0

                                   Table 3.1 Table of Values for
238 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

                                 Figure 3.2 The graph of the first vector-valued function is an ellipse.

b. The table of values for          is as follows:

                                 t  t

                                 0

                                              Table 3.2 Table of Values for
The graph of this curve is also an ellipse centered at the origin.

Access for free at openstax.org
      3.1 · Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves 239

Figure 3.3 The graph of the second vector-valued function is also an ellipse.

c. We go through the same procedure for a three-dimensional vector function.

t  t

0

                                   Table 3.3 Table of Values for

The values then repeat themselves, except for the fact that the coefficient of k is always increasing (Figure 3.4). This
curve is called a helix. Notice that if the k component is eliminated, then the function becomes
which is a unit circle centered at the origin.

Figure 3.4 The graph of the third vector-valued function is a helix.
240 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

You may notice that the graphs in parts a. and b. are identical. This happens because the function describing curve b is a
so-called reparameterization of the function describing curve a. In fact, any curve has an infinite number of
reparameterizations; for example, we can replace t with in any of the three previous curves without changing the
shape of the curve. The interval over which t is defined may change, but that is all. We return to this idea later in this
chapter when we study arc-length parameterization.

As mentioned, the name of the shape of the curve of the graph in Example 3.2c. is a helix (Figure 3.4). The curve

resembles a spring, with a circular cross-section looking down along the z-axis. It is possible for a helix to be elliptical in

cross-section as well. For example, the vector-valued function                             describes an elliptical helix.

The projection of this helix into the            is an ellipse. Last, the arrows in the graph of this helix indicate the

orientation of the curve as t progresses from 0 to

3.2 Create a graph of the vector-valued function

At this point, you may notice a similarity between vector-valued functions and parameterized curves. Indeed, given a

vector-valued function                           we can define       and         If a restriction exists on the values of

t (for example, t is restricted to the interval  for some constants       then this restriction is enforced on the

parameter. The graph of the parameterized function would then agree with the graph of the vector-valued function,

except that the vector-valued graph would represent vectors rather than points. Since we can parameterize a curve

defined by a function            it is also possible to represent an arbitrary plane curve by a vector-valued function.

Limits and Continuity of a Vector-Valued Function

We now take a look at the limit of a vector-valued function. This is important to understand to study the calculus of
vector-valued functions.

Definition

A vector-valued function r approaches the limit L as t approaches a, written

provided

This is a rigorous definition of the limit of a vector-valued function. In practice, we use the following theorem:

Theorem 3.1

Limit of a Vector-Valued Function                                                                        as t approaches a is
Let f, g, and h be functions of t. Then the limit of the vector-valued function                                               (3.3)
given by

provided the limits                           exist. Similarly, the limit of the vector-valued function
                                 as t approaches a is given by

                                                                                                                          (3.4)

provided the limits                                 exist.

In the following example, we show how to calculate the limit of a vector-valued function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          3.1 · Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves 241

EXAMPLE 3.3

Evaluating the Limit of a Vector-Valued Function

For each of the following vector-valued functions, calculate         for

a.
b.

    Solution                                      into the two component expressions:
a. Use Equation 3.3 and substitute the value

b. Use Equation 3.4 and substitute the value      into the three component expressions:

    3.3 Calculate   for the function

Now that we know how to calculate the limit of a vector-valued function, we can define continuity at a point for such a
function.

Definition

Let f, g, and h be functions of t. Then, the vector-valued function       is continuous at point  if
the following three conditions hold:

1.  exists

2.          exists

3.

Similarly, the vector-valued function                                is continuous at point  if the following three
conditions hold:

1.  exists

2.          exists

3.
242 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

     SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES

1. Give the component            2. Given                                       3. Sketch the curve of the
                                                                       find         vector-valued function
     functions        and                                                                                            and
                                     the following values (if                       give the orientation of the
     for the vector-                 possible).                                     curve. Sketch asymptotes as
                                      a.                                            a guide to the graph.
     valued function
                                      b.
                                       c.

4. Evaluate                      5. Given the vector-valued                     6. Given the vector-valued
                                     function                                       function
                                     find the following values:                     find the following values:
                                      a.                                             a.

                                       b.        continuous at                       b.      continuous at
                                       c. Is                                         c. Is

                                                                                     d.

                                       d. Graph

7. Let

    Find the following values:
     a.
     b.
      c. Is continuous at

Find the limit of the following vector-valued functions at the indicated value of t.

8.                               9.              for                            10.

                                                                                         

11.                              12.                                            13.          for

                                                                                         

14. Describe the curve defined by the
      vector-valued function

Find the domain of the vector-valued functions.

15. Domain:                      16. Domain:                                    17. Domain:

Let                              and use it to answer the following questions.

18. For what values of t is      19. Sketch the graph of                        20. Find the domain of
      continuous?

21. For what values of t is

     continuous?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 243

Eliminate the parameter t, write the equation in Cartesian coordinates, then sketch the graphs of the vector-valued
functions.

22.              (Hint: Let       23.                                 24.

         and     Solve

     the first equation for x in

     terms of t and substitute

     this result into the second

     equation.)

25.                               26.

Use a graphing utility to sketch each of the following vector-valued functions:

27. [T]                                28. [T]                             29. [T]

30.              clockwise        31.                   from left to  32. The line through P and Q
                                        right
     and counterclockwise                                                  where P is  and Q

                                                                           is

Consider the curve described by the vector-valued function

33. What is the initial point of  34. What is                         35. [T] Use technology to
      the path corresponding to                                             sketch the curve.

36. Eliminate the parameter t     37. [T] Let                                    38. [T] Use the result of the
      to show that                                                                     preceding problem to
      where                             Use technology to graph the                    construct an equation of a
                                        curve (called the roller-coaster               roller coaster with a steep
39. Use the results of the              curve) over the interval                       drop from the peak and
      preceding two problems to         Choose at least two views to                   steep incline from the
      construct an equation of a        determine the peaks and valleys.               "valley." Then, use
      path of a roller coaster                                                         technology to graph the
      with more than two          40. a. Graph the curve                               equation.
      turning points (peaks and
      valleys).                             using two viewing angles of your choice to see the overall shape
                                            of the curve.
                                       b. Does the curve resemble a "slinky"?
                                       c. What changes to the equation should be made to increase the
                                            number of coils of the slinky?

3.2 Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions

Learning Objectives

      3.2.1 Write an expression for the derivative of a vector-valued function.
      3.2.2 Find the tangent vector at a point for a given position vector.
      3.2.3 Find the unit tangent vector at a point for a given position vector and explain its significance.
      3.2.4 Calculate the definite integral of a vector-valued function.

To study the calculus of vector-valued functions, we follow a similar path to the one we took in studying real-valued
functions. First, we define the derivative, then we examine applications of the derivative, then we move on to defining
integrals. However, we will find some interesting new ideas along the way as a result of the vector nature of these
functions and the properties of space curves.

Derivatives of Vector-Valued Functions

Now that we have seen what a vector-valued function is and how to take its limit, the next step is to learn how to
differentiate a vector-valued function. The definition of the derivative of a vector-valued function is nearly identical to the
definition of a real-valued function of one variable. However, because the range of a vector-valued function consists of
244 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

vectors, the same is true for the range of the derivative of a vector-valued function.
  Definition
  The derivative of a vector-valued function is

provided the limit exists. If    exists, then r is differentiable at t. If  exists for all t in an open interval  (3.5)
                                                                                                                   the
then r is differentiable over the interval  For the function to be differentiable over the closed interval

following two limits must exist as well:

Many of the rules for calculating derivatives of real-valued functions can be applied to calculating the derivatives of
vector-valued functions as well. Recall that the derivative of a real-valued function can be interpreted as the slope of a
tangent line or the instantaneous rate of change of the function. The derivative of a vector-valued function can be
understood to be an instantaneous rate of change as well; for example, when the function represents the position of an
object at a given point in time, the derivative represents its velocity at that same point in time.
We now demonstrate taking the derivative of a vector-valued function.

  EXAMPLE 3.4

Finding the Derivative of a Vector-Valued Function
Use the definition to calculate the derivative of the function

     Solution
Let's use Equation 3.5:

       3.4 Use the definition to calculate the derivative of the function
Notice that in the calculations in Example 3.4, we could also obtain the answer by first calculating the derivative of each
component function, then putting these derivatives back into the vector-valued function. This is always true for
calculating the derivative of a vector-valued function, whether it is in two or three dimensions. We state this in the
following theorem. The proof of this theorem follows directly from the definitions of the limit of a vector-valued function
and the derivative of a vector-valued function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 245

Theorem 3.2

Differentiation of Vector-Valued Functions
Let f, g, and h be differentiable functions of t.

i. If        then
ii. If
                                           then

EXAMPLE 3.5

Calculating the Derivative of Vector-Valued Functions
Use Differentiation of Vector-Valued Functions to calculate the derivative of each of the following functions.

a.
b.
c.

     Solution
We use Differentiation of Vector-Valued Functions and what we know about differentiating functions of one variable.

a. The first component of                                                is  The second component is

                                  We have        and                     so the theorem gives
b. The first component is
                                           and the second component is                         We have             and
                          so we obtain                                                                                      and
c. The first component of                                            is      the second component is
                                           We have                                                            and
     the third component is
     so the theorem gives

    3.5 Calculate the derivative of the function

We can extend to vector-valued functions the properties of the derivative that we presented in the Introduction to
Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-introduction). In particular, the constant multiple rule,
the sum and difference rules, the product rule, and the chain rule all extend to vector-valued functions. However, in the
case of the product rule, there are actually three extensions: (1) for a real-valued function multiplied by a vector-valued
function, (2) for the dot product of two vector-valued functions, and (3) for the cross product of two vector-valued
functions.

  Theorem 3.3

  Properties of the Derivative of Vector-Valued Functions
  Let r and u be differentiable vector-valued functions of t, let f be a differentiable real-valued function of t, and let c be
  a scalar.
246 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Proof

The proofs of the first two properties follow directly from the definition of the derivative of a vector-valued function. The

third property can be derived from the first two properties, along with the product rule from the Introduction to

Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-introduction). Let                             Then

To prove property iv. let             and                       Then

The proof of property v. is similar to that of property iv. Property vi. can be proved using the chain rule. Last, property vii.
follows from property iv:


Now for some examples using these properties.

  EXAMPLE 3.6

Using the Properties of Derivatives of Vector-Valued Functions
Given the vector-valued functions

and

calculate each of the following derivatives using the properties of the derivative of vector-valued functions.

 a.
b.

Solution

a. We have                       and                            Therefore, according to property iv.:

b. First, we need to adapt property v. for this problem:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 247

Recall that the cross product of any vector with itself is zero. Furthermore,   represents the second derivative of

Therefore,

3.6 Given the vector-valued functions                                     and   calculate
                                  and

Tangent Vectors and Unit Tangent Vectors

Recall from the Introduction to Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-introduction) that the

derivative at a point can be interpreted as the slope of the tangent line to the graph at that point. In the case of a vector-

valued function, the derivative provides a tangent vector to the curve represented by the function. Consider the vector-

valued function             The derivative of this function is                  If we substitute the value

into both functions we get

The graph of this function appears in Figure 3.5, along with the vectors  and

Figure 3.5 The tangent line at a point is calculated from the derivative of the vector-valued function

Notice that the vector  is tangent to the circle at the point corresponding to  This is an example of a

tangent vector to the plane curve defined by
248 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Definition

Let C be a curve defined by a vector-valued function r, and assume that          exists when  A tangent vector v at

    is any vector such that, when the tail of the vector is placed at point      on the graph, vector v is tangent to

curve C. Vector                  is an example of a tangent vector at point  Furthermore, assume that  The

principal unit tangent vector at t is defined to be

                                                                                                                         (3.6)

provided

The unit tangent vector is exactly what it sounds like: a unit vector that is tangent to the curve. To calculate a unit

tangent vector, first find the derivative  Second, calculate the magnitude of the derivative. The third step is to divide

the derivative by its magnitude.

EXAMPLE 3.7

Finding a Unit Tangent Vector
Find the unit tangent vector for each of the following vector-valued functions:

 a.
b.

     Solution
 a.

b.

       3.7 Find the unit tangent vector for the vector-valued function

Integrals of Vector-Valued Functions

We introduced antiderivatives of real-valued functions in Antiderivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/
pages/4-10-antiderivatives) and definite integrals of real-valued functions in The Definite Integral (http://openstax.org/
books/calculus-volume-2/pages/1-2-the-definite-integral). Each of these concepts can be extended to vector-valued
functions. Also, just as we can calculate the derivative of a vector-valued function by differentiating the component
functions separately, we can calculate the antiderivative in the same manner. Furthermore, the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus applies to vector-valued functions as well.
The antiderivative of a vector-valued function appears in applications. For example, if a vector-valued function
represents the velocity of an object at time t, then its antiderivative represents position. Or, if the function represents the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 249

acceleration of the object at a given time, then the antiderivative represents its velocity.

Definition

Let f, g, and h be integrable real-valued functions over the closed interval

1. The indefinite integral of a vector-valued function                        is

                                                                                              (3.7)

     The definite integral of a vector-valued function is                                                               (3.8)
2. The indefinite integral of a vector-valued function
                                                                                  is
                                                                                                                        (3.9)

    The definite integral of the vector-valued function is

                                                                                              (3.10)

Since the indefinite integral of a vector-valued function involves indefinite integrals of the component functions, each of
these component integrals contains an integration constant. They can all be different. For example, in the two-
dimensional case, we can have

where F and G are antiderivatives of f and g, respectively. Then

where        Therefore, the integration constant becomes a constant vector.

EXAMPLE 3.8

Integrating Vector-Valued Functions
Calculate each of the following integrals:

a.

b.

c.

    Solution
a. We use the first part of the definition of the integral of a space curve:
250 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

        b. First calculate
             Next, substitute this back into the integral and integrate:

        c. Use the second part of the definition of the integral of a space curve:
              3.8 Calculate the following integral:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 251

        SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES

Compute the derivatives of the vector-valued functions.

41.  42.                                                 43.                         

                                                                                A sketch of the graph is shown
                                                                                here. Notice the varying periodic
                                                                                nature of the graph.

44.  45.                                                 46.

47.       48.

49.       50.

For the following problems, find a tangent vector at the indicated value of t.

51.            52.                                                              53.

54.
252 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Find the unit tangent vector for the following parameterized curves.

55.                                        56.

     . Two views of this curve

     are presented here:

57.                                             58.
                                                        Here is the graph of the function:
Let                              and

Find the following.

59.                                   60.                             61.

62. Compute the first, second,        63. Find
      and third derivatives of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 253

64. The acceleration function, initial velocity, and initial  65. The position vector of a particle is
      position of a particle are
      Find                                                           a. Graph the position function
                                                                           and display a view of the graph
66. Find the velocity and the                                              that illustrates the asymptotic
      speed of a particle with the                                         behavior of the function.
      position function
                                                                     b. Find the velocity as t
                                                                           approaches but is not equal to
                                                                                (if it exists).

      The speed of a particle is the                                                                      where is the
      magnitude of the velocity and
      is represented by

A particle moves on a circular path of radius b according to the function
angular velocity,

69. Evaluate                          67. Find the velocity function       68. Show that the speed of the
      given                                 and show that is                     particle is proportional to
                                            always orthogonal to                 the angular velocity.

                                70. Find the antiderivative of               71. Evaluate

                                that satisfies the initial condition

72. An object starts from rest  73. Show that if the speed of a       74. Given
                                      particle traveling along a            and
at point      and                     curve represented by a                find
                                      vector-valued function is
moves with an acceleration            constant, then the velocity     77. Find the equation of the
                                      function is always                    tangent line to the curve
of            where                   perpendicular to the                                            at
                                      acceleration function.
           is measured in feet
                                76. Find the velocity vector for
per second per second.                the function

Find the location of the

object after  sec.

75. Given

find the velocity and the
speed at any time.
254 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

78. Describe and sketch the            79. Locate the highest point on
      curve represented by the               the curve
      vector-valued function                                             and

                                             give the value of the
                                             function at this point.

The position vector for a particle is                             The graph is shown here:

                                 80. Find the velocity vector at  81. Find the speed of the
                                       any time.
                                                                  particle at time           sec.

82. Find the acceleration at

time  sec.

A particle travels along the path of a helix with the equation                               See the graph presented here:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.2 · Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions 255

Find the following:               84. Speed of the particle at any  85. Acceleration of the particle
                                        time                              at any time
83. Velocity of the particle at
      any time

86. Find the unit tangent
      vector for the helix.

A particle travels along the path of an ellipse with the equation                              Find the following:

87. Velocity of the particle      88. Speed of the particle at      89. Acceleration of the particle
                                                                          at

Given the vector-valued function                    (graph is shown here), find the following:

91. Speed                         92. Acceleration  90. Velocity

Given                                                                   93. Find the minimum speed
94.                                                                           of a particle traveling along
                                                                              the curve

                                  and                               find the following:

                                  95.                               96. Now, use the product rule

                                                                    for the derivative of the

                                                                    cross product of two

                                                                    vectors and show this

                                                                    result is the same as the

                                                                    answer for the preceding

                                                                    problem.
256 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Find the unit tangent vector T(t) for the following vector-valued functions.

97.          The graph is shown 98.                                           99.

      here:

Evaluate the following integrals:

100.                               101.  where

3.3 Arc Length and Curvature

Learning Objectives

      3.3.1 Determine the length of a particle's path in space by using the arc-length function.
      3.3.2 Explain the meaning of the curvature of a curve in space and state its formula.
      3.3.3 Describe the meaning of the normal and binormal vectors of a curve in space.

In this section, we study formulas related to curves in both two and three dimensions, and see how they are related to
various properties of the same curve. For example, suppose a vector-valued function describes the motion of a particle
in space. We would like to determine how far the particle has traveled over a given time interval, which can be described
by the arc length of the path it follows. Or, suppose that the vector-valued function describes a road we are building and
we want to determine how sharply the road curves at a given point. This is described by the curvature of the function at
that point. We explore each of these concepts in this section.

Arc Length for Vector Functions

We have seen how a vector-valued function describes a curve in either two or three dimensions. Recall Arc Length of a
Parametric Curve, which states that the formula for the arc length of a curve defined by the parametric functions

                                            is given by

In a similar fashion, if we define a smooth curve using a vector-valued function          where
the arc length is given by the formula                                             over the same interval

In three dimensions, if the vector-valued function is described by
              the arc length is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 257

Theorem 3.4

Arc-Length Formulas

    i. Plane curve: Given a smooth curve C defined by the function           where t lies within the
                                                                                                             (3.11)
    interval      the arc length of C over the interval is
                                                                                          where t lies within
ii. Space curve: Given a smooth curve C defined by the function                                              (3.12)

    the interval     the arc length of C over the interval is

The two formulas are very similar; they differ only in the fact that a space curve has three component functions instead
of two. Note that the formulas are defined for smooth curves: curves where the vector-valued function is
differentiable with a non-zero derivative. The smoothness condition guarantees that the curve has no cusps (or corners)
that could make the formula problematic.

EXAMPLE 3.9

Finding the Arc Length
Calculate the arc length for each of the following vector-valued functions:

a.
b.

    Solution

a. Using Equation 3.11,  so

b. Using Equation 3.12,                                        so

    Here we can use a table integration formula
258 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

             so we obtain

              3.9 Calculate the arc length of the parameterized curve

       We now return to the helix introduced earlier in this chapter. A vector-valued function that describes a helix can be
       written in the form
       where R represents the radius of the helix, h represents the height (distance between two consecutive turns), and the
       helix completes N turns. Let's derive a formula for the arc length of this helix using Equation 3.12. First of all,
       Therefore,

       This gives a formula for the length of a wire needed to form a helix with N turns that has radius R and height h.

     Arc-Length Parameterization

       We now have a formula for the arc length of a curve defined by a vector-valued function. Let's take this one step further
       and examine what an arc-length function is.
       If a vector-valued function represents the position of a particle in space as a function of time, then the arc-length
       function measures how far that particle travels as a function of time. The formula for the arc-length function follows
       directly from the formula for arc length:

                                                                                                                                                                        (3.13)
       If the curve is in two dimensions, then only two terms appear under the square root inside the integral. The reason for
       using the independent variable u is to distinguish between time and the variable of integration. Since measures

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 259

distance traveled as a function of time,   measures the speed of the particle at any given time. Since we have a

formula for in Equation 3.13, we can differentiate both sides of the equation:

If we assume that defines a smooth curve, then the arc length is always increasing, so  for           Last, if

is a curve on which                   for all t, then

which means that t represents the arc length as long as

Theorem 3.5

Arc-Length Function                        Then the arc-length function is given by
Let describe a smooth curve for

                                                                                                                     (3.14)

Furthermore,                      If             for all  then the parameter t represents the arc length from the
starting point at

A useful application of this theorem is to find an alternative parameterization of a given curve, called an arc-length

parameterization. Recall that any vector-valued function can be reparameterized via a change of variables. For

example, if we have a function                                     that parameterizes a circle of radius 3, we can change

the parameter from t to obtaining a new parameterization                             The new parameterization still

defines a circle of radius 3, but now we need only use the values       to traverse the circle once.

Suppose that we find the arc-length function and are able to solve this function for t as a function of s. We can then

reparameterize the original function by substituting the expression for t back into     The vector-valued function is

now written in terms of the parameter s. Since the variable s represents the arc length, we call this an arc-length

parameterization of the original function  One advantage of finding the arc-length parameterization is that the

distance traveled along the curve starting from        is now equal to the parameter s. The arc-length parameterization

also appears in the context of curvature (which we examine later in this section) and line integrals, which we study in the

Introduction to Vector Calculus.

EXAMPLE 3.10

Finding an Arc-Length Parameterization
Find the arc-length parameterization for each of the following curves:

 a.
b.

     Solution
 a. First we find the arc-length function using Equation 3.14:
260 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

which gives the relationship between the arc length s and the parameter t as       so,        Next we replace the
                                                                              to obtain
variable t in the original function                    with the expression

This is the arc-length parameterization of  Since the original restriction on t was given by  the restriction

on s becomes                     or

b. The arc-length function is given by Equation 3.14:

Therefore, the relationship between the arc length s and the parameter t is   so              Substituting

this into the original function                        yields

This is an arc-length parameterization of   The original restriction on the parameter was     so the

restriction on s is                  or

       3.10 Find the arc-length function for the helix

                   Then, use the relationship between the arc length and the parameter t to find an arc-length
                    parameterization of

Curvature

An important topic related to arc length is curvature. The concept of curvature provides a way to measure how sharply a
smooth curve turns. A circle has constant curvature. The smaller the radius of the circle, the greater the curvature.
Think of driving down a road. Suppose the road lies on an arc of a large circle. In this case you would barely have to turn
the wheel to stay on the road. Now suppose the radius is smaller. In this case you would need to turn more sharply to
stay on the road. In the case of a curve other than a circle, it is often useful first to inscribe a circle to the curve at a given
point so that it is tangent to the curve at that point and "hugs" the curve as closely as possible in a neighborhood of the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 261

point (Figure 3.6). The curvature of the graph at that point is then defined to be the same as the curvature of the
inscribed circle.

Figure 3.6 The graph represents the curvature of a function             The sharper the turn in the graph, the greater the
curvature, and the smaller the radius of the inscribed circle.  where is the arc-length parameter. The curvature

  Definition

  Let C be a smooth curve in the plane or in space given by
  at s is

MEDIA

Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_spacecurve) for more information about the curvature of a space
curve.

The formula in the definition of curvature is not very useful in terms of calculation. In particular, recall that

represents the unit tangent vector to a given vector-valued function  and the formula for  is                       To

use the formula for curvature, it is first necessary to express in terms of the arc-length parameter s, then find the

unit tangent vector  for the function  then take the derivative of            with respect to s. This is a tedious

process. Fortunately, there are equivalent formulas for curvature.

Theorem 3.6

Alternative Formulas for Curvature

If C is a smooth curve given by     then the curvature of C at t is given by

                                                                                                                   (3.15)

If C is a three-dimensional curve, then the curvature can be given by the formula

                                                                                                                   (3.16)

If C is the graph of a function        and both and exist, then the curvature at point         is given by
                                                                                                              (3.17)

Proof

The first formula follows directly from the chain rule:

where s is the arc length along the curve C. Dividing both sides by   and taking the magnitude of both sides gives
262 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Since                  this gives the formula for the curvature of a curve C in terms of any parameterization of C:

In the case of a three-dimensional curve, we start with the formulas               and

Therefore,                       We can take the derivative of this function using the scalar product formula:

Using these last two equations we get

Since                            this reduces to

Since  is parallel to            and is orthogonal to         it follows that and  are orthogonal. This means that
                                                         so

Now we solve this equation for                    and use the fact that

Then, we divide both sides by                     This gives

This proves Equation 3.16. To prove Equation 3.17, we start with the assumption that curve C is defined by the function

            Then, we can define                               Using the previous formula for curvature:

Therefore,


  EXAMPLE 3.11

Finding Curvature
Find the curvature for each of the following curves at the given point:
 a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 263

b.

    Solution
a. This function describes a helix.

The curvature of the helix at        can be found by using Equation 3.15. First, calculate

Next, calculate
Last, apply Equation 3.15:

     The curvature of this helix is constant at all points on the helix.
b. This function describes a semicircle.
264 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

             To find the curvature of this graph, we must use Equation 3.16. First, we calculate and
             Then, we apply Equation 3.17:

The curvature of this circle is equal to the reciprocal of its radius. There is a minor issue with the absolute value in
Equation 3.16; however, a closer look at the calculation reveals that the denominator is positive for any value of x.

3.11 Find the curvature of the curve defined by the function

at the point

The Normal and Binormal Vectors

We have seen that the derivative  of a vector-valued function is a tangent vector to the curve defined by        and

the unit tangent vector          can be calculated by dividing  by its magnitude. When studying motion in three

dimensions, two other vectors are useful in describing the motion of a particle along a path in space: the principal unit

normal vector and the binormal vector.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 265

Definition                                                                                   then the principal
                                                                                                               (3.18)
Let C be a three-dimensional smooth curve represented by r over an open interval I. If                         (3.19)
unit normal vector at t is defined to be

The binormal vector at t is defined as

where  is the unit tangent vector.

Note that, by definition, the binormal vector is orthogonal to both the unit tangent vector and the normal vector.

Furthermore,  is always a unit vector. This can be shown using the formula for the magnitude of a cross product

where is the angle between  and         Since      is the derivative of a unit vector, property (vii) of the derivative of

a vector-valued function tells us that  and        are orthogonal to each other, so     Furthermore, they are both

unit vectors, so their magnitude is 1. Therefore,                                       and  is a unit vector.

The principal unit normal vector can be challenging to calculate because the unit tangent vector involves a quotient, and
this quotient often has a square root in the denominator. In the three-dimensional case, finding the cross product of the
unit tangent vector and the unit normal vector can be even more cumbersome. Fortunately, we have alternative
formulas for finding these two vectors, and they are presented in Motion in Space.

EXAMPLE 3.12

Finding the Principal Unit Normal Vector and Binormal Vector
For each of the following vector-valued functions, find the principal unit normal vector. Then, if possible, find the
binormal vector.

 a.
b.

     Solution
 a. This function describes a circle.

To find the principal unit normal vector, we first must find the unit tangent vector
266 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

             Next, we use Equation 3.18:
             Notice that the unit tangent vector and the principal unit normal vector are orthogonal to each other for all values
             of t:
             Furthermore, the principal unit normal vector points toward the center of the circle from every point on the circle.
             Since defines a curve in two dimensions, we cannot calculate the binormal vector.

        b. This function looks like this:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 267

To find the principal unit normal vector, we first find the unit tangent vector

Next, we calculate  and
268 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

             Therefore, according to Equation 3.18:

             Once again, the unit tangent vector and the principal unit normal vector are orthogonal to each other for all values
             of t:

             Last, since represents a three-dimensional curve, we can calculate the binormal vector using Equation 3.17:

3.12 Find the unit normal vector for the vector-valued function  and evaluate it at

For any smooth curve in three dimensions that is defined by a vector-valued function, we now have formulas for the unit
tangent vector T, the unit normal vector N, and the binormal vector B. The unit normal vector and the binormal vector
form a plane that is perpendicular to the curve at any point on the curve, called the normal plane. In addition, these
three vectors form a frame of reference in three-dimensional space called the Frenet frame of reference (also called the
TNB frame) (Figure 3.7). Last, the plane determined by the vectors T and N forms the osculating plane of C at any point P
on the curve.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 269

Figure 3.7 This figure depicts a Frenet frame of reference. At every point P on a three-dimensional curve, the unit
tangent, unit normal, and binormal vectors form a three-dimensional frame of reference.

Suppose we form a circle in the osculating plane of C at point P on the curve. Assume that the circle has the same
curvature as the curve does at point P and let the circle have radius r. Then, the curvature of the circle is given by We
call r the radius of curvature of the curve, and it is equal to the reciprocal of the curvature. If this circle lies on the
concave side of the curve and is tangent to the curve at point P, then this circle is called the osculating circle of C at P, as
shown in the following figure.

  Figure 3.8 In this osculating circle, the circle is tangent to curve C at point P and shares the same curvature.

MEDIA

For more information on osculating circles, see this demonstration (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_OsculCircle1) on
curvature and torsion, this article (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_OsculCircle3) on osculating circles, and this
discussion (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_OsculCircle2) of Serret formulas.

To find the equation of an osculating circle in two dimensions, we need find only the center and radius of the circle.

EXAMPLE 3.13

Finding the Equation of an Osculating Circle

Find the equation of the osculating circle of the helix defined by the function  at

     Solution
Figure 3.9 shows the graph of
270 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

                         Figure 3.9 We want to find the osculating circle of this graph at the point where
First, let's calculate the curvature at

This gives  Therefore, the radius of the osculating circle is given by       Next, we then calculate the

coordinates of the center of the circle. When  the slope of the tangent line is zero. Therefore, the center of the

osculating circle is directly above the point on the graph with coordinates  The center is located at               The

formula for a circle with radius r and center  is given by                   Therefore, the equation of the

osculating circle is                           The graph and its osculating circle appears in the following graph.

                                                Figure 3.10 The osculating circle has radius
       3.13 Find the equation of the osculating circle of the curve defined by the vector-valued function

                                             at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 271

        SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES

Find the arc length of the curve on the given interval.

102.                                103.

      This portion of the graph is

      shown here:

104.                                        Thi1s05.

      portion of the graph is shown here:

106.                             over the 107. Find the length of one turn of the  108. Find the arc length of the
        interval   Here is the portion of helix given by                                   vector-valued function

      the graph on the indicated interval:                                                 over
272 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

109. A particle travels once        110. Set up an integral to find           111. Find the length of the curve
        around a circle with the            the circumference of the                                                 over the
        equation of motion                  ellipse with the equation
                                                                              interval        The graph is
        Find the distance traveled                                            shown here:
        around the circle by the
        particle.

112. Find the length of the         113. The position function for a          114. Given
        curve                               particle is                               find the binormal vector
        for
                                            Find the unit tangent vector       117. Given
115. Given                                  and the unit normal vector
        determine the tangent               at
        vector
                                      116. Given
118. Given
        find the unit binormal      determine the unit tangent                find the unit normal vector
        vector evaluated at         vector evaluated at                             evaluated at

                                    119. Given                                 find the 120.  Find the unit tangent vector and
                                            unit tangent vector               The graph is
                                            shown here:                                       unit normal vector at            for

                                                                                              the plane curve

                                                                                                                               The graph

                                                                                              is shown here:

121. Find the unit tangent          122. Find the principal normal            123. Find       for the curve
        vector for                          vector to the curve
                                                                          at
124. Find for the curve                     the point determined by

                                    125. Find the unit normal                 126. Find the unit tangent
                                            vector for                                vector for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.3 · Arc Length and Curvature 273

127. Find the arc-length                   128. Parameterize the helix         129. Parameterize the curve
        function for the line
        segment given by                           using the arc-length        using the arc-length
                                  Write r          parameter s, from
        as a parameter of s.                                                   parameter s, at the point

                                                                               at which   for

130. Find the curvature of the curve        131. Find the x-coordinate at      132. Find the curvature of the
                                        at                                             curve
                                                   which the curvature of
        (Note: The graph is an ellipse.)                                               Does the curvature
                                                   the curve             is a          depend upon the
                                                                                       parameter t?
                                                   maximum value.

133. Find the curvature  for               134. Find the curvature for         135. Find the curvature  of the curve
        the curve           at                                                         shown here:        The graph is
        the point                           the curve         at the

                                            point

136. Find the curvature of                 137. Find the curvature of          138. At what point does the

                                                   at point                    curve      have
                                           140. Find the point of
                                                                               maximum curvature?
                                                   maximum curvature on
139. What happens to the                           the curve                   141. Find the equations of the
                                                                                       normal plane and the
curvature as   for                         143. Find the equation for the              osculating plane of the
                                                   osculating plane at point           curve
the curve                                                     on the curve

                                                                               at point

142. Find equations of the                                                     144. Find the radius of

osculating circles of the                                                      curvature of                     at

ellipse                     at                                                 the point

the points    and
274 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

145. Find the curvature at each            146. Calculate the curvature of the  147. Find the radius of
                                                   circular helix                       curvature of
point       on the                                                                      at point

hyperbola

148. Find the radius of

curvature of the

hyperbola                        at point

A particle moves along the plane curve C described by                         Solve the following problems.

149. Find the length of the                150. Find the curvature of the     151. Describe the curvature as
        curve over the interval                    plane curve at
                                                                                t increases from             to

The surface of a large cup is formed by revolving the graph of the function                from              to  about the
y-axis (measured in centimeters).

152. [T] Use technology to                 153. Find the curvature of         154. [T] Use technology to
        graph the surface.                         the generating curve as a          graph the curvature
                                                   function of x.                     function.

3.4 Motion in Space

Learning Objectives

      3.4.1 Describe the velocity and acceleration vectors of a particle moving in space.
      3.4.2 Explain the tangential and normal components of acceleration.
      3.4.3 State Kepler's laws of planetary motion.

We have now seen how to describe curves in the plane and in space, and how to determine their properties, such as arc
length and curvature. All of this leads to the main goal of this chapter, which is the description of motion along plane
curves and space curves. We now have all the tools we need; in this section, we put these ideas together and look at how
to use them.

Motion Vectors in the Plane and in Space

Our starting point is using vector-valued functions to represent the position of an object as a function of time. All of the
following material can be applied either to curves in the plane or to space curves. For example, when we look at the orbit
of the planets, the curves defining these orbits all lie in a plane because they are elliptical. However, a particle traveling
along a helix moves on a curve in three dimensions.

Definition

Let be a twice-differentiable vector-valued function of the parameter t that represents the position of an object as
a function of time. The velocity vector of the object is given by

                                                                                                                                                             (3.20)

The acceleration vector is defined to be

                                                                                                                 (3.21)

The speed is defined to be

                                                                                                                 (3.22)

Since can be in either two or three dimensions, these vector-valued functions can have either two or three

components. In two dimensions, we define               and in three dimensions

Then the velocity, acceleration, and speed can be written as shown in the following table.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  3.4 · Motion in Space 275

  Quantity                      Two Dimensions  Three Dimensions
Position
Velocity
Acceleration
Speed

                   Table 3.4 Formulas for Position, Velocity, Acceleration, and Speed  where t measures time

  EXAMPLE 3.14

Studying Motion Along a Parabola
A particle moves in a parabolic path defined by the vector-valued function
in seconds.
 a. Find the velocity, acceleration, and speed as functions of time.
b. Sketch the curve along with the velocity vector at time

     Solution
 a. We use Equation 3.20, Equation 3.21, and Equation 3.22:

b. The graph of                 is a portion of a parabola (Figure 3.11). The velocity vector at  is

and the acceleration vector at  is

Notice that the velocity vector is tangent to the path, as is always the case.
276 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Figure 3.11 This graph depicts the velocity vector at time  for a particle moving in a parabolic path.

       3.14 A particle moves in a path defined by the vector-valued function
                   where t measures time in seconds and where distance is measured in feet. Find the velocity, acceleration,
                    and speed as functions of time.

To gain a better understanding of the velocity and acceleration vectors, imagine you are driving along a curvy road. If
you do not turn the steering wheel, you would continue in a straight line and run off the road. The speed at which you
are traveling when you run off the road, coupled with the direction, gives a vector representing your velocity, as
illustrated in the following figure.

Figure 3.12 At each point along a road traveled by a car, the velocity vector of the car is tangent to the path traveled by
the car.
However, the fact that you must turn the steering wheel to stay on the road indicates that your velocity is always
changing (even if your speed is not) because your direction is constantly changing to keep you on the road. As you turn
to the right, your acceleration vector also points to the right. As you turn to the left, your acceleration vector points to
the left. This indicates that your velocity and acceleration vectors are constantly changing, regardless of whether your
actual speed varies (Figure 3.13).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.4 · Motion in Space 277

Figure 3.13 The dashed line represents the trajectory of an object (a car, for example). The acceleration vector points
toward the inside of the turn at all times.

Components of the Acceleration Vector

We can combine some of the concepts discussed in Arc Length and Curvature with the acceleration vector to gain a
deeper understanding of how this vector relates to motion in the plane and in space. Recall that the unit tangent vector
T and the unit normal vector N form an osculating plane at any point P on the curve defined by a vector-valued function

       The following theorem shows that the acceleration vector lies in the osculating plane and can be written as a
linear combination of the unit tangent and the unit normal vectors.

Theorem 3.7

The Plane of the Acceleration Vector

The acceleration vector of an object moving along a curve traced out by a twice-differentiable function      lies in

the plane formed by the unit tangent vector        and the principal unit normal vector  to C. Furthermore,

Here, is the speed of the object and is the curvature of C traced out by

Proof

Because              and                  we have                         Now we differentiate this equation:

Since                we know                       so

A formula for curvature is            so               This gives



The coefficients of  and      are referred to as the tangential component of acceleration and the normal

component of acceleration, respectively. We write to denote the tangential component and to denote the

normal component.
278 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Theorem 3.8

Tangential and Normal Components of Acceleration

Let be a vector-valued function that denotes the position of an object as a function of time. Then             is

the acceleration vector. The tangential and normal components of acceleration and are given by the formulas

                                                                                                    (3.23)

and
                                                                                                                                                             (3.24)

These components are related by the formula

                                                                                                    (3.25)

Here  is the unit tangent vector to the curve defined by          and  is the unit normal vector to the curve

defined by

The normal component of acceleration is also called the centripetal component of acceleration or sometimes the radial
component of acceleration. To understand centripetal acceleration, suppose you are traveling in a car on a circular track
at a constant speed. Then, as we saw earlier, the acceleration vector points toward the center of the track at all times. As
a rider in the car, you feel a pull toward the outside of the track because you are constantly turning. This sensation acts in
the opposite direction of centripetal acceleration. The same holds true for noncircular paths. The reason is that your
body tends to travel in a straight line and resists the force resulting from acceleration that push it toward the side. Note
that at point B in Figure 3.14 the acceleration vector is pointing backward. This is because the car is decelerating as it
goes into the curve.

    Figure 3.14 The tangential and normal components of acceleration can be used to describe the acceleration vector.

The tangential and normal unit vectors at any given point on the curve provide a frame of reference at that point. The
tangential and normal components of acceleration are the projections of the acceleration vector onto T and N,
respectively.

EXAMPLE 3.15

Finding Components of Acceleration                                                                  where t measures
A particle moves in a path defined by the vector-valued function
time in seconds and distance is measured in feet.

 a. Find and as functions of t.
b. Find and at time

     Solution
 a. Let's start with Equation 3.23:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      3.4 · Motion in Space 279

Then we apply Equation 3.24:

b. We must evaluate each of the answers from part a. at

The units of acceleration are feet per second squared, as are the units of the normal and tangential components of
acceleration.

3.15 An object moves in a path defined by the vector-valued function  where t measures time in
            seconds.

             a. Find and as functions of t.
             b. Find and at time

Projectile Motion

Now let's look at an application of vector functions. In particular, let's consider the effect of gravity on the motion of an
object as it travels through the air, and how it determines the resulting trajectory of that object. In the following, we
ignore the effect of air resistance. This situation, with an object moving with an initial velocity but with no forces acting
on it other than gravity, is known as projectile motion. It describes the motion of objects from golf balls to baseballs,
and from arrows to cannonballs.

First we need to choose a coordinate system. If we are standing at the origin of this coordinate system, then we choose
the positive y-axis to be up, the negative y-axis to be down, and the positive x-axis to be forward (i.e., away from the
thrower of the object). The effect of gravity is in a downward direction, so Newton's second law tells us that the force on
280 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

the object resulting from gravity is equal to the mass of the object times the acceleration resulting from to gravity, or

             where represents the force from gravity and g represents the acceleration resulting from gravity at Earth's

surface. The value of g in the English system of measurement is approximately 32 ft/sec2 and it is approximately 9.8 m/
sec2 in the metric system. This is the only force acting on the object. Since gravity acts in a downward direction, we can

write the force resulting from gravity in the form              as shown in the following figure.

                                   Figure 3.15 An object is falling under the influence of gravity.
MEDIA
Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_projectile) for a video showing projectile motion.

Newton's second law also tells us that       where a represents the acceleration vector of the object. This force must

be equal to the force of gravity at all times, so we therefore know that

Now we use the fact that the acceleration vector is the first derivative of the velocity vector. Therefore, we can rewrite the
last equation in the form

By taking the antiderivative of each side of this equation we obtain

for some constant vector To determine the value of this vector, we can use the velocity of the object at a fixed time,

say at time        We call this velocity the initial velocity:     Therefore,                             and

This gives the velocity vector as

Next we use the fact that velocity is the derivative of position          This gives the equation

Taking the antiderivative of both sides of this equation leads to

with another unknown constant vector To determine the value of we can use the position of the object at a given

time, say at time  We call this position the initial position:            Therefore,

                                        and         This gives the position of the object at any time as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      3.4 · Motion in Space 281

Let's take a closer look at the initial velocity and initial position. In particular, suppose the object is thrown upward from

the origin at an angle to the horizontal, with initial speed How can we modify the previous result to reflect this

scenario? First, we can assume it is thrown from the origin. If not, then we can move the origin to the point from where it

is thrown. Therefore,   as shown in the following figure.

Figure 3.16 Projectile motion when the object is thrown upward at an angle  The horizontal motion is at constant
velocity and the vertical motion is at constant acceleration.

We can rewrite the initial velocity vector in the form                      Then the equation for the position function
      becomes

The coefficient of i represents the horizontal component of and is the horizontal distance of the object from the
origin at time t. The maximum value of the horizontal distance (measured at the same initial and final altitude) is called
the range R. The coefficient of j represents the vertical component of and is the altitude of the object at time t. The
maximum value of the vertical distance is the height H.

EXAMPLE 3.16

Motion of a Cannonball

During an Independence Day celebration, a cannonball is fired from a cannon on a cliff toward the water. The cannon is

aimed at an angle of 30° above horizontal and the initial speed of the cannonball is  The cliff is 100 ft above the

water (Figure 3.17).

a. Find the maximum height of the cannonball.
b. How long will it take for the cannonball to splash into the sea?
c. How far out to sea will the cannonball hit the water?
282 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

                              Figure 3.17 The flight of a cannonball (ignoring air resistance) is projectile motion.

     Solution
We use the equation

with                             and  ft/sec. Then the position equation becomes

a. The cannonball reaches its maximum height when the vertical component of its velocity is zero, because the
     cannonball is neither rising nor falling at that point. The velocity vector is

      Therefore, the vertical component of velocity is given by the expression    Setting this expression equal to

      zero and solving for t gives    sec. The height of the cannonball at this time is given by the vertical

      component of the position vector, evaluated at

      Therefore, the maximum height of the cannonball is 1406.39 ft above the cannon, or 1506.39 ft above sea level.

b. When the cannonball lands in the water, it is 100 ft below the cannon. Therefore, the vertical component of the

      position vector is equal to     Setting the vertical component of equal to  and solving, we obtain

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              3.4 · Motion in Space 283

     The positive value of t that solves this equation is approximately 19.08. Therefore, the cannonball hits the water
     after approximately 19.08 sec.
c. To find the distance out to sea, we simply substitute the answer from part (b) into

Therefore, the ball hits the water about 9914.26 ft away from the base of the cliff. Notice that the vertical

component of the position vector is very close to  which tells us that the ball just hit the water. Note that

9914.26 feet is not the true range of the cannon since the cannonball lands in the ocean at a location below the

cannon. The range of the cannon would be determined by finding how far out the cannonball is when its height is

100 ft above the water (the same as the altitude of the cannon).

       3.16 An archer fires an arrow at an angle of 40° above the horizontal with an initial speed of 98 m/sec. The
                    height of the archer is 171.5 cm. Find the horizontal distance the arrow travels before it hits the ground.

One final question remains: In general, what is the maximum distance a projectile can travel, given its initial speed? To
determine this distance, we assume the projectile is fired from ground level and we wish it to return to ground level. In
other words, we want to determine an equation for the range. In this case, the equation of projectile motion is

Setting the second component equal to zero and solving for t yields

Therefore, either  or                    We are interested in the second value of t, so we substitute this into  which

gives

Thus, the expression for the range of a projectile fired at an angle is

The only variable in this expression is  To maximize the distance traveled, take the derivative of the coefficient of i with
respect to and set it equal to zero:

This value of is the smallest positive value that makes the derivative equal to zero. Therefore, in the absence of air
284 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

       resistance, the best angle to fire a projectile (to maximize the range) is at a angle. The distance it travels is given by

       Therefore, the range for an angle of is

     Kepler's Laws

       During the early 1600s, Johannes Kepler was able to use the amazingly accurate data from his mentor Tycho Brahe to
       formulate his three laws of planetary motion, now known as Kepler's laws of planetary motion. These laws also apply
       to other objects in the solar system in orbit around the Sun, such as comets (e.g., Halley's comet) and asteroids.
       Variations of these laws apply to satellites in orbit around Earth.

         Theorem 3.9
         Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion

           i. The path of any planet about the Sun is elliptical in shape, with the center of the Sun located at one focus of the
                ellipse (the law of ellipses).

          ii. A line drawn from the center of the Sun to the center of a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals
                (the law of equal areas) (Figure 3.18).

         iii. The ratio of the squares of the periods of any two planets is equal to the ratio of the cubes of the lengths of their
                semimajor orbital axes (the law of harmonies).

       Figure 3.18 Kepler's first and second laws are pictured here. The Sun is located at a focus of the elliptical orbit of any
       planet. Furthermore, the shaded areas are all equal, assuming that the amount of time measured as the planet moves is
       the same for each region.
       Kepler's third law is especially useful when using appropriate units. In particular, 1 astronomical unit is defined to be the
       average distance from Earth to the Sun, and is now recognized to be 149,597,870,700 m or, approximately 93,000,000 mi.
       We therefore write 1 A.U. = 93,000,000 mi. Since the time it takes for Earth to orbit the Sun is 1 year, we use Earth years
       for units of time. Then, substituting 1 year for the period of Earth and 1 A.U. for the average distance to the Sun, Kepler's
       third law can be written as

       for any planet in the solar system, where is the period of that planet measured in Earth years and is the average
       distance from that planet to the Sun measured in astronomical units. Therefore, if we know the average distance from a
       planet to the Sun (in astronomical units), we can then calculate the length of its year (in Earth years), and vice versa.
       Kepler's laws were formulated based on observations from Brahe; however, they were not proved formally until Sir Isaac
       Newton was able to apply calculus. Furthermore, Newton was able to generalize Kepler's third law to other orbital
       systems, such as a moon orbiting around a planet. Kepler's original third law only applies to objects orbiting the Sun.

      Proof

       Let's now prove Kepler's first law using the calculus of vector-valued functions. First we need a coordinate system. Let's

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.4 · Motion in Space 285

place the Sun at the origin of the coordinate system and let the vector-valued function represent the location of a

planet as a function of time. Newton proved Kepler's law using his second law of motion and his law of universal

gravitation. Newton's second law of motion can be written as           where F represents the net force acting on the

planet. His law of universal gravitation can be written in the form         which indicates that the force

resulting from the gravitational attraction of the Sun points back toward the Sun, and has magnitude  (Figure 3.19).

Figure 3.19 The gravitational force between Earth and the Sun is equal to the mass of the earth times its acceleration.

Setting these two forces equal to each other, and using the fact that       we obtain

which can be rewritten as

This equation shows that the vectors  and r are parallel to each other, so                         Next, let's differentiate
         with respect to time:

This proves that  is a constant vector, which we call C. Since and v are both perpendicular to C for all values of t,

they must lie in a plane perpendicular to C. Therefore, the motion of the planet lies in a plane.

Next we calculate the expression

                                                                                                                  (3.26)

The last equality in Equation 3.26 is from the triple cross product formula.
       MEDIA
      Visit this website (https://www.openstax.org/l/20_triplecross) for an explanation of the triple cross product formula.

We need an expression for       To calculate this, we differentiate with respect to time:

                                                                                                                  (3.27)

Since             we also have

                                                                                                                  (3.28)

Combining Equation 3.27 and Equation 3.28, we get

Substituting this into Equation 3.26 gives us
286 3 · Vector-Valued Functions                                                                                (3.29)

       However,

Therefore, Equation 3.29 becomes

Since C is a constant vector, we can integrate both sides and obtain

where D is a constant vector. Our goal is to solve for  Let's start by calculating

However,                                so
Since         we have
Note that
Solving for                       where is the angle between r and D. Therefore,

where         This is the polar equation of a conic with a focus at the origin, which we set up to be the Sun. It is a

hyperbola if  a parabola if       or an ellipse if      Since planets have closed orbits, the only possibility is an

ellipse. However, at this point it should be mentioned that hyperbolic comets do exist. These are objects that are merely

passing through the solar system at speeds too great to be trapped into orbit around the Sun. As they pass close enough

to the Sun, the gravitational field of the Sun deflects the trajectory enough so the path becomes hyperbolic.



EXAMPLE 3.17

Using Kepler's Third Law for Nonheliocentric Orbits
Kepler's third law of planetary motion can be modified to the case of one object in orbit around an object other than the
Sun, such as the Moon around the Earth. In this case, Kepler's third law becomes

                                                                                                                                                                 (3.30)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.4 · Motion in Space 287

where m is the mass of the Moon and M is the mass of Earth, a represents the length of the major axis of the elliptical
orbit, and P represents the period.

Given that the mass of the Moon is  the mass of Earth is

                                   and the period of the moon is 27.3 days, let's find the length of the major axis of the

orbit of the Moon around Earth.

     Solution
It is important to be consistent with units. Since the universal gravitational constant contains seconds in the units, we
need to use seconds for the period of the Moon as well:

Substitute all the data into Equation 3.30 and solve for a:

     Analysis
According to solarsystem.nasa.gov, the actual average distance from the Moon to Earth is 384,400 km. This is calculated
using reflectors left on the Moon by Apollo astronauts back in the 1960s.

3.17 Titan is the largest moon of Saturn. The mass of Titan is approximately  kg. The mass of

Saturn is approximately             kg. Titan takes approximately 16 days to orbit Saturn. Use this

information, along with the universal gravitation constant                    to estimate the

distance from Titan to Saturn.

  EXAMPLE 3.18
Chapter Opener: Halley's Comet

We now return to the chapter opener, which discusses the motion of Halley's comet around the Sun. Kepler's first law

states that Halley's comet follows an elliptical path around the Sun, with the Sun as one focus of the ellipse. The period of

Halley's comet is approximately 76.1 years, depending on how closely it passes by Jupiter and Saturn as it passes through

the outer solar system. Let's use   years. What is the average distance of Halley's comet from the Sun?

     Solution       with            we obtain                so  A.U. This comes out to
Using the equation
288 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

approximately                    mi.

A natural question to ask is: What are the maximum (aphelion) and minimum (perihelion) distances from Halley's Comet

to the Sun? The eccentricity of the orbit of Halley's Comet is 0.967 (Source: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/

factsheet/cometfact.html). Recall that the formula for the eccentricity of an ellipse is  where a is the length of the

semimajor axis and c is the distance from the center to either focus. Therefore,          and                      A.U.

Subtracting this from a gives the perihelion distance                                     A.U. According to the National

Space Science Data Center (Source: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/cometfact.html), the perihelion

distance for Halley's comet is 0.587 A.U. To calculate the aphelion distance, we add

This is approximately                 mi. The average distance from Pluto to the Sun is 39.5 A.U. (Source:

http://www.oarval.org/furthest.htm), so it would appear that Halley's Comet stays just within the orbit of Pluto.

STUDENT PROJECT

Navigating a Banked Turn
How fast can a racecar travel through a circular turn without skidding and hitting the wall? The answer could depend
on several factors:

  · The weight of the car;
  · The friction between the tires and the road;
  · The radius of the circle;
  · The "steepness" of the turn.

In this project we investigate this question for NASCAR racecars at the Bristol Motor Speedway in Tennessee. Before
considering this track in particular, we use vector functions to develop the mathematics and physics necessary for
answering questions such as this.

A car of mass m moves with constant angular speed around a circular curve of radius R (Figure 3.20). The curve is
banked at an angle If the height of the car off the ground is h, then the position of the car at time t is given by the
function

                                               Figure 3.20 Views of a race car moving around a track.
   1. Find the velocity function of the car. Show that v is tangent to the circular curve. This means that, without a

         force to keep the car on the curve, the car will shoot off of it.
   2. Show that the speed of the car is Use this to show that
   3. Find the acceleration a. Show that this vector points toward the center of the circle and that
   4. The force required to produce this circular motion is called the centripetal force, and it is denoted Fcent. This

         force points toward the center of the circle (not toward the ground). Show that
         As the car moves around the curve, three forces act on it: gravity, the force exerted by the road (this force is
         perpendicular to the ground), and the friction force (Figure 3.21). Because describing the frictional force
         generated by the tires and the road is complex, we use a standard approximation for the frictional force. Assume

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.4 · Motion in Space 289

that           for some positive constant The constant is called the coefficient of friction.

Figure 3.21 The car has three forces acting on it: gravity (denoted by mg), the friction force f, and the force
exerted by the road N.

Let   denote the maximum speed the car can attain through the curve without skidding. In other words,

      is the fastest speed at which the car can navigate the turn. When the car is traveling at this speed, the

magnitude of the centripetal force is

The next three questions deal with developing a formula that relates the speed  to the banking angle

5. Show that                    Conclude that

6. The centripetal force is the sum of the forces in the horizontal direction, since the centripetal force points toward

the center of the circular curve. Show that

Conclude that

7. Show that                                   Conclude that the maximum speed does not actually

depend on the mass of the car.

Now that we have a formula relating the maximum speed of the car and the banking angle, we are in a position

to answer the questions like the one posed at the beginning of the project.

The Bristol Motor Speedway is a NASCAR short track in Bristol, Tennessee. The track has the approximate shape

shown in Figure 3.22. Each end of the track is approximately semicircular, so when cars make turns they are

traveling along an approximately circular curve. If a car takes the inside track and speeds along the bottom of

turn 1, the car travels along a semicircle of radius approximately 211 ft with a banking angle of 24°. If the car

decides to take the outside track and speeds along the top of turn 1, then the car travels along a semicircle with

a banking angle of 28°. (The track has variable angle banking.)
290 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

Figure 3.22 At the Bristol Motor Speedway, Bristol, Tennessee (a), the turns have an inner radius of about 211 ft and a
width of 40 ft (b). (credit: part (a) photo by Raniel Diaz, Flickr)

The coefficient of friction for a normal tire in dry conditions is approximately 0.7. Therefore, we assume the
coefficient for a NASCAR tire in dry conditions is approximately 0.98.

Before answering the following questions, note that it is easier to do computations in terms of feet and seconds, and
then convert the answers to miles per hour as a final step.

 8. In dry conditions, how fast can the car travel through the bottom of the turn without skidding?
 9. In dry conditions, how fast can the car travel through the top of the turn without skidding?
10. In wet conditions, the coefficient of friction can become as low as 0.1. If this is the case, how fast can the car

       travel through the bottom of the turn without skidding?
11. Suppose the measured speed of a car going along the outside edge of the turn is 105 mph. Estimate the

       coefficient of friction for the car's tires.

SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES

155. Given                         156. Given

                                   find

the velocity of a particle moving        find the acceleration vector of a

along this curve.                        particle moving along the curve

                                         in the preceding exercise.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3.4 · Motion in Space 291

Given the following position functions, find the velocity, acceleration, and speed in terms of the parameter t.

157.                               158.         159.                                            The

                                                                          graph is shown here:

Find the velocity, acceleration, and speed of a particle with the given position function.

160.                               161.         . The graph is shown162.

                                         here:

163. The position function of      164. Let
        an object is given by
                                           Find the velocity and
        At what time is the speed          acceleration vectors and show
        a minimum?                         that the acceleration is
                                           proportional to
292 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

       Consider the motion of a point on the circumference of a rolling circle. As the circle rolls, it generates the cycloid
                                                               where is the angular velocity of the circle:

                                                                                 165. Find the equations for the
                                                                                         velocity, acceleration, and
                                                                                         speed of the particle at
                                                                                         any time.

       A person on a hang glider is spiraling upward as a result of the rapidly rising air on a path having position vector
                                                    The path is similar to that of a helix, although it is not a helix. The graph is shown here:

Find the following quantities:     167. The glider's speed at any  168. The times, if any, at which
                                           time                            the glider's acceleration is
166. The velocity and                                                      orthogonal to its velocity
        acceleration vectors

Given that                         is the position vector of a moving particle, find the following quantities:

169. The velocity of the particle  170. The speed of the particle  171. The acceleration of the
                                                                           particle
172. Find the maximum speed
        of a point on the
        circumference of an
        automobile tire of radius
        1 ft when the automobile
        is traveling at 55 mph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                3.4 · Motion in Space 293

A projectile is shot in the air from ground level with an initial velocity of 500 m/sec at an angle of 60° with the horizontal.
The graph is shown here:

                                     173. At what time does the
                                             projectile reach maximum
                                             height?

174. What is the approximate         175. At what time is the           176. What is the maximum
        maximum height of the                maximum range of the               range?
        projectile?                          projectile attained?

177. What is the total flight
        time of the projectile?

A projectile is fired at a height of 1.5 m above the ground with an initial velocity of 100 m/sec and at an angle of 30°
above the horizontal. Use this information to answer the following questions:

178. Determine the maximum           179. Determine the range of        180. A golf ball is hit in a
        height of the projectile.            the projectile.                    horizontal direction off
                                                                                the top edge of a building
                                                                                that is 100 ft tall. How fast
                                                                                must the ball be launched
                                                                                to land 450 ft away?

181. A projectile is fired from      182. Prove that an object          183. The acceleration of an
        ground level at an angle             moving in a straight line
        of 8° with the horizontal.           at a constant speed has    object is given by
        The projectile is to have a          an acceleration of zero.
        range of 50 m. Find the                                                       The
        minimum velocity
        necessary to achieve this                                       velocity at       sec is
        range.
                                                                                    and the position

                                                                        of the object at      sec

                                                                        is

                                                                        Find the object's position

                                                                        at any time.

184. Find given that                 185. Find the tangential and       186. Given                   and
        and                                  normal components of
                                             acceleration for                       find the tangential

                                             at                             and normal components

                                                                            of acceleration.
294 3 · Vector-Valued Functions

For each of the following problems, find the tangential and normal components of acceleration.

187.                                 The grap1h88.                       189.

      is shown here:

190.                                                191.                       192.
193.
                                     194. Find the position vector-      195. The force on a particle is
196. An automobile that                      valued function given               given by
        weighs 2700 lb makes a               that
        turn on a flat road while                           and                The particle is located at
        traveling at 56 ft/sec. If
        the radius of the turn is                                              point     at                The
        70 ft, what is the required
        frictional force to keep                                               initial velocity of the
        the car from skidding?
                                                                               particle is given by

                                                                                         Find the path

                                                                               of the particle of mass m.

                                                                               (Recall,

                                     197. Using Kepler's laws, it can    198. Find the time in years it
                                             be shown that                       takes the dwarf planet
                                                                                 Pluto to make one orbit
                                                                 is the          about the Sun given that
                                                                                              A.U.
                                     minimum speed needed

                                     when                 so that an

                                     object will escape from

                                     the pull of a central force

                                     resulting from mass M.

                                     Use this result to find the

                                     minimum speed when

                                                    for a space capsule

                                     to escape from the

                                     gravitational pull of Earth

                                     if the probe is at an

                                     altitude of 300 km above

                                     Earth's surface.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.4 · Motion in Space 295

Suppose that the position function for an object in three dimensions is given by the equation

199. Show that the particle        200. Find the angle between        201. Find the tangential and
        moves on a circular cone.          the velocity and                   normal components of
                                           acceleration vectors when          acceleration when
296 3 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

acceleration vector the second derivative of the position vector

arc-length function a function that describes the arc length of curve C as a function of t

arc-length parameterization a reparameterization of a vector-valued function in which the parameter is equal to the

arc length

binormal vector a unit vector orthogonal to the unit tangent vector and the unit normal vector

component functions the component functions of the vector-valued function                                are  and

and the component functions of the vector-valued function                             are                     and

curvature the derivative of the unit tangent vector with respect to the arc-length parameter

definite integral of a vector-valued function the vector obtained by calculating the definite integral of each of the

component functions of a given vector-valued function, then using the results as the components of the resulting

function

derivative of a vector-valued function the derivative of a vector-valued function is

    provided the limit exists
Frenet frame of reference (TNB frame) a frame of reference in three-dimensional space formed by the unit tangent

    vector, the unit normal vector, and the binormal vector
helix a three-dimensional curve in the shape of a spiral
indefinite integral of a vector-valued function a vector-valued function with a derivative that is equal to a given

    vector-valued function
Kepler's laws of planetary motion three laws governing the motion of planets, asteroids, and comets in orbit around

    the Sun
limit of a vector-valued function a vector-valued function has a limit L as t approaches a if

normal component of acceleration the coefficient of the unit normal vector N when the acceleration vector is written

as a linear combination of and

normal plane a plane that is perpendicular to a curve at any point on the curve

osculating circle a circle that is tangent to a curve C at a point P and that shares the same curvature

osculating plane the plane determined by the unit tangent and the unit normal vector

plane curve the set of ordered pairs           together with their defining parametric equations              and

principal unit normal vector a vector orthogonal to the unit tangent vector, given by the formula

principal unit tangent vector a unit vector tangent to a curve C

projectile motion motion of an object with an initial velocity but no force acting on it other than gravity

radius of curvature the reciprocal of the curvature

reparameterization an alternative parameterization of a given vector-valued function

smooth curves where the vector-valued function is differentiable with a non-zero derivative

space curve the set of ordered triples                 together with their defining parametric equations

          and

tangent vector to at             any vector v such that, when the tail of the vector is placed at point       on the graph,

vector v is tangent to curve C

tangential component of acceleration the coefficient of the unit tangent vector T when the acceleration vector is

written as a linear combination of and

vector parameterization any representation of a plane or space curve using a vector-valued function

vector-valued function a function of the form                     or                                     where the

component functions f, g, and h are real-valued functions of the parameter t

velocity vector the derivative of the position vector

Access for free at openstax.org
Key Equations                                             3 · Chapter Review 297

  Vector-                                                              where the
  valued
  function

  Limit of
  a
  vector-
  valued
  function

  Derivative of a vector-
  valued function

  Principal unit tangent
  vector

  Indefinite integral of a
  vector-valued function

  Definite integral of a
  vector-valued function

  Arc length of space curve

Arc-length function

Curvature

Principal unit normal vector

Binormal vector
Velocity
Acceleration
Speed
Tangential component of acceleration

Normal component of acceleration

Key Concepts

3.1 Vector-Valued Functions and Space Curves

· A vector-valued function is a function of the form  or
298 3 · Chapter Review

component functions f, g, and h are real-valued functions of the parameter t.

· The graph of a vector-valued function of the form                      is called a plane curve. The graph of a

vector-valued function of the form                                    is called a space curve.

· It is possible to represent an arbitrary plane curve by a vector-valued function.

· To calculate the limit of a vector-valued function, calculate the limits of the component functions separately.

3.2 Calculus of Vector-Valued Functions

· To calculate the derivative of a vector-valued function, calculate the derivatives of the component functions, then

put them back into a new vector-valued function.

· Many of the properties of differentiation from the Introduction to Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-

volume-1/pages/3-introduction) also apply to vector-valued functions.

· The derivative of a vector-valued function is also a tangent vector to the curve. The unit tangent vector         is

calculated by dividing the derivative of a vector-valued function by its magnitude.

· The antiderivative of a vector-valued function is found by finding the antiderivatives of the component functions,

then putting them back together in a vector-valued function.

· The definite integral of a vector-valued function is found by finding the definite integrals of the component

functions, then putting them back together in a vector-valued function.

3.3 Arc Length and Curvature

· The arc-length function for a vector-valued function is calculated using the integral formula

    This formula is valid in both two and three dimensions.
· The curvature of a curve at a point in either two or three dimensions is defined to be the curvature of the inscribed

    circle at that point. The arc-length parameterization is used in the definition of curvature.
· There are several different formulas for curvature. The curvature of a circle is equal to the reciprocal of its radius.
· The principal unit normal vector at t is defined to be

· The binormal vector at t is defined as                   where         is the unit tangent vector.

· The Frenet frame of reference is formed by the unit tangent vector, the principal unit normal vector, and the

binormal vector.

· The osculating circle is tangent to a curve at a point and has the same curvature as the tangent curve at that point.

3.4 Motion in Space

· If represents the position of an object at time t, then     represents the velocity and       represents the

acceleration of the object at time t. The magnitude of the velocity vector is speed.

· The acceleration vector always points toward the concave side of the curve defined by         The tangential and

normal components of acceleration and are the projections of the acceleration vector onto the unit tangent

and unit normal vectors to the curve.

· Kepler's three laws of planetary motion describe the motion of objects in orbit around the Sun. His third law can be

modified to describe motion of objects in orbit around other celestial objects as well.

· Newton was able to use his law of universal gravitation in conjunction with his second law of motion and calculus to

prove Kepler's three laws.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

202. A parametric equation       203.                                    204. The curvature of a circle
                                                                                 of radius is constant
that passes through                                                              everywhere. Furthermore,
                                                                                 the curvature is equal to
points P and Q can be

given by

where                   and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       3 · Chapter Review 299

205. The speed of a particle
        with a position function
              is

Find the domains of the vector-valued functions.

206.                               207.

Sketch the curves for the following vector equations. Use a calculator if needed.

208. [T]                           209. [T]

Find a vector function that describes the following curves.

210. Intersection of the  with     211. Intersection of the cone
        cylinder                                                and plane
        the plane

Find the derivatives of                                      and           Find the unit tangent vector.

212.                               213.

Evaluate the following integrals.

214.                               215.           with

Find the length for the following curves.

216.                               217.                      for
        for

Reparameterize the following functions with respect to their arc length measured from  in direction of increasing

218.                                       219.

Find the curvature for the following vector functions.

220.                                       221.                                    222. Find the unit tangent vector,
                                                                                           the unit normal vector, and
                                                                                           the binormal vector for

223. Find the tangential and       224. A Ferris wheel car is              225. The position of a particle is
        normal acceleration                moving at a constant                    given by
        components with the                speed and has a
        position vector                    constant radius Find                    where is measured in
                                           the tangential and normal               seconds and is
                                           acceleration of the Ferris              measured in meters. Find
                                           wheel car.                              the velocity, acceleration,
                                                                                   and speed functions. What
                                                                                   are the position, velocity,
                                                                                   speed, and acceleration of
                                                                                   the particle at 1 sec?
300 3 · Chapter Review

The following problems consider launching a cannonball out of a cannon. The cannonball is shot out of the cannon with
an angle and initial velocity The only force acting on the cannonball is gravity, so we begin with a constant
acceleration

226. Find the velocity vector    227. Find the position vector     228. At what angle do you
        function                               and the parametric          need to fire the
                                                                           cannonball for the
                                         representation for the            horizontal distance to be
                                         position.                         greatest? What is the total
                                                                           distance it would travel?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    4 · Introduction 301

4  DIFFERENTIATION OF FUNCTIONS OF
   SEVERAL VARIABLES

Figure 4.1 Americans use (and lose) millions of golf balls a year, which keeps golf ball manufacturers in business. In this
chapter, we study a profit model and learn methods for calculating optimal production levels for a typical golf ball
manufacturing company. (credit: modification of work by oatsy40, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Functions of Several Variables
  4.2 Limits and Continuity
  4.3 Partial Derivatives
  4.4 Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations
  4.5 The Chain Rule
  4.6 Directional Derivatives and the Gradient
  4.7 Maxima/Minima Problems
  4.8 Lagrange Multipliers

      Introduction

In Introduction to Applications of Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-introduction), we
studied how to determine the maximum and minimum of a function of one variable over a closed interval. This function
might represent the temperature over a given time interval, the position of a car as a function of time, or the altitude of a
jet plane as it travels from New York to San Francisco. In each of these examples, the function has one independent
variable.

Suppose, however, that we have a quantity that depends on more than one variable. For example, temperature can
depend on location and the time of day, or a company's profit model might depend on the number of units sold and the
302 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

amount of money spent on advertising. In this chapter, we look at a company that produces golf balls. We develop a
profit model and, under various restrictions, we find that the optimal level of production and advertising dollars spent
determines the maximum possible profit. Depending on the nature of the restrictions, both the method of solution and
the solution itself changes (see Example 4.41).

When dealing with a function of more than one independent variable, several questions naturally arise. For example,
how do we calculate limits of functions of more than one variable? The definition of derivative we used before involved a
limit. Does the new definition of derivative involve limits as well? Do the rules of differentiation apply in this context? Can
we find relative extrema of functions using derivatives? All these questions are answered in this chapter.

4.1 Functions of Several Variables

Learning Objectives

      4.1.1 Recognize a function of two variables and identify its domain and range.
      4.1.2 Sketch a graph of a function of two variables.
      4.1.3 Sketch several traces or level curves of a function of two variables.
      4.1.4 Recognize a function of three or more variables and identify its level surfaces.

Our first step is to explain what a function of more than one variable is, starting with functions of two independent
variables. This step includes identifying the domain and range of such functions and learning how to graph them. We
also examine ways to relate the graphs of functions in three dimensions to graphs of more familiar planar functions.

Functions of Two Variables

The definition of a function of two variables is very similar to the definition for a function of one variable. The main
difference is that, instead of mapping values of one variable to values of another variable, we map ordered pairs of
variables to another variable.

Definition

A function of two variables  maps each ordered pair        in a subset of the real plane  to a unique

real number The set is called the domain of the function. The range of is the set of all real numbers that has

at least one ordered pair    such that                     as shown in the following figure.

                         Figure 4.2 The domain of a function of two variables consists of ordered pairs
Determining the domain of a function of two variables involves taking into account any domain restrictions that may
exist. Let's take a look.

  EXAMPLE 4.1
Domains and Ranges for Functions of Two Variables
Find the domain and range of each of the following functions:
 a.
b.

     Solution
 a. This is an example of a linear function in two variables. There are no values or combinations of and that cause

              to be undefined, so the domain of is  To determine the range, first pick a value for We need to find a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 303

solution to the equation              or                One such solution can be obtained by first setting
which yields the equation
                                      The solution to this equation is              which gives the ordered pair

             as a solution to the equation              for any value of Therefore, the range of the function is all real

numbers, or 

b. For the function  to have a real value, the quantity under the square root must be nonnegative:

This inequality can be written in the form

Therefore, the domain of          is                         The graph of this set of points can be described as

a disk of radius centered at the origin. The domain includes the boundary circle as shown in the following graph.

          Figure 4.3 The domain of the function                                     is a closed disk of radius 3.

To determine the range of                               we start with a point       on the boundary of the domain,
which is defined by the relation
                                            It follows that                    and

If        (in other words,                  then

This is the maximum value of the function. Given any value c between                we can find an entire set of points
inside the domain of such that

Since                this describes a circle of radius  centered at the origin. Any point on this circle satisfies the
equation
                     Therefore, the range of this function can be written in interval notation as
304 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

    4.1 Find the domain and range of the function

Graphing Functions of Two Variables

Suppose we wish to graph the function                      This function has two independent variables             and one

dependent variable When graphing a function                         of one variable, we use the Cartesian plane. We are able to

graph any ordered pair           in the plane, and every point in the plane has an ordered pair           associated with it. With

a function of two variables, each ordered pair                      in the domain of the function is mapped to a real number

Therefore, the graph of the function consists of ordered triples                      The graph of a function      of two

variables is called a surface.

To understand more completely the concept of plotting a set of ordered triples to obtain a surface in three-dimensional

space, imagine the      coordinate system laying flat. Then, every point in the domain of the function has a unique

    associated with it. If is positive, then the graphed point is located above the                       if is negative, then the

graphed point is located below the                         The set of all the graphed points becomes the two-dimensional surface that

is the graph of the function

EXAMPLE 4.2

Graphing Functions of Two Variables
Create a graph of each of the following functions:

a.
b.

    Solution                                                                          is                                      and the
a. In Example 4.1, we determined that the domain of

    range is                        When                            we have           Therefore any point on the circle of radius

    centered at the origin in the                          maps to  in  If            then                     so any point on the

    circle of radius    centered at the origin in the                        maps to  in  As              gets closer to zero, the

    value of z approaches 3. When                          then              This is the origin in the         If             is equal

    to any other value between         then                         equals some other constant between         The surface

    described by this function is a hemisphere centered at the origin with radius as shown in the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 305

      Figure 4.4 Graph of the hemisphere represented by the given function of two variables.

b. This function also contains the expression  Setting this expression equal to various values starting at zero,

we obtain circles of increasing radius. The minimum value of  is zero (attained when

When  the function becomes                     and when       then the function becomes  These are cross-

sections of the graph, and are parabolas. Recall from Introduction to Vectors in Space that the name of the graph of

      is a paraboloid. The graph of appears in the following graph.
306 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

               Figure 4.5 A paraboloid is the graph of the given function of two variables.

  EXAMPLE 4.3

Nuts and Bolts
A profit function for a hardware manufacturer is given by

where is the number of nuts sold per month (measured in thousands) and represents the number of bolts sold per
month (measured in thousands). Profit is measured in thousands of dollars. Sketch a graph of this function.

     Solution                                                           consists of  coordinate pairs that yield a
This function is a polynomial function in two variables. The domain of
nonnegative profit:

This is a disk of radius centered at  A further restriction is that both             must be nonnegative. When

and            Note that it is possible for either value to be a noninteger; for example, it is possible to sell

thousand nuts in a month. The domain, therefore, contains thousands of points, so we can consider all points within the

disk. For any  we can solve the equation

Since   we know that                  so the previous equation describes a circle with radius  centered at the
point  Therefore. the range of
                                                           is    The graph of        is also a paraboloid, and this

paraboloid points downward as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 307

              Figure 4.6 The graph of the given function of two variables is also a paraboloid.

Level Curves

If hikers walk along rugged trails, they might use a topographical map that shows how steeply the trails change. A

topographical map contains curved lines called contour lines. Each contour line corresponds to the points on the map

that have equal elevation (Figure 4.7). A level curve of a function of two variables  is completely analogous to a

contour line on a topographical map.

Figure 4.7 (a) A topographical map of Devil's Tower, Wyoming. Lines that are close together indicate very steep terrain.
(b) A perspective photo of Devil's Tower shows just how steep its sides are. Notice the top of the tower has the same
shape as the center of the topographical map.
308 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Definition

Given a function                 and a number in the range of   level curve of a function of two variables for the value

    is defined to be the set of points satisfying the equation

Returning to the function                                  we can determine the level curves of this function. The range of is

the closed interval          First, we choose any number in this closed interval--say,  The level curve corresponding

to  is described by the equation

To simplify, square both sides of this equation:

Now, multiply both sides of the equation by and add to each side:

This equation describes a circle centered at the origin with radius Using values of between       yields other

circles also centered at the origin. If  then the circle has radius so it consists solely of the origin. Figure 4.8 is a

graph of the level curves of this function corresponding to                       Note that in the previous derivation it may

be possible that we introduced extra solutions by squaring both sides. This is not the case here because the range of the

square root function is nonnegative.

Figure 4.8 Level curves of the function                         using             and             corresponds to the origin).

A graph of the various level curves of a function is called a contour map.

EXAMPLE 4.4

Making a Contour Map

Given the function                                         find the level curve corresponding to  Then create a

contour map for this function. What are the domain and range of

     Solution                    we set                    and solve. This gives
To find the level curve for

We then square both sides and multiply both sides of the equation by
Now, we rearrange the terms, putting the terms together and the terms together, and add to each side:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 309

Next, we group the pairs of terms containing the same variable in parentheses, and factor from the first pair:

Then we complete the square in each pair of parentheses and add the correct value to the right-hand side:

Next, we factor the left-hand side and simplify the right-hand side:

Last, we divide both sides by                                                                                                        (4.1)
This equation describes an ellipse centered at  The graph of this ellipse appears in the following graph.

               Figure 4.9 Level curve of the function                                        corresponding to
We can repeat the same derivation for values of less than  Then, Equation 4.1 becomes

for an arbitrary value of Figure 4.10 shows a contour map for         using the values                         When
the level curve is the point
310 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.10 Contour map for the function                                     using the values

4.2 Find and graph the level curve of the function                           corresponding to

Another useful tool for understanding the graph of a function of two variables is called a vertical trace. Level curves

are always graphed in the              but as their name implies, vertical traces are graphed in the - or

Definition

Consider a function              with domain                A vertical trace of the function can be either the set of points
that solves the equation
                                       for a given constant  or              for a given constant

EXAMPLE 4.5

Finding Vertical Traces                                    corresponding to  and
Find vertical traces for the function

     Solution  in the equation
First set

This describes a cosine graph in the plane                 The other values of appear in the following table.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 311

                                                     Vertical Trace for

                                             Table 4.1 Vertical Traces Parallel

                                             to the         for the Function

In a similar fashion, we can substitute the          in the equation     to obtain the traces in the         as listed
in the following table.

                                                     Vertical Trace for

                                             Table 4.2 Vertical Traces Parallel

                                             to the         for the Function

The three traces in the  are cosine functions; the three traces in the                are sine functions. These curves

appear in the intersections of the surface with the planes                       and                  as shown in

the following figure.

Figure 4.11 Vertical traces of the function  are cosine curves in the            (a) and sine curves in the
(b).

4.3 Determine the equation of the vertical trace of the function
312 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

    corresponding to             and describe its graph.

Functions of two variables can produce some striking-looking surfaces. The following figure shows two examples.

Figure 4.12 Examples of surfaces representing functions of two variables: (a) a combination of a power function and a
sine function and (b) a combination of trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions.

Functions of More Than Two Variables

So far, we have examined only functions of two variables. However, it is useful to take a brief look at functions of more
than two variables. Two such examples are

and

In the first function,           represents a point in space, and the function maps each point in space to a fourth

quantity, such as temperature or wind speed. In the second function,  can represent a point in the plane, and can

represent time. The function might map a point in the plane to a third quantity (for example, pressure) at a given time

The method for finding the domain of a function of more than two variables is analogous to the method for functions of

one or two variables.

EXAMPLE 4.6

Domains for Functions of Three Variables
Find the domain of each of the following functions:

 a.

b.

    Solution                                               to be defined (and be a real value), two conditions must hold:
a. For the function

     1. The denominator cannot be zero.
     2. The radicand cannot be negative.

    Combining these conditions leads to the inequality

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 313

Moving the variables to the other side and reversing the inequality gives the domain as

                                                                   

which describes a ball of radius centered at the origin. (Note: The surface of the ball is not included in this
domain.)

b. For the function      to be defined (and be a real value), two conditions must hold:

1. The radicand cannot be negative.
2. The denominator cannot be zero.

Since the radicand cannot be negative, this implies      and therefore that              Since the denominator

cannot be zero,      or                       Which can be rewritten as         , which are the equations of two lines

passing through the origin. Therefore, the domain of is

4.4 Find the domain of the function

Functions of two variables have level curves, which are shown as curves in the  However, when the function has

three variables, the curves become surfaces, so we can define level surfaces for functions of three variables.

Definition

Given a function     and a number in the range of        a level surface of a function of three variables is

defined to be the set of points satisfying the equation

  EXAMPLE 4.7                                              corresponding to
                                                         This equation describes a hyperboloid of one sheet as
Finding a Level Surface
Find the level surface for the function

     Solution
The level surface is defined by the equation
shown in the following figure.
314 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.13 A hyperboloid of one sheet with some of its level surfaces.

4.5 Find the equation of the level surface of the function

corresponding to                 and describe the surface, if possible.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.1 · Functions of Several Variables 315

        SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, evaluate each function at the indicated values.

1.                    Find        2.                           Find  3. The volume of a right

                                                                              circular cylinder is calculated

                                                                              by a function of two

                                                                              variables,

                                                                              where is the radius of the

                                                                              right circular cylinder and

                                                                              represents the height of the

                                                                              cylinder. Evaluate

                                                                              and explain what this

                                                                              means.

4. An oxygen tank is

     constructed of a right

     cylinder of height and

     radius with two

     hemispheres of radius

     mounted on the top and

     bottom of the cylinder.

     Express the volume of the

     tank as a function of two

     variables,       find

     and explain what

     this means.

For the following exercises, find the domain of the function.

5.                                6.                                 7.

8.                                9.                                 10.

Find the range of the functions.

11.                               12.                                13.

For the following exercises, find the level curves of each function at the indicated value of to visualize the given
function.

14.                               15.                                16.

17.                               18.                                19.

20.                               21.                                22.

23.                               24.                                25.

26.                                    27.                                    28.

29.                   any

     constant

For the following exercises, find the vertical traces of the functions at the indicated values of and y, and plot the traces.

30.                               31.                                32.
316 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Find the domain of the following functions.

33.                                  34.                               35.
                                                                                      38.
36.                                       37.
                                                                       41. Use technology to graph
For the following exercises, plot a graph of the function.

39.                                  40.

Sketch the following by finding the level curves. Verify the graph using technology.

42.                                  43.                               44.

45.                                  46.                               47. Describe the contour lines

                                                                              for several values of for

Find the level surface for the functions of three variables and describe it.

48.                                  49.                                      50.

51.                                       52.

For the following exercises, find an equation of the level curve of that contains the point

53.                                       54.                                 55.

56. The strength of an               57. A thin plate made of iron is  58. Refer to the preceding
                                           located in the                    problem. Using the
     electric field at point               The temperature in                temperature function
                                           degrees Celsius at a point        found there, determine the
     resulting from an                                is inversely           proportionality constant if
                                           proportional to the square        the temperature at point
     infinitely long charged wire          of its distance from the                                  Use this
                                           origin. Express as a              constant to determine the
     lying along the             is        function of                       temperature at point

     given by

     where is a positive
     constant. For simplicity, let

             and find the
     equations of the level
     surfaces for

59. Refer to the preceding
      problem. Find the level
      curves for

      and describe what the level
      curves represent.

4.2 Limits and Continuity

Learning Objectives

      4.2.1 Calculate the limit of a function of two variables.
      4.2.2 Learn how a function of two variables can approach different values at a boundary point, depending on

               the path of approach.
      4.2.3 State the conditions for continuity of a function of two variables.
      4.2.4 Verify the continuity of a function of two variables at a point.
      4.2.5 Calculate the limit of a function of three or more variables and verify the continuity of the function at a

               point.

We have now examined functions of more than one variable and seen how to graph them. In this section, we see how to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              4.2 · Limits and Continuity 317

take the limit of a function of more than one variable, and what it means for a function of more than one variable to be
continuous at a point in its domain. It turns out these concepts have aspects that just don't occur with functions of one
variable.

Limit of a Function of Two Variables

Recall from The Limit of a Function (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/2-2-the-limit-of-a-function) the
definition of a limit of a function of one variable:

Let    be defined for all      in an open interval containing Let be a real number. Then

if for every  there exists a              such that if             for all in the domain of then

Before we can adapt this definition to define a limit of a function of two variables, we first need to see how to extend the
idea of an open interval in one variable to an open interval in two variables.

Definition

Consider a point            A disk centered at point    is defined to be an open disk of radius centered at
                                                      
point         --that is,

as shown in the following graph.

                               Figure 4.14 A disk centered around the point

The idea of a disk appears in the definition of the limit of a function of two variables. If is small, then all the points

     in the disk are close to             This is completely analogous to being close to in the definition of a limit of a

function of one variable. In one dimension, we express this restriction as

In more than one dimension, we use a disk.                         as             approaches  is written
  Definition
  Let be a function of two variables, and The limit of

if for each       there exists a small enough           such that for all points  in a disk around        except

possibly for        itself, the value of  is no more than away from               (Figure 4.15). Using symbols, we write the

following: For any         there exists a number        such that
318 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.15 The limit of a function involving two variables requires that  be within of whenever     is within

of   The smaller the value of the smaller the value of

Proving that a limit exists using the definition of a limit of a function of two variables can be challenging. Instead, we use
the following theorem, which gives us shortcuts to finding limits. The formulas in this theorem are an extension of the
formulas in the limit laws theorem in The Limit Laws (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/2-3-the-limit-
laws).

Theorem 4.1

Limit laws for functions of two variables

Let       and    be defined for all                        in a neighborhood around  and assume the

neighborhood is contained completely inside the domain of Assume that and are real numbers such that

                 and                                       and let be a constant. Then each of the following statements holds:

Constant Law:

                                                                                                     (4.2)

Identity Laws:

                                                                                                     (4.3)
                                                                                                     (4.4)

Sum Law:

                                                                                                     (4.5)

Difference Law:

                                                                                                     (4.6)

Constant Multiple Law:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.2 · Limits and Continuity 319

Product Law:                                                                                              (4.7)
Quotient Law:                                                                                             (4.8)
                                                                                                          (4.9)
Power Law:                                                                                               (4.10)

for any positive integer
Root Law:

                                                                                                         (4.11)

for all if is odd and positive, and for     if is even and positive provided that               for all

               in neighborhood of        .

The proofs of these properties are similar to those for the limits of functions of one variable. We can apply these laws to
finding limits of various functions.

  EXAMPLE 4.8

Finding the Limit of a Function of Two Variables
Find each of the following limits:
 a.

b.

     Solution
 a. First use the sum and difference laws to separate the terms:

Next, use the constant multiple law on the second, third, fourth, and fifth limits:
Now, use the power law on the first and third limits, and the product law on the second limit:
320 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

     Last, use the identity laws on the first six limits and the constant law on the last limit:
b. Before applying the quotient law, we need to verify that the limit of the denominator is nonzero. Using the

     difference law, constant multiple law, and identity law,

     Since the limit of the denominator is nonzero, the quotient law applies. We now calculate the limit of the numerator
     using the difference law, constant multiple law, and identity law:

Therefore, according to the quotient law we have

4.6 Evaluate the following limit:

Since we are taking the limit of a function of two variables, the point  is in  and it is possible to approach this

point from an infinite number of directions. Sometimes when calculating a limit, the answer varies depending on the

path taken toward          If this is the case, then the limit fails to exist. In other words, the limit must be unique,

regardless of path taken.

EXAMPLE 4.9

Limits That Fail to Exist
Show that neither of the following limits exist:

 a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.2 · Limits and Continuity 321

b.

    Solution                                         consists of all points in the          except for the point  (Figure
a. The domain of the function

    4.16). To show that the limit does not exist as  approaches              we note that it is impossible to satisfy the

    definition of a limit of a function of two variables because of the fact that the function takes different values along

    different lines passing through point          First, consider the line         in the  Substituting          into

    gives

    for any value of Therefore the value of remains constant for any point on the           and as approaches zero,

    the function remains fixed at zero.

    Next, consider the line    Substituting          into  gives

    This is true for any point on the line         If we let approach zero while staying on this line, the value of the

    function remains fixed at regardless of how small is.

    Choose a value for that is less than --say, Then, no matter how small a disk we draw around                          the

    values of       for points inside that disk will include both and Therefore, the definition of limit at a point is

    never satisfied and the limit fails to exist.

    Figure 4.16 Graph of the function                            Along the line             the function is equal to zero;

    along the line  the function is equal to

    In a similar fashion to a., we can approach the origin along any straight line passing through the origin. If we try the

    (i.e.,          then the function remains fixed at zero. The same is true for the       Suppose we approach

    the origin along a straight line of slope The equation of this line is          Then the limit becomes
322 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

regardless of the value of It would seem that the limit is equal to zero. What if we chose a curve passing through

the origin instead? For example, we can consider the parabola given by the equation  Substituting in

place of in    gives

By the same logic in a., it is impossible to find a disk around the origin that satisfies the definition of the limit for

any value of   Therefore,                                  does not exist.

4.7 Show that

            does not exist.

Interior Points and Boundary Points

To study continuity and differentiability of a function of two or more variables, we first need to learn some new
terminology.

Definition

Let S be a subset of  (Figure 4.17).

1. A point    is called an interior point of if there is a disk centered around contained completely in
2. A point    is called a boundary point of if every disk centered around contains points both inside and

     outside

              Figure 4.17 In the set shown,                is an interior point and  is a boundary point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      4.2 · Limits and Continuity 323

Definition

Let S be a subset of  (Figure 4.17).

 1. is called an open set if every point of is an interior point.
 2. is called a closed set if it contains all its boundary points.

An example of an open set is a disk. If we include the boundary of the disk, then it becomes a closed set. A set that
contains some, but not all, of its boundary points is neither open nor closed. For example if we include half the boundary
of a disk but not the other half, then the set is neither open nor closed.

  Definition

 Let S be a subset of  (Figure 4.17).

   1. An open set is a connected set if it cannot be represented as the union of two or more disjoint, nonempty
        open subsets.

   2. A set is a region if it is open, connected, and nonempty.

The definition of a limit of a function of two variables requires the disk to be contained inside the domain of the

function. However, if we wish to find the limit of a function at a boundary point of the domain, the  is not contained

inside the domain. By definition, some of the points of the  are inside the domain and some are outside. Therefore,

we need only consider points that are inside both the disk and the domain of the function. This leads to the definition

of the limit of a function at a boundary point.

Definition

Let be a function of two variables, and and suppose          is on the boundary of the domain of Then, the limit

of          as      approaches  is written

if for any      there exists a number            such that for any point   inside the domain of and within a suitably
                                                                          away from (Figure 4.15). Using symbols, we
small distance positive of      the value of         is no more than

can write: For any  there exists a number        such that

  EXAMPLE 4.10

Limit of a Function at a Boundary Point
Prove

     Solution                                    is                               which is a circle of radius
The domain of the function

centered at the origin, along with its interior as shown in the following graph.
324 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

                                                 Figure 4.18 Domain of the function
       We can use the limit laws, which apply to limits at the boundary of domains as well as interior points:

       See the following graph.

                                                  Figure 4.19 Graph of the function
              4.8 Evaluate the following limit:

     Continuity of Functions of Two Variables

       In Continuity (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/2-4-continuity), we defined the continuity of a
       function of one variable and saw how it relied on the limit of a function of one variable. In particular, three conditions are

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.2 · Limits and Continuity 325

necessary for  to be continuous at point

1.  exists.

2.             exists.

3.

These three conditions are necessary for continuity of a function of two variables as well.

Definition

A function     is continuous at a point             in its domain if the following conditions are satisfied:

1.             exists.

2.                      exists.

3.

EXAMPLE 4.11

Demonstrating Continuity for a Function of Two Variables

Show that the function               is continuous at point

    Solution

There are three conditions to be satisfied, per the definition of continuity. In this example,  and

1.          exists. This is true because the domain of the function consists of those ordered pairs for which the

    denominator is nonzero (i.e.,                   Point    satisfies this condition. Furthermore,

2.                      exists. This is also true:

3.                                  This is true because we have just shown that both sides of this equation equal three.

    4.9 Show that the function                               is continuous at point

Continuity of a function of any number of variables can also be defined in terms of delta and epsilon. A function of two

variables is continuous at a point       in its domain if for every   there exists a            such that, whenever

                        it is true,                          This definition can be combined with the formal definition

(that is, the epsilon-delta definition) of continuity of a function of one variable to prove the following theorems:

Theorem 4.2

The Sum of Continuous Functions Is Continuous

If  is continuous at                and             is continuous at  then                      is continuous at
326 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Theorem 4.3

The Product of Continuous Functions Is Continuous

If   is continuous at and             is continuous at             then                  is continuous at

Theorem 4.4

The Composition of Continuous Functions Is Continuous

Let be a function of two variables from a domain                    to a range            Suppose is continuous at some point

               and define             Let be a function that maps  to  such that is in the domain of

Last, assume is continuous at Then                         is continuous at       as shown in the following figure.

                                  Figure 4.20 The composition of two continuous functions is continuous.
Let's now use the previous theorems to show continuity of functions in the following examples.

EXAMPLE 4.12

More Examples of Continuity of a Function of Two Variables

Show that the functions               and                                    are continuous everywhere.

     Solution

The polynomials                  and                       are continuous at every real number, and therefore by the product of

continuous functions theorem,                              is continuous at every point  in the           Since

                 is continuous at every point              in the            and         is continuous at every real number

the continuity of the composition of functions tells us that                             is continuous at every point            in

the

     4.10 Show that the functions                                  and                           are continuous everywhere.

Functions of Three or More Variables

The limit of a function of three or more variables occurs readily in applications. For example, suppose we have a function

     that gives the temperature at a physical location                       in three dimensions. Or perhaps a function

     can indicate air pressure at a location                       at time How can we take a limit at a point in  What does

it mean to be continuous at a point in four dimensions?

The answers to these questions rely on extending the concept of a disk into more than two dimensions. Then, the ideas
of the limit of a function of three or more variables and the continuity of a function of three or more variables are very
similar to the definitions given earlier for a function of two variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.2 · Limits and Continuity 327

Definition

Let           be a point in  Then, a   ball in three dimensions consists of all points in   lying at a distance of
less than
            from  --that is,

                                       

To define a ball in higher dimensions, add additional terms under the radical to correspond to each additional

dimension. For example, given a point               in  a ball around can be described by

                                  

To show that a limit of a function of three variables exists at a point  it suffices to show that for any point in a

ball centered at  the value of the function at that point is arbitrarily close to a fixed value (the limit value).

All the limit laws for functions of two variables hold for functions of more than two variables as well.

EXAMPLE 4.13

Finding the Limit of a Function of Three Variables
Find

     Solution
Before we can apply the quotient law, we need to verify that the limit of the denominator is nonzero. Using the
difference law, the identity law, and the constant law,

Since this is nonzero, we next find the limit of the numerator. Using the product law, difference law, constant multiple
law, and identity law,

Last, applying the quotient law:

4.11 Find
328 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

        SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the limit of the function.

60.                              61.                                   62. Show that the limit

                                                                                         exists and

                                                                              is the same along the

                                                                              paths:     and

                                                                              and along

For the following exercises, evaluate the limits at the indicated values of   If the limit does not exist, state this and
explain why the limit does not exist.

63.                              64.                                   65.

66.                              67.                                   68.

69.                              70.                                   71.

72.                              73.                                          74.

75.                              76.                                   77.

For the following exercises, complete the statement.

78. A point       in a plane     79. A point               in a plane

     region is an interior            region is called a

     point of if                      boundary point of if

     _________________.               ___________.

For the following exercises, use algebraic techniques to evaluate the limit.

80.                              81.                                   82.

83.

For the following exercises, evaluate the limits of the functions of three variables.

84.                              85.

For the following exercises, evaluate the limit of the function by determining the value the function approaches along the
indicated paths. If the limit does not exist, explain why not.

86.                              87. Evaluate                          88.

       a. Along the                    using the results of                   a. Along the x-axis
       b. Along the                    previous problem.                      b. Along the y-axis
       c. Along the path                                                      c. Along the path

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.2 · Limits and Continuity 329

89. Evaluate

      using the results of
      previous problem.

Discuss the continuity of the following functions. Find the largest region in the         in which the following functions
are continuous.

90.                               91.                                   92.

93.

For the following exercises, determine the region in which the function is continuous. Explain your answer.

94.                               95.                                                96.

97. Determine whether                  (Hint: Show that the function
                              is       approaches different values along
                                       two different paths.)
      continuous at
                                  98. Create a plot using               99. Determine the region of
                                        graphing software to
                                        determine where the limit            the          in which the
                                        does not exist. Find where
                                        in the coordinate plane              function
                                                               is
                                                                                                     is
                                        continuous.
                                                                             continuous. Use
                                                                             technology to support your
                                                                             conclusion.

100. Determine the region of      101. At what points in space is 102. At what points in space is

     the        in which

                                       continuous?                           continuous?

     is continuous. Use
     technology to support
     your conclusion. (Hint:
     Choose the range of
     values for
     carefully!)

103. Show that                    104. [T] Evaluate                     105. [T]
                                                                                 a.
                does not                                          by                 Use a CAS to draw a
                                                                                     contour map of
     exist at   by plotting               plotting the function
                                          using a CAS. Determine
     the graph of the function.           analytically the limit along       b. What is the name of
                                          the path                                the geometric shape
                                                                                  of the level curves?

                                                                             c. Give the general
                                                                                  equation of the level
                                                                                  curves.

                                                                             d. What is the maximum
                                                                                  value of

                                                                             e. What is the domain of
                                                                                  the function?

                                                                             f. What is the range of
                                                                                  the function?
330 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

106. True or False: If we        107. Use polar coordinates to        108. Use polar coordinates to
        evaluate                                                              find
                                         find
        along several paths and
        each time the limit is           You can also find the limit
        we can conclude that             using L'Hôpital's rule.

109. Discuss the continuity of   110. Given                           111. Given
                      where              find                                 find
                      and

4.3 Partial Derivatives

Learning Objectives

      4.3.1 Calculate the partial derivatives of a function of two variables.
      4.3.2 Calculate the partial derivatives of a function of more than two variables.
      4.3.3 Determine the higher-order derivatives of a function of two variables.
      4.3.4 Explain the meaning of a partial differential equation and give an example.

Now that we have examined limits and continuity of functions of two variables, we can proceed to study derivatives.
Finding derivatives of functions of two variables is the key concept in this chapter, with as many applications in
mathematics, science, and engineering as differentiation of single-variable functions. However, we have already seen
that limits and continuity of multivariable functions have new issues and require new terminology and ideas to deal with
them. This carries over into differentiation as well.

Derivatives of a Function of Two Variables

When studying derivatives of functions of one variable, we found that one interpretation of the derivative is an

instantaneous rate of change of as a function of Leibniz notation for the derivative is         which implies that is

the dependent variable and is the independent variable. For a function              of two variables, and are the

independent variables and is the dependent variable. This raises two questions right away: How do we adapt Leibniz

notation for functions of two variables? Also, what is an interpretation of the derivative? The answer lies in partial

derivatives.

Definition

Let            be a function of two variables. Then the partial derivative of  with respect to  written as        or
                                                                                                                  (4.12)
is defined as

The partial derivative of with respect to written as       or is defined as

                                                                                                                  (4.13)

This definition shows two differences already. First, the notation changes, in the sense that we still use a version of

Leibniz notation, but the in the original notation is replaced with the symbol (This rounded is usually called

"partial," so  is spoken as the "partial of with respect to This is the first hint that we are dealing with partial

derivatives. Second, we now have two different derivatives we can take, since there are two different independent

variables. Depending on which variable we choose, we can come up with different partial derivatives altogether, and

often do.

EXAMPLE 4.14

Calculating Partial Derivatives from the Definition

Use the definition of the partial derivative as a limit to calculate  and      for the function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.3 · Partial Derivatives 331

     Solution
First, calculate
Next, substitute this into Equation 4.12 and simplify:

To calculate first calculate
Next, substitute this into Equation 4.13 and simplify:

4.12 Use the definition of the partial derivative as a limit to calculate  and  for the function

The idea to keep in mind when calculating partial derivatives is to treat all independent variables, other than the variable

with respect to which we are differentiating, as constants. Then proceed to differentiate as with a function of a single

variable. To see why this is true, first fix and define  as a function of Then

The same is true for calculating the partial derivative of with respect to This time, fix and define                      as

a function of Then
332 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

All differentiation rules from Introduction to Derivatives (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/
3-introduction) apply.

EXAMPLE 4.15

Calculating Partial Derivatives

Calculate     and                for the following functions by holding the opposite variable constant then differentiating:

a.
b.

    Solution

a. To calculate      treat the variable                    as a constant. Then differentiate  with respect to using the sum,

    difference, and power rules:

    The derivatives of the third, fifth, and sixth terms are all zero because they do not contain the variable  so they are
    treated as constant terms. The derivative of the second term is equal to the coefficient of which is
    Calculating

    These are the same answers obtained in Example 4.14.

b. To calculate      treat the variable y as a constant. Then differentiate                   with respect to x using the chain rule

    and power rule:

    To calculate     treat the variable as a constant. Then differentiate                     with respect to using the chain rule
    and power rule:

    4.13 Calculate               and  for the function                                        by holding the opposite

              variable constant, then differentiating.

How can we interpret these partial derivatives? Recall that the graph of a function of two variables is a surface in  If

we remove the limit from the definition of the partial derivative with respect to the difference quotient remains:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            4.3 · Partial Derivatives 333

This resembles the difference quotient for the derivative of a function of one variable, except for the presence of the
variable. Figure 4.21 illustrates a surface described by an arbitrary function

                 Figure 4.21 Secant line passing through the points           and
                                                                         for an arbitrary point
In Figure 4.21, the value of is positive. If we graph  and                                         then the slope

of the secant line passing through these two points is given by

This line is parallel to the        Therefore, the slope of the secant line represents an average rate of change of the

function as we travel parallel to the   As approaches zero, the slope of the secant line approaches the slope of

the tangent line.

If we choose to change instead of by the same incremental value then the secant line is parallel to the         and

so is the tangent line. Therefore,     represents the slope of the tangent line passing through the point

parallel to the    and         represents the slope of the tangent line passing through the point               parallel

to the  If we wish to find the slope of a tangent line passing through the same point in any other direction, then

we need what are called directional derivatives, which we discuss in Directional Derivatives and the Gradient.

We now return to the idea of contour maps, which we introduced in Functions of Several Variables. We can use a contour
map to estimate partial derivatives of a function

EXAMPLE 4.16

Partial Derivatives from a Contour Map

Use a contour map to estimate          at the point    for the function

     Solution
The following graph represents a contour map for the function
334 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.22 Contour map for the function                             using            and               corresponds to the
origin).

The inner circle on the contour map corresponds to              and the next circle out corresponds to        The first circle is
                                                                                                               The first
given by the equation                     the second circle is given by the equation                         of the first circle is
equation simplifies to                                                                                  evaluated at the point
                                 and the second equation simplifies to                 The

and the                          of the second circle is             We can estimate the value of

using the slope formula:

To calculate the exact value of  evaluated at the point              we start by finding           using the chain rule. First,

we rewrite the function as                                                           and then differentiate with respect to while
holding constant:

Next, we evaluate this expression using                    and

The estimate for the partial derivative corresponds to the slope of the secant line passing through the points

                and                                        It represents an approximation to the slope of the tangent line to the

surface through the point                                  which is parallel to the

4.14 Use a contour map to estimate                         at point  for the function

                Compare this with the exact answer.

Functions of More Than Two Variables

Suppose we have a function of three variables, such as                               We can calculate partial derivatives of with

respect to any of the independent variables, simply as extensions of the definitions for partial derivatives of functions of

two variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          4.3 · Partial Derivatives 335

Definition

Let           be a function of three variables. Then, the partial derivative of  with respect to x, written as     or
                                                                                                                (4.14)
     is defined to be

The partial derivative of with respect to written as          or is defined to be

                                                                                                                (4.15)

The partial derivative of with respect to written as          or is defined to be

                                                                                                                (4.16)

We can calculate a partial derivative of a function of three variables using the same idea we used for a function of two

variables. For example, if we have a function of              and we wish to calculate  then we treat the other two

independent variables as if they are constants, then differentiate with respect to

EXAMPLE 4.17

Calculating Partial Derivatives for a Function of Three Variables

Use the limit definition of partial derivatives to calculate  for the function

Then, find    and      by setting the other two variables constant and differentiating accordingly.

Solution

We first calculate     using Equation 4.14, then we calculate the other two partial derivatives by holding the remaining

variables constant. To use the equation to find   we first need to calculate

and recall that                                                    Next, we substitute these two expressions
into the equation:

Then we find        by holding  constant. Therefore, any term that does not include the variable is constant, and

its derivative is zero. We can apply the sum, difference, and power rules for functions of one variable:
336 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

To calculate  we hold x and y constant and apply the sum, difference, and power rules for functions of one
variable:

    4.15 Use the limit definition of partial derivatives to calculate  for the function

              Then find          and  by setting the other two variables constant and differentiating accordingly.

  EXAMPLE 4.18

Calculating Partial Derivatives for a Function of Three Variables
Calculate the three partial derivatives of the following functions.

 a.
b.

     Solution
In each case, treat all variables as constants except the one whose partial derivative you are calculating.

a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   4.3 · Partial Derivatives 337

b.

    4.16 Calculate                       and       for the function

Higher-Order Partial Derivatives

Consider the function

Its partial derivatives are

Each of these partial derivatives is a function of two variables, so we can calculate partial derivatives of these functions.
Just as with derivatives of single-variable functions, we can call these second-order derivatives, third-order derivatives,
and so on. In general, they are referred to as higher-order partial derivatives. There are four second-order partial
derivatives for any function (provided they all exist):

An alternative notation for each is                and respectively. Higher-order partial derivatives calculated with
respect to different variables, such as
                                              and  are commonly called mixed partial derivatives.

EXAMPLE 4.19

Calculating Second Partial Derivatives
Calculate all four second partial derivatives for the function

    Solution

To calculate  and            we first calculate
338 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

To calculate  differentiate      with respect to

To calculate  differentiate      with respect to

To calculate  and                first calculate
To calculate
              differentiate      with respect to

To calculate  differentiate      with respect to

4.17 Calculate all four second partial derivatives for the function

At this point we should notice that, in both Example 4.19 and the checkpoint, it was true that
Under certain conditions, this is always true. In fact, it is a direct consequence of the following theorem.

Theorem 4.5

Equality of Mixed Partial Derivatives (Clairaut's Theorem)

Suppose that  is defined on an open disk that contains the point               If the functions and are

continuous on then

Clairaut's theorem guarantees that as long as mixed second-order derivatives are continuous, the order in which we
choose to differentiate the functions (i.e., which variable goes first, then second, and so on) does not matter. It can be
extended to higher-order derivatives as well. The proof of Clairaut's theorem can be found in most advanced calculus
books.

Two other second-order partial derivatives can be calculated for any function  The partial derivative         is equal

to the partial derivative of with respect to and is equal to the partial derivative of with respect to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           4.3 · Partial Derivatives 339

Partial Differential Equations

In Introduction to Differential Equations (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/4-introduction), we
studied differential equations in which the unknown function had one independent variable. A partial differential
equation is an equation that involves an unknown function of more than one independent variable and one or more of
its partial derivatives. Examples of partial differential equations are

                                                                                                                                                                 (4.17)

(heat equation in two dimensions)

                                                                                           (4.18)

(wave equation in two dimensions)

                                                                                           (4.19)

(Laplace's equation in two dimensions)

In the first two equations, the unknown function has three independent variables--         --and is an arbitrary

constant. The independent variables     are considered to be spatial variables, and the variable represents time. In

Laplace's equation, the unknown function has two independent variables

EXAMPLE 4.20

A Solution to the Wave Equation
Verify that

is a solution to the wave equation

                                                                                           (4.20)

Solution

First, we calculate  and

Next, we substitute each of these into the right-hand side of Equation 4.20 and simplify:
This verifies the solution.
340 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

4.18 Verify that                                                is a solution to the heat equation
                                                                                                    (4.21)

Since the solution to the two-dimensional heat equation is a function of three variables, it is not easy to create a visual

representation of the solution. We can graph the solution for fixed values of t, which amounts to snapshots of the heat

distributions at fixed times. These snapshots show how the heat is distributed over a two-dimensional surface as time

progresses. The graph of the preceding solution at time         appears in the following figure. As time progresses, the

extremes level out, approaching zero as t approaches infinity.

                                                                             Figure 4.23

If we consider the heat equation in one dimension, then it is possible to graph the solution over time. The heat equation
in one dimension becomes

where represents the thermal diffusivity of the material in question. A solution of this differential equation can be
written in the form

                                                                                                                                                                 (4.22)

where is any positive integer. A graph of this solution using   appears in Figure 4.24, where the initial

temperature distribution over a wire of length is given by      Notice that as time progresses, the wire

cools off. This is seen because, from left to right, the highest temperature (which occurs in the middle of the wire)

decreases and changes color from red to blue.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         4.3 · Partial Derivatives 341

                          Figure 4.24 Graph of a solution of the heat equation in one dimension over time.
STUDENT PROJECT
Lord Kelvin and the Age of Earth

Figure 4.25 (a) William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), 1824-1907, was a British physicist and electrical engineer; (b) Kelvin
used the heat diffusion equation to estimate the age of Earth (credit: modification of work by NASA).
During the late 1800s, the scientists of the new field of geology were coming to the conclusion that Earth must be
"millions and millions" of years old. At about the same time, Charles Darwin had published his treatise on evolution.
Darwin's view was that evolution needed many millions of years to take place, and he made a bold claim that the
342 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Weald chalk fields, where important fossils were found, were the result of million years of erosion.

At that time, eminent physicist William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) used an important partial differential equation, known

as the heat diffusion equation, to estimate the age of Earth by determining how long it would take Earth to cool from

molten rock to what we had at that time. His conclusion was a range of   million years, but most likely about

million years. For many decades, the proclamations of this irrefutable icon of science did not sit well with

geologists or with Darwin.

MEDIA

Read Kelvin's paper (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_KelEarthAge) on estimating the age of the Earth.

Kelvin made reasonable assumptions based on what was known in his time, but he also made several assumptions
that turned out to be wrong. One incorrect assumption was that Earth is solid and that the cooling was therefore via
conduction only, hence justifying the use of the diffusion equation. But the most serious error was a forgivable
one--omission of the fact that Earth contains radioactive elements that continually supply heat beneath Earth's
mantle. The discovery of radioactivity came near the end of Kelvin's life and he acknowledged that his calculation
would have to be modified.

Kelvin used the simple one-dimensional model applied only to Earth's outer shell, and derived the age from graphs
and the roughly known temperature gradient near Earth's surface. Let's take a look at a more appropriate version of
the diffusion equation in radial coordinates, which has the form

                                                                                                                                                            (4.23)

Here,        is temperature as a function of (measured from the center of Earth) and time is the heat

conductivity--for molten rock, in this case. The standard method of solving such a partial differential equation is by

separation of variables, where we express the solution as the product of functions containing each variable

separately. In this case, we would write the temperature as

1. Substitute this form into Equation 4.13 and, noting that is constant with respect to distance and            is

constant with respect to time show that

2. This equation represents the separation of variables we want. The left-hand side is only a function of and the

right-hand side is only a function of and they must be equal for all values of            Therefore, they both must

be equal to a constant. Let's call that constant           (The convenience of this choice is seen on substitution.) So,

we have

Now, we can verify through direct substitution for each equation that the solutions are               and

                                 where                     Note that     is also a valid solution, so we could

have chosen           for our constant. Can you see why it would not be valid for this case as time increases?

3. Let's now apply boundary conditions.

       a. The temperature must be finite at the center of Earth,         Which of the two constants, or must

       therefore be zero to keep finite at                 (Recall that  as               but         behaves very

       differently.)

b. Kelvin argued that when magma reaches Earth's surface, it cools very rapidly. A person can often touch the

       surface within weeks of the flow. Therefore, the surface reached a moderate temperature very early and

       remained nearly constant at a surface temperature For simplicity, let's set                    and find

       such that this is the temperature there for all time (Kelvin took the value to be              We can add

       this  constant to our solution later.) For this to be true, the sine argument must be zero at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    4.3 · Partial Derivatives 343

        Note that has an infinite series of values that satisfies this condition. Each value of represents a valid

        solution (each with its own value for The total or general solution is the sum of all these solutions.

c. At      we assume that all of Earth was at an initial hot temperature (Kelvin took this to be about

           The application of this boundary condition involves the more advanced application of Fourier

        coefficients. As noted in part b. each value of represents a valid solution, and the general solution is a

        sum of all these solutions. This results in a series solution:

Note how the values of come from the boundary condition applied in part b. The term        is the constant
for each term in the series, determined from applying the Fourier method. Letting    examine the first few

terms of this solution shown here and note how  in the exponential causes the higher terms to decrease quickly as
time progresses:

Near time  many terms of the solution are needed for accuracy. Inserting values for the conductivity and

           for time approaching merely thousands of years, only the first few terms make a significant contribution.

Kelvin only needed to look at the solution near Earth's surface (Figure 4.26) and, after a long time, determine what

time best yielded the estimated temperature gradient known during his era  increase per             He simply chose

a range of times with a gradient close to this value. In Figure 4.26, the solutions are plotted and scaled, with the

        surface temperature added. Note that the center of Earth would be relatively cool. At the time, it was

thought Earth must be solid.

Figure 4.26 Temperature versus radial distance from the center of Earth. (a) Kelvin's results, plotted to scale. (b) A

close-up of the results at a depth of  below Earth's surface.

Epilog

On May     physicist Ernest Rutherford spoke at the Royal Institution to announce a revised calculation that

included the contribution of radioactivity as a source of Earth's heat. In Rutherford's own words:

"I came into the room, which was half-dark, and presently spotted Lord Kelvin in the audience, and realised that I was
344 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

in for trouble at the last part of my speech dealing with the age of the Earth, where my views conflicted with his. To
my relief, Kelvin fell fast asleep, but as I came to the important point, I saw the old bird sit up, open an eye and cock a
baleful glance at me.

Then a sudden inspiration came, and I said Lord Kelvin had limited the age of the Earth, provided no new source [of
heat] was discovered. That prophetic utterance referred to what we are now considering tonight, radium! Behold! The
old boy beamed upon me."

Rutherford calculated an age for Earth of about            million years. Today's accepted value of Earth's age is about
billion years.

        SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, calculate the partial derivative using the limit definitions only.

112. for                         113. for

For the following exercises, calculate the sign of the partial derivative using the graph of the surface.

                                                            114.

115.                             116.                                    117.

For the following exercises, calculate the partial derivatives.

118. for                         119. for                                120. and for

121. and for                     122. Find                 for           123. Let                Find and

124. Let          Find           125. Let                          Find  126. Let
        and          and                      and                Find            Find and

127. Let                         128. Let                                129. Find at            for
        Evaluate                                       and
                                                                                                    Evaluate
                                                                               the partial derivatives at
                                                                               point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   4.3 · Partial Derivatives 345

130. Given                                  131. Given                        132. The area of a

      find         and                              find                      parallelogram with
                                                                         and
                                                                              adjacent side lengths that

                                                                              are         and in which

                                                                              the angle between these

                                                                              two sides is is given by

                                                                              the function

                                                                                                   Find

                                                                              the rate of change of the

                                                                              area of the parallelogram

                                                                              with respect to the

                                                                              following:

                                                                              a. Side a

                                                                              b. Side b

                                                                              c.

133. Express the volume of a                134. Calculate for

      right circular cylinder as a

      function of two variables:

      a. its radius and its

              height

      b. Show that the rate of

              change of the volume

              of the cylinder with

              respect to its radius is

              the product of its

              circumference

              multiplied by its

              height.

      c. Show that the rate of

              change of the volume

              of the cylinder with

              respect to its height is

              equal to the area of

              the circular base.

Find the indicated higher-order partial derivatives.

135.        for                             136.  for                         137. Let
                                                                                      Find and
138. Given                   find           139. Given
                                                    find                      140. Given
              and                                           and
                                            142. Find     for                         show that

141. Show that
                                        is

        a solution of the
        differential equation

143. Let                                                  144. Let
        Find                                                      Find
346 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

145. Given                                  146. Given

        find all points at which                           find all points at which   and
                           simultaneously.
                                                           simultaneously.
147. Given
                                                           148. Given

find all points on at which                                find all points at which
                  simultaneously.                          simultaneously.

149. Show that                              150. Show that                           151. Show that
        satisfies the equation                      solves Laplace's equation                satisfies the heat
                                                                                             equation

152. Find                                   153. Find                                 154. Find
        for
                                            for
155. Find                                                                                      for
        for
                                            156. The function                         157. The equation for heat

                                                                       gives the                    flow in the     is

                                                           pressure at a point in a                                 Show
                                                           gas as a function of
                                                           temperature and                          that
                                                           volume The letters
                                                                                                    is a solution.
                                                                      are constants.
                                                           Find and and

                                                           explain what these
                                                           quantities represent.

158. The basic wave equation                159. The law of cosines can be            160. Suppose the sides of a
                                                                                              rectangle are changing
is           Verify that                    thought of as a function of                       with respect to time. The
                                                                                              first side is changing at a
             and                            three variables. Let       and                    rate of in./sec whereas
                                                                                              the second side is
             are                            be two sides of any triangle                      changing at the rate of
                                                                                              in/sec. How fast is the
solutions.                                  where the angle is the                            diagonal of the rectangle
                                                                                              changing when the first
                                            included angle between the two                    side measures in. and
                                                                                              the second side measures
                                            sides. Then,                                          in.? (Round answer to
                                                                                              three decimal places.)
                                            gives the square of the third
                                            side of the triangle. Find

                                            and when                           and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 347

161. A Cobb-Douglas             162. The apparent temperature index is a
        production function is          measure of how the temperature
                                        feels, and it is based on two
     where           represent          variables: which is relative
                                        humidity, and which is the air
     the amount of labor and            temperature.

     capital available. Let

            and

     Find and at these                  Find and when  and

     values, which represent
     the marginal productivity
     of labor and capital,
     respectively.

4.4 Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations

Learning Objectives

      4.4.1 Determine the equation of a plane tangent to a given surface at a point.
      4.4.2 Use the tangent plane to approximate a function of two variables at a point.
      4.4.3 Explain when a function of two variables is differentiable.
      4.4.4 Use the total differential to approximate the change in a function of two variables.

In this section, we consider the problem of finding the tangent plane to a surface, which is analogous to finding the

equation of a tangent line to a curve when the curve is defined by the graph of a function of one variable,            The

slope of the tangent line at the point  is given by    what is the slope of a tangent plane? We learned

about the equation of a plane in Equations of Lines and Planes in Space; in this section, we see how it can be applied to

the problem at hand.

Tangent Planes

Intuitively, it seems clear that, in a plane, only one line can be tangent to a curve at a point. However, in three-
dimensional space, many lines can be tangent to a given point. If these lines lie in the same plane, they determine the
tangent plane at that point. A tangent plane at a regular point contains all of the lines tangent to that point. A more
intuitive way to think of a tangent plane is to assume the surface is smooth at that point (no corners). Then, a tangent
line to the surface at that point in any direction does not have any abrupt changes in slope because the direction
changes smoothly.

Definition

Let                   be a point on a surface and let be any curve passing through and lying entirely in If

the tangent lines to all such curves at lie in the same plane, then this plane is called the tangent plane to at

     (Figure 4.27).
348 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.27 The tangent plane to a surface at a point contains all the tangent lines to curves in that pass through

For a tangent plane to a surface to exist at a point on that surface, it is sufficient for the function that defines the surface
to be differentiable at that point, defined later in this section. We define the term tangent plane here and then explore
the idea intuitively.

Definition

Let be a surface defined by a differentiable function          and let                    be a point in the domain of
   Then, the equation of the tangent plane to at is given by                                                            (4.24)

To see why this formula is correct, let's first find two tangent lines to the surface The equation of the tangent line to

the curve that is represented by the intersection of with the vertical trace given by     is

                                 Similarly, the equation of the tangent line to the curve that is represented by the

intersection of with the vertical trace given by           is                                 A parallel vector to the

first tangent line is                    a parallel vector to the second tangent line is      We can take

the cross product of these two vectors:

This vector is perpendicular to both lines and is therefore perpendicular to the tangent plane. We can use this vector as a

normal vector to the tangent plane, along with the point                in the equation for a plane:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 349

Solving this equation for gives Equation 4.24.

EXAMPLE 4.21

Finding a Tangent Plane
Find the equation of the tangent plane to the surface defined by the function
at point

Solution

First, we must calculate     and                then use Equation 4.24 with    and

Then Equation 4.24 becomes
(See the following figure).

              Figure 4.28 Calculating the equation of a tangent plane to a given surface at a given point.

4.19 Find the equation of the tangent plane to the surface defined by the function
                                                                     at point
350 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

  EXAMPLE 4.22                                                                                           at the point

Finding Another Tangent Plane
Find the equation of the tangent plane to the surface defined by the function

Solution

First, calculate      and        then use Equation 4.24 with  and

Then Equation 4.24 becomes

A tangent plane to a surface does not always exist at every point on the surface. Consider the function
The graph of this function follows.

                      Figure 4.29 Graph of a function that does not have a tangent plane at the origin.

If either         or  then       so the value of the function does not change on either the x- or y-axis.

Therefore,                       so as either              approach zero, these partial derivatives stay equal to zero.

Substituting them into Equation 4.24 gives                 as the equation of the tangent line. However, if we approach the origin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 351

from a different direction, we get a different story. For example, suppose we approach the origin along the line          If

we put      into the original function, it becomes

When        the slope of this curve is equal to      when         the slope of this curve is equal to             This

presents a problem. In the definition of tangent plane, we presumed that all tangent lines through point (in this case,
the origin) lay in the same plane. This is clearly not the case here. When we study differentiable functions, we will see
that this function is not differentiable at the origin.

Linear Approximations

Recall from Linear Approximations and Differentials (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-2-linear-

approximations-and-differentials) that the formula for the linear approximation of a function  at the point             is

given by

The diagram for the linear approximation of a function of one variable appears in the following graph.

                           Figure 4.30 Linear approximation of a function in one variable.

The tangent line can be used as an approximation to the function           for values of reasonably close to      When

working with a function of two variables, the tangent line is replaced by a tangent plane, but the approximation idea is

much the same.

Definition

Given a function           with continuous partial derivatives that exist at the point         the linear
approximation of
                  at the point  is given by the equation

                                                                                                                  (4.25)

Notice that this equation also represents the tangent plane to the surface defined by          at the point

The idea behind using a linear approximation is that, if there is a point   at which the precise value of         is

known, then for values of  reasonably close to             the linear approximation (i.e., tangent plane) yields a value

that is also reasonably close to the exact value of  (Figure 4.31). Furthermore the plane that is used to find the

linear approximation is also the tangent plane to the surface at the point
352 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

                          Figure 4.31 Using a tangent plane for linear approximation at a point.

EXAMPLE 4.23

Using a Tangent Plane Approximation

Given the function                                         approximate  using point  for             What is the
                                                                                                  and
approximate value of                  to four decimal places?

     Solution                                                           and          using
To apply Equation 4.25, we first must calculate

Now we substitute these values into Equation 4.25:

Last, we substitute              and  into

The approximate value of              to four decimal places is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 353

which corresponds to a    error in approximation.

4.20 Given the function                              approximate               using point  for                   What is the
             approximate value of           to four decimal places?

Differentiability

When working with a function               of one variable, the function is said to be differentiable at a point  if

exists. Furthermore, if a function of one variable is differentiable at a point, the graph is "smooth" at that point (i.e., no

corners exist) and a tangent line is well-defined at that point.

The idea behind differentiability of a function of two variables is connected to the idea of smoothness at that point. In

this case, a surface is considered to be smooth at point if a tangent plane to the surface exists at that point. If a

function is differentiable at a point, then a tangent plane to the surface exists at that point. Recall the formula for a

tangent plane at a point      is given by

For a tangent plane to exist at the point   the partial derivatives must therefore exist at that point. However, this

is not a sufficient condition for smoothness, as was illustrated in Figure 4.29. In that case, the partial derivatives existed

at the origin, but the function also had a corner on the graph at the origin.

Definition

A function    is differentiable at a point         if, for all points          in a disk around  we can write
                                                                                                                 (4.26)

where the error term satisfies

The last term in Equation 4.26 is referred to as the error term and it represents how closely the tangent plane comes to
the surface in a small neighborhood disk) of point For the function to be differentiable at the function must be
smooth--that is, the graph of must be close to the tangent plane for points near

EXAMPLE 4.24

Demonstrating Differentiability            is differentiable at point
Show that the function
                                                   using               and     then we use Equation 4.26:
     Solution
First, we calculate

Therefore     and             and Equation 4.26 becomes
354 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

       Next, we calculate

Since         for any value of   the original limit must be equal to zero. Therefore,         is

differentiable at point

4.21 Show that the function                                       is differentiable at point

The function                                                      is not differentiable at the origin. We can see this by calculating the

partial derivatives. This function appeared earlier in the section, where we showed that

Substituting this information into Equation 4.26 using            and  we get

Calculating                                                gives

Depending on the path taken toward the origin, this limit takes different values. Therefore, the limit does not exist and
the function is not differentiable at the origin as shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 355

             Figure 4.32 This function                  is not differentiable at the origin.

Differentiability and continuity for functions of two or more variables are connected, the same as for functions of one
variable. In fact, with some adjustments of notation, the basic theorem is the same.

Theorem 4.6

Differentiability Implies Continuity

Let          be a function of two variables with        in the domain of If  is differentiable at

then         is continuous at

Differentiability Implies Continuity shows that if a function is differentiable at a point, then it is continuous there.
However, if a function is continuous at a point, then it is not necessarily differentiable at that point. For example,

is continuous at the origin, but it is not differentiable at the origin. This observation is also similar to the situation in
single-variable calculus.

Continuity of First Partials Implies Differentiability further explores the connection between continuity and
differentiability at a point. This theorem says that if the function and its partial derivatives are continuous at a point, the
function is differentiable.

Theorem 4.7

Continuity of First Partials Implies Differentiability

Let          be a function of two variables with        in the domain of If                   and                         all

exist in a neighborhood of     and are continuous at    then  is differentiable there.

Recall that earlier we showed that the function
356 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

       was not differentiable at the origin. Let's calculate the partial derivatives and

The contrapositive of the preceding theorem states that if a function is not differentiable, then at least one of the

hypotheses must be false. Let's explore the condition that        must be continuous. For this to be true, it must be

true that

Let             Then

If       then this expression equals     if                 then it equals                               In either case, the value

depends on so the limit fails to exist.

Differentials

In Linear Approximations and Differentials (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-2-linear-

approximations-and-differentials) we first studied the concept of differentials. The differential of written is defined

as              The differential is used to approximate                        where                     Extending this idea to the

linear approximation of a function of two variables at the point      yields the formula for the total differential for a

function of two variables.

    Definition

    Let               be a function of two variables with   in the domain of and let        and be chosen so that
                                                                                          then the differentials and
                         is also in the domain of If is differentiable at the point

         are defined as

    The differential also called the total differential of        at                      is defined as

                                                                                                           (4.27)

Notice that the symbol is not used to denote the total differential; rather, appears in front of         Now, let's define
                                                    We use to approximate so

Therefore, the differential is used to approximate the change in the function             at the point     for given

values of and Since                                               this can be used further to approximate

See the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 357

Figure 4.33 The linear approximation is calculated via the formula

One such application of this idea is to determine error propagation. For example, if we are manufacturing a gadget and
are off by a certain amount in measuring a given quantity, the differential can be used to estimate the error in the total
volume of the gadget.

EXAMPLE 4.25

Approximation by Differentials

Find the differential of the function                     and use it to approximate at point        Use

and                       What is the exact value of

     Solution                                             using     and
First, we must calculate

Then, we substitute these quantities into Equation 4.27:            The exact value of is given by
This is the approximation to

4.22 Find the differential of the function                               and use it to approximate at point

              Use                      and                What is the exact value of

Differentiability of a Function of Three Variables

All of the preceding results for differentiability of functions of two variables can be generalized to functions of three
variables. First, the definition:
358 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Definition  is differentiable at a point                               if for all points  in a disk around  we can write
A function                                                                                                          (4.28)

where the error term E satisfies

If a function of three variables is differentiable at a point              then it is continuous there. Furthermore,

continuity of first partial derivatives at that point guarantees differentiability.

        SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find a unit normal vector to the surface at the indicated point.

163.                              164.                           when

For the following exercises, as a useful review for techniques used in this section, find a normal vector and a tangent
vector at point

165.                              166.

167.                                    168.                                              169.

For the following exercises, find the equation for the tangent plane to the surface at the indicated point. (Hint: Solve for
in terms of and

170.                                    171.

172.                                                             173.

174.                              175.                                       176.

177.                              178.

179.                                                       180.

181.

For the following exercises, find parametric equations for the normal line to the surface at the indicated point. (Recall

that to find the equation of a line in space, you need a point on the line,               and a vector                that is

parallel to the line. Then the equation of the line is

182.                                    183.

184.                                                       185.

186.                              187.                                 at

                                        point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.4 · Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations 359

For the following exercises, use the figure shown here.

189. The length of line                                   188. The length of line
        segment is equal to                                       segment is equal to
        what mathematical                                         what mathematical
        expression?                                               expression?

                                    190. Using the figure, explain
                                            what the length of line
                                            segment represents.

For the following exercises, complete each task.

191. Show that                      192. Find the total differential
        is differentiable at point          of the function

193. Show that                      is differentiable at every point. In other  194. Find the total differential
        words, show that                                                                of the function

where both and approach zero as                          approaches                    where   changes from
                                                                                       from      and changes

195. Let                  Compute    196. The volume of a right                 197. See the preceding

          from    to                              circular cylinder is given           problem. Use differentials

and then find the approximate                     by                  Find             to estimate the volume of

change in from point to point                     the differential                     aluminum in an enclosed

          Recall                                  Interpret the formula                aluminum can with

                                                  geometrically.                       diameter     and

and and           are approximately                                                    height       if the
equal.
                                                                                       aluminum is  cm

                                                                                       thick.
360 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

198. Use the differential to            199. Let                              200. The centripetal
                                                                                      acceleration of a particle
approximate the change                          Find the exact change in the          moving in a circle is given
                                                function and the
in                               as             approximate change in the
                                                function as changes from
    moves from point                                                              by           where
                                                                 and changes
    to point                                    from                              is the velocity and is the

Compare this                                                                      radius of the circle.

approximation with the                                                            Approximate the

actual change in the                                                              maximum percent error

function.                                                                         in measuring the

                                                                                  acceleration resulting

                                                                                  from errors of in

                                                                                  and in (Recall that

                                                                                  the percentage error is

                                                                                  the ratio of the amount of

                                                                                  error over the original

                                                                                  amount. So, in this case,

                                                                                  the percentage error in

                                                                                  is given by

201. The radius and height              202. The base radius and              203. The electrical resistance
        of a right circular cylinder            height of a right circular            produced by wiring
        are measured with                       cone are measured as                  resistors and in
        possible errors of                      in. and in., respectively,            parallel can be calculated
                         respectively.          with a possible error in              from the formula
        Approximate the                         measurement of as much                                       If and
        maximum possible                        as in. each. Use
        percentage error in                     differentials to estimate                  are measured to be
        measuring the volume                    the maximum error in the                   and respectively,
        (Recall that the                        calculated volume of the              and if these
        percentage error is the                 cone.                                 measurements are
        ratio of the amount of                                                        accurate to within
        error over the original                                                       estimate the maximum
        amount. So, in this case,                                                     possible error in
        the percentage error in                                                       computing (The
        is given by                                                                   symbol represents an
                                                                                      ohm, the unit of electrical
204. The area of an ellipse with                                                      resistance.)
        axes of length and
        is given by the formula         205. The period of a simple           206. Electrical power is given
                      Approximate               pendulum with small
        the percent change in the               oscillations is calculated    by      where is
        area when increases by                  from the formula
             and increases by                                                 the voltage and is the

                                                                              resistance. Approximate

                                                           where is           the maximum percentage

                                        the length of the                     error in calculating power

                                        pendulum and is the                   if      is applied to a

                                        acceleration resulting                        resistor and the

                                        from gravity. Suppose                 possible percent errors in

                                        that and have errors                  measuring and are

                                        of, at most,       and                    and respectively.

                                                           respectively. Use

                                        differentials to

                                        approximate the

                                        maximum percentage

                                        error in the calculated

                                        value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          4.5 · The Chain Rule 361

For the following exercises, find the linear approximation of each function at the indicated point.

207.                              208.                                 209.

210.                                          211.

212. [T] Find the equation of     213. [T] Find the equation for the          214. [T] Find the equation of
                                          tangent plane to the surface at             the tangent plane to the
      the tangent plane to the            the indicated point, and graph the          surface
                                          surface and the tangent plane:
      surface                                                                         at point

      at point          and                                                           and graph the surface
                                                                                      and the tangent plane.
      graph the surface and the

      tangent plane at the

      point.

4.5 The Chain Rule

Learning Objectives

      4.5.1 State the chain rules for one or two independent variables.
      4.5.2 Use tree diagrams as an aid to understanding the chain rule for several independent and intermediate

               variables.
      4.5.3 Perform implicit differentiation of a function of two or more variables.

In single-variable calculus, we found that one of the most useful differentiation rules is the chain rule, which allows us to
find the derivative of the composition of two functions. The same thing is true for multivariable calculus, but this time we
have to deal with more than one form of the chain rule. In this section, we study extensions of the chain rule and learn
how to take derivatives of compositions of functions of more than one variable.

Chain Rules for One or Two Independent Variables

Recall that the chain rule for the derivative of a composite of two functions can be written in the form

In this equation, both       and       are functions of one variable. Now suppose that is a function of two variables and

is a function of one variable. Or perhaps they are both functions of two variables, or even more. How would we

calculate the derivative in these cases? The following theorem gives us the answer for the case of one independent

variable.

Theorem 4.8

Chain Rule for One Independent Variable

Suppose that            and            are differentiable functions of and    is a differentiable function of
                                                                                                                   (4.29)
           Then                   is a differentiable function of and

where the ordinary derivatives are evaluated at and the partial derivatives are evaluated at

Proof

The proof of this theorem uses the definition of differentiability of a function of two variables. Suppose that f is

differentiable at the point            where        and                for a fixed value of We wish to prove that

                 is differentiable at    and that Equation 4.29 holds at that point as well.

Since is differentiable at we know that

                                                                                                                      (4.30)

where                                         We then subtract                from both sides of this equation:
362 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

       Next, we divide both sides by
       Then we take the limit as approaches

The left-hand side of this equation is equal to            which leads to

The last term can be rewritten as

As approaches                    approaches                so we can rewrite the last product as

Since the first limit is equal to zero, we need only show that the second limit is finite:

Since and are both differentiable functions of both limits inside the last radical exist. Therefore, this value is

finite. This proves the chain rule at      the rest of the theorem follows from the assumption that all functions are

differentiable over their entire domains.



Closer examination of Equation 4.29 reveals an interesting pattern. The first term in the equation is  and the

second term is  Recall that when multiplying fractions, cancelation can be used. If we treat these derivatives as

fractions, then each product "simplifies" to something resembling          The variables    that disappear in this

simplification are often called intermediate variables: they are independent variables for the function but are

dependent variables for the variable Two terms appear on the right-hand side of the formula, and is a function of

two variables. This pattern works with functions of more than two variables as well, as we see later in this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        4.5 · The Chain Rule 363

EXAMPLE 4.26

Using the Chain Rule

Calculate     for each of the following functions:

a.
b.

    Solution

a. To use the chain rule, we need four quantities--        and

    Now, we substitute each of these into Equation 4.29:

    This answer has three variables in it. To reduce it to one variable, use the fact that                             We

    obtain

    This derivative can also be calculated by first substituting and into                   then differentiating with
    respect to

    Then

    which is the same solution. However, it may not always be this easy to differentiate in this form.

b. To use the chain rule, we again need four quantities--       and

    We substitute each of these into Equation 4.29:
364 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

To reduce this to one variable, we use the fact that       and  Therefore,

To eliminate negative exponents, we multiply the top by and the bottom by

Again, this derivative can also be calculated by first substituting and into  then differentiating with
respect to

Then

This is the same solution.

4.23 Calculate                   given the following functions. Express the final answer in terms of

It is often useful to create a visual representation of Equation 4.29 for the chain rule. This is called a tree diagram for the
chain rule for functions of one variable and it provides a way to remember the formula (Figure 4.34). This diagram can be
expanded for functions of more than one variable, as we shall see very shortly.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4.5 · The Chain Rule 365

                           Figure 4.34 Tree diagram for the case

In this diagram, the leftmost corner corresponds to  Since has two independent variables, there are two

lines coming from this corner. The upper branch corresponds to the variable and the lower branch corresponds to the

variable Since each of these variables is then dependent on one variable one branch then comes from and one

branch comes from Last, each of the branches on the far right has a label that represents the path traveled to reach

that branch. The top branch is reached by following the branch, then the branch; therefore, it is labeled

             The bottom branch is similar: first the branch, then the branch. This branch is labeled

             To get the formula for           add all the terms that appear on the rightmost side of the diagram. This

gives us Equation 4.29.

In Chain Rule for Two Independent Variables,         is a function of          and both  and

are functions of the independent variables

Theorem 4.9

Chain Rule for Two Independent Variables

Suppose      and           are differentiable functions of and and                    is a differentiable
                                                                               and
function of  Then,                            is a differentiable function of
                                                                                                                (4.31)

and
                                                                                                                                                             (4.32)

We can draw a tree diagram for each of these formulas as well as follows.

             Figure 4.35 Tree diagram for                              and

To derive the formula for  start from the left side of the diagram, then follow only the branches that end with and
366 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

add the terms that appear at the end of those branches. For the formula for       follow only the branches that end
with and add the terms that appear at the end of those branches.

There is an important difference between these two chain rule theorems. In Chain Rule for One Independent Variable,
the left-hand side of the formula for the derivative is not a partial derivative, but in Chain Rule for Two Independent
Variables it is. The reason is that, in Chain Rule for One Independent Variable, is ultimately a function of alone,
whereas in Chain Rule for Two Independent Variables, is a function of both

EXAMPLE 4.27

Using the Chain Rule for Two Variables

Calculate  and                   using the following functions:

Solution

To implement the chain rule for two variables, we need six partial derivatives--  and

To find    we use Equation 4.31:

Next, we substitute                   and

To find    we use Equation 4.32:

Then we substitute                    and

4.24 Calculate                   and  given the following functions:

The Generalized Chain Rule

Now that we've see how to extend the original chain rule to functions of two variables, it is natural to ask: Can we extend
the rule to more than two variables? The answer is yes, as the generalized chain rule states.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4.5 · The Chain Rule 367

Theorem 4.10

Generalized Chain Rule

Let                     be a differentiable function of independent variables, and for each  let
                                                                                              (4.33)
                      be a differentiable function of independent variables. Then

for any

In the next example we calculate the derivative of a function of three independent variables in which each of the three
variables is dependent on two other variables.

EXAMPLE 4.28

Using the Generalized Chain Rule

Calculate        and    using the following functions:

Solution

The formulas for      and  are

Therefore, there are nine different partial derivatives that need to be calculated and substituted. We need to calculate
each of them:

Now, we substitute each of them into the first formula to calculate

then substitute                   and                                into this equation:

Next, we calculate                and                                into this equation:
then we substitute
368 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

4.25 Calculate  and                      given the following functions:

  EXAMPLE 4.29

Drawing a Tree Diagram
Create a tree diagram for the case when

and write out the formulas for the three partial derivatives of

Solution

Starting from the left, the function has three independent variables:    Therefore, three branches must be

emanating from the first node. Each of these three branches also has three branches, for each of the variables

  Figure 4.36 Tree diagram for a function of three variables, each of which is a function of three independent variables.
The three formulas are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               4.5 · The Chain Rule 369

4.26 Create a tree diagram for the case when

and write out the formulas for the three partial derivatives of

Implicit Differentiation

Recall from Implicit Differentiation (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/3-8-implicit-differentiation) that

implicit differentiation provides a method for finding  when is defined implicitly as a function of The method

involves differentiating both sides of the equation defining the function with respect to then solving for          Partial

derivatives provide an alternative to this method.

Consider the ellipse defined by the equation                     as follows.

                      Figure 4.37 Graph of the ellipse defined by

This equation implicitly defines as a function of   As such, we can find the derivative        using the method of
implicit differentiation:

We can also define a function               by using the left-hand side of the equation defining the ellipse. Then

                               The ellipse              can then be described by the equation

Using this function and the following theorem gives us an alternative approach to calculating

Theorem 4.11

Implicit Differentiation of a Function of Two or More Variables

Suppose the function           defines implicitly as a function    of via the equation                              Then
                                                                                                                     (4.34)

provided                       defines implicitly as a differentiable function of        then
If the equation
370 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

                                                                                                          (4.35)

as long as

Equation 4.34 is a direct consequence of Equation 4.31. In particular, if we assume that is defined implicitly as a

function of via the equation               we can apply the chain rule to find

Solving this equation for        gives Equation 4.34. Equation 4.35 can be derived in a similar fashion.

Let's now return to the problem that we started before the previous theorem. Using Implicit Differentiation of a Function

of Two or More Variables and the function                               we obtain

Then Equation 4.34 gives

which is the same result obtained by the earlier use of implicit differentiation.

EXAMPLE 4.30

Implicit Differentiation by Partial Derivatives

a. Calculate  if is defined implicitly as a function of via the equation

What is the equation of the tangent line to the graph of this curve at point

b. Calculate  and                given

Solution

a. Set                                                     then calculate and

The derivative is given by

The slope of the tangent line at point                     is given by

To find the equation of the tangent line, we use the point-slope form (Figure 4.38):

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        4.5 · The Chain Rule 371

b. We have     Figure 4.38 Graph of the rotated ellipse defined by
                                             Therefore,

Using Equation 4.35,

4.27 Find             if is defined implicitly as a function of by the equation

               What is the equation of the tangent line to the graph of this curve at point

        SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the information provided to solve the problem.

215. Let                  and  216. Let                  where      217. If
        where  Find                                 and       Find          and

                                            and                                              find and

218. If                        219. If                              220. Suppose
        and    find
                                                                    where                          and

                               and                       find                                Find

                               and express the answer in
                               terms of and
372 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

For the following exercises, find       using the chain rule and direct substitution.
221.                                    222.

223.                                                       224.                                    225.

226.                                    227. Let                                 228. Let                 where
                                                                                         and             Find
                                                                            and
                                                          Express as a
                                                function of and find
                                                directly. Then, find
                                                using the chain rule.

229. Let              where

        Find     and
        and   when

For the following exercises, find       using partial derivatives.               232.
                                        231.                                     235.
230.                                    234.                                     238.
233.                                    237.
236.                                    240. Let                                    241. Let
239. Find using the chain                                                                    and
                                                                                                         Find
        rule where
                                   and        and                Find

242. Find by the chain rule             243. Let                                 244. Let                where
        where                                   and                                           and
                                                and                    Find                        and           Find
        and

245. If       when    find              246. Find if
        and                and                  and
        and

247. If

      and     find

For the following exercises, use this information: A function                      is said to be homogeneous of degree if
                             For all homogeneous functions of degree             the following equation is true:

Show that the given function is homogeneous and verify that

248.                                    249.                                     250.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              4.5 · The Chain Rule 373

251. The volume of a right       252. The pressure of a gas is           253. The radius of a right
                                                                                 circular cone is increasing
circular cylinder is given                 related to the volume and             at cm/min whereas the
                                                                                 height of the cone is
by                   where                 temperature by the                    decreasing at cm/min.
                                                                                 Find the rate of change of
is the radius of the                       formula              where            the volume of the cone
                                                                                 when the radius is cm
cylinder and y is the                      temperature is expressed              and the height is cm.

cylinder height. Suppose                   in kelvins. Express the

and are functions of                       pressure of the gas as a

given by        and                        function of both and

       so that              are            Find when

both increasing with time.                            cm3/min,
How fast is the volume
increasing when                                        K/min,
and                                        cm3, and

254. The volume of a frustum of a cone               255. A closed box is in the shape of a
        is given by the formula                              rectangular solid with
                                              where          dimensions
                                                             (Dimensions are in inches.)
        is the radius of the smaller circle,                 Suppose each dimension is
        is the radius of the larger circle, and              changing at the rate of
                                                             in./min. Find the rate of change
          is the height of the frustum (see                  of the total surface area of the
        figure). Find the rate of change of                  box when
        the volume of this frustum when

if                               (all in/
min).

256. The total resistance in a   257. The temperature at a               258. The              components of a

circuit that has three                     point      is        and      fluid moving in two

individual resistances                     is measured using the         dimensions are given by the

represented by         and                 Celsius scale. A fly crawls   following functions:

is given by the formula                    so that its position after                          and

                                           seconds is given by

Suppose at a given time                               and                The speed of the fluid at the

the resistance is                                     where              point                 is

the y resistance is                        are measured in

and the resistance is                      centimeters. The              Find and                  using the
                                                                         chain rule.
       Also, suppose the                   temperature function

resistance is changing                     satisfies                and

at a rate of           the                                How fast is

resistance is changing at                  the temperature
                                           increasing on the fly's
the rate of          and                   path after sec?

the resistance has no

change. Find the rate of

change of the total

resistance in this circuit at

this time.
374 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

259. Let                  where

Use a tree diagram and the chain rule to find an expression for

4.6 Directional Derivatives and the Gradient

Learning Objectives

      4.6.1 Determine the directional derivative in a given direction for a function of two variables.
      4.6.2 Determine the gradient vector of a given real-valued function.
      4.6.3 Explain the significance of the gradient vector with regard to direction of change along a surface.
      4.6.4 Use the gradient to find the tangent to a level curve of a given function.
      4.6.5 Calculate directional derivatives and gradients in three dimensions.

In Partial Derivatives we introduced the partial derivative. A function      has two partial derivatives:                   and

These derivatives correspond to each of the independent variables and can be interpreted as instantaneous rates

of change (that is, as slopes of a tangent line). For example,  represents the slope of a tangent line passing through

a given point on the surface defined by                    assuming the tangent line is parallel to the x-axis. Similarly,

represents the slope of the tangent line parallel to the        Now we consider the possibility of a tangent line parallel to

neither axis.

Directional Derivatives

We start with the graph of a surface defined by the equation             Given a point  in the domain of we

choose a direction to travel from that point. We measure the direction using an angle which is measured

counterclockwise in the x, y-plane, starting at zero from the positive x-axis (Figure 4.39). The distance we travel is and

the direction we travel is given by the unit vector                      Therefore, the z-coordinate of the second point

on the graph is given by

Figure 4.39 Finding the directional derivative at a point on the graph of              The slope of the blue arrow on the
graph indicates the value of the directional derivative at that point.
                                                                                   by the length of the line segment
We can calculate the slope of the secant line by dividing the difference in  Therefore, the slope of the secant line is
connecting the two points in the domain. The length of the line segment is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 375

To find the slope of the tangent line in the same direction, we take the limit as approaches zero.

Definition

Suppose              is a function of two variables with a domain of Let   and define

Then the directional derivative of in the direction of is given by

                                                                                                    (4.36)

provided the limit exists.

Equation 4.36 provides a formal definition of the directional derivative that can be used in many cases to calculate a
directional derivative.

EXAMPLE 4.31

Finding a Directional Derivative from the Definition

Let                  Find the directional derivative    of                 in the direction of

                     What is

     Solution               and is acute, this implies
First of all, since

Using                         we first calculate

We substitute this expression into Equation 4.36:

To calculate                we substitute  and          into this answer:
376 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

       (See the following figure.)

Figure 4.40 Finding the directional derivative in a given direction at a given point on a surface. The plane is tangent to
the surface at the given point

Another approach to calculating a directional derivative involves partial derivatives, as outlined in the following theorem.

    Theorem 4.12

    Directional Derivative of a Function of Two Variables

    Let           be a function of two variables               and assume that and exist and        is differentiable

    everywhere. Then the directional derivative of in the direction of                 is given by

                                                                                                       (4.37)

Proof                                                                                  is given by

Equation 4.36 states that the directional derivative of f in the direction of

Let               and                 and define               Since and both exist, and therefore is

differentiable, we can use the chain rule for functions of two variables to calculate

If       then                    and                       so

Access for free at openstax.org
By the definition of  it is also true that                                          4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 377

Therefore,                                                                                    in the direction of


EXAMPLE 4.32

Finding a Directional Derivative: Alternative Method

Let                   Find the directional derivative      of

                      What is

     Solution
First, we must calculate the partial derivatives of

Then we use Equation 4.37 with

To calculate          let        and

This is the same answer obtained in Example 4.31.

Gradient

The right-hand side of Equation 4.37 is equal to                             which can be written as the dot product

of two vectors. Define the first vector as                                and the second vector as

                      Then the right-hand side of the equation can be written as the dot product of these two vectors:
                                                                                                                                                      (4.38)

The first vector in Equation 4.38 has a special name: the gradient of the function  The symbol  is called nabla and the
vector is read

Definition

Let            be a function of             such that and exist. The vector         is called the gradient of and
is defined as                                                                                                         (4.39)

The vector            is also written as

     4.28 Find the directional derivative              of                           in the direction of

                                            using Equation 4.37. What is

If the vector that is given for the direction of the derivative is not a unit vector, then it is only necessary to divide by the
378 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

norm of the vector. For example, if we wished to find the directional derivative of the function in Example 4.32 in the

direction of the vector          we would first divide by its magnitude to get This gives us

Then

EXAMPLE 4.33

Finding Gradients                of each of the following functions:
Find the gradient

a.
b.

     Solution                                                                           then use Equation 4.39.
For both parts a. and b., we first calculate the partial derivatives and

a.

b.

      4.29 Find the gradient                 of

The gradient has some important properties. We have already seen one formula that uses the gradient: the formula for

the directional derivative. Recall from The Dot Product that if the angle between two vectors and is then

                         Therefore, if the angle between                      and                is we have

The disappears because is a unit vector. Therefore, the directional derivative is equal to the magnitude of the

gradient evaluated at            multiplied by             Recall that        ranges from to If  then            and

           and both point in the same direction. If                     then            and      and point in opposite

directions. In the first case, the value of                is maximized; in the second case, the value of        is

minimized. If                    then                                              for any vector These three cases are outlined

in the following theorem.

Theorem 4.13

Properties of the Gradient             is differentiable at             (Figure 4.41).
Suppose the function

    i. If                then                       for any unit vector
                                              is maximized when points in the same direction as
ii. If                   then          is                                                                        The
                                              is minimized when points in the opposite direction from                   The
      maximum value of                 is

iii. If                  then

      minimum value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 379

Figure 4.41 The gradient indicates the maximum and minimum values of the directional derivative at a point.

EXAMPLE 4.34

Finding a Maximum Directional Derivative                                      at  is a maximum. What is the
Find the direction for which the directional derivative of
maximum value?                                                      and the unit vector point in the same direction.

     Solution
The maximum value of the directional derivative occurs when
Therefore, we start by calculating

Next, we evaluate the gradient at

We need to find a unit vector that points in the same direction as            so the next step is to divide           by

its magnitude, which is                                           Therefore,

This is the unit vector that points in the same direction as        To find the angle corresponding to this unit vector,
we solve the equations

for Since cosine is negative and sine is positive, the angle must be in the second quadrant. Therefore,

The maximum value of the directional derivative at            is              (see the following figure).
380 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Figure 4.42 The maximum value of the directional derivative at   is in the direction of the gradient.

4.30 Find the direction for which the directional derivative of                 at  is a maximum.
             What is the maximum value?

Figure 4.43 shows a portion of the graph of the function         Given a point      in the domain of

the maximum value of the gradient at that point is given by      This would equal the rate of greatest ascent if

the surface represented a topographical map. If we went in the opposite direction, it would be the rate of greatest

descent.

Figure 4.43 A typical surface in   Given a point on the surface, the directional derivative can be calculated using the

gradient.

When using a topographical map, the steepest slope is always in the direction where the contour lines are closest
together (see Figure 4.44). This is analogous to the contour map of a function, assuming the level curves are obtained for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 381

equally spaced values throughout the range of that function.

            Figure 4.44 Contour map for the function                   using level values between and

Gradients and Level Curves

Recall that if a curve is defined parametrically by the function pair  then the vector                         is tangent

to the curve for every value of in the domain. Now let's assume        is a differentiable function of         and

       is in its domain. Let's suppose further that           and      for some value of and consider the level

curve               Define              and calculate                  on the level curve. By the chain Rule,

But             because         for all Therefore, on the one hand,

on the other hand,

Therefore,

Thus, the dot product of these vectors is equal to zero, which implies they are orthogonal. However, the second vector is
tangent to the level curve, which implies the gradient must be normal to the level curve, which gives rise to the following
theorem.

Theorem 4.14

Gradient Is Normal to the Level Curve

Suppose the function                  has continuous first-order partial derivatives in an open disk centered at a point

            If                  then    is normal to the level curve of at

We can use this theorem to find tangent and normal vectors to level curves of a function.

EXAMPLE 4.35

Finding Tangents to Level Curves                      find a tangent vector to the level curve at point
For the function
Graph the level curve corresponding to               and draw in       and a tangent vector.

     Solution
First, we must calculate

Next, we evaluate           at
382 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

This vector is orthogonal to the curve at point            We can obtain a tangent vector by reversing the components and
multiplying either one by Thus, for example,                     is a tangent vector (see the following graph).

Figure 4.45 A rotated ellipse with equation f(x, y) = 18. At the point (-2, 1) on the ellipse, there are drawn two arrows, one
tangent vector and one normal vector. The normal vector is marked f(-2, 1) and is perpendicular to the tangent vector.
Note that the tangent vector is drawn much shorter than it actually is to fit in the figure. The direction is correct,
however.

    4.31 For the function                                                 find the tangent to the level curve at point

                      Draw the graph of the level curve corresponding to  and draw                 and a tangent

             vector.

Three-Dimensional Gradients and Directional Derivatives

The definition of a gradient can be extended to functions of more than two variables.

Definition

Let                 be a function of three variables such that            exist. The vector        is called the
gradient of  and is defined as                                                                               (4.40)

             can also be written as

Calculating the gradient of a function in three variables is very similar to calculating the gradient of a function in two

variables. First, we calculate the partial derivatives     and and then we use Equation 4.40.

EXAMPLE 4.36

Finding Gradients in Three Dimensions

Find the gradient                of each of the following functions:

a.
b.

     Solution                                                         and then use Equation 4.40.
For both parts a. and b., we first calculate the partial derivatives

a.

b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 383

     4.32 Find the gradient                of

The directional derivative can also be generalized to functions of three variables. To determine a direction in three

dimensions, a vector with three components is needed. This vector is a unit vector, and the components of the unit

vector are called directional cosines. Given a three-dimensional unit vector in standard form (i.e., the initial point is at

the origin), this vector forms three different angles with the positive      and z-axes. Let's call these angles       and

Then the directional cosines are given by             and           These are the components of the unit vector since

is a unit vector, it is true that

Definition

Suppose           is a function of three variables with a domain of Let                             and let
                        be a unit vector. Then, the directional derivative of  in the direction of is given by

                                                                                                                         (4.41)

provided the limit exists.

We can calculate the directional derivative of a function of three variables by using the gradient, leading to a formula
that is analogous to Equation 4.38.

Theorem 4.15

Directional Derivative of a Function of Three Variables

Let           be a differentiable function of three variables and let          be a unit vector. Then,
                                                                                                    (4.42)
the directional derivative of in the direction of is given by

The three angles            determine the unit vector In practice, we can use an arbitrary (nonunit) vector, then divide

by its magnitude to obtain a unit vector in the desired direction.

EXAMPLE 4.37

Finding a Directional Derivative in Three Dimensions

Calculate         in the direction of                      for the function

     Solution
First, we find the magnitude of
384 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Therefore,                                 is a unit vector in the direction of so
                                 Next, we calculate the partial derivatives of

then substitute them into Equation 4.42:

Last, to find                    we substitute

      4.33 Calculate             and                             in the direction of                for the function

        SECTION 4.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the directional derivative using the limit definition only.

260.                  in the     261.                                    at  262. Find the directional
        at point                         point                   in the              derivative of
        direction of
                                         direction of                                                       at
                                                                                                    in the
                                                                                      point

                                                                                      direction of

For the following exercises, find the directional derivative of the function at point        in the direction of  or as
appropriate.

263.                             264.

265.                                                       266.

267.                                                       268.

269.                                                       270.

271.                                                       272.

273.

For the following exercises, find the directional derivative of the function in the direction of the unit vector

274.                             275.                                        276.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              4.6 · Directional Derivatives and the Gradient 385

277.                                278.                                               279.

For the following exercises, find the gradient.

280. Find the gradient of           281. Find the gradient of

        Then, find the gradient at          at point
        point                       at and the directional derivative in

282. Find the gradient of
        the direction of

283.

For the following exercises, find the directional derivative of the function at point         in the direction of

284.                                             285.

For the following exercises, find the derivative of the function at in the direction of

286.                                                   287.

288. [T] Use technology to          289. [T] Use technology to
        sketch the level curve of           sketch the level curve of
                                                                       that
        that passes through                 passes through
                  and draw the              and draw the gradient
                                            vector at
        gradient vector at

For the following exercises, find the gradient vector at the indicated point.

290.                                291.

292.                                      293.

For the following exercises, find the derivative of the function.

294.                          at    295.                     at point            296.                 at

      point     in the                           in the direction the                  point  in the

      direction the function              function increases most                      direction the function

      increases most rapidly              rapidly                                      increases most rapidly

297.                                298.                                     at

      at point                in          point              in the

      the direction the function          direction the function

      increases most rapidly              increases most rapidly

For the following exercises, find the maximum rate of change of at the given point and the direction in which it occurs.

299.                                300.                                         301.

     For the following exercises, find equations of

a. the tangent plane and
b. the normal line to the given surface at the given point.
386 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

302. The level surface                      303.                                           304.                       at
                             for                    at point
                                                                                                 point

        at point

305.
        at point

For the following exercises, solve the problem.

306. The temperature in a                   307. The electrical potential                  308. If the electric potential at
        metal sphere is inversely                   (voltage) in a certain region of
        proportional to the                         space is given by the function               a point      in the
        distance from the center
        of the sphere (the origin:                   a. Find the rate of change of               xy-plane is
                     The                                  the voltage at point
        temperature at point                                          in the direction of        then the electric intensity
                   is                                     the vector
         a. Find the rate of                                                                     vector at    is
              change of the                          b. In which direction does
              temperature at point                        the voltage change most                a. Find the electric
                          in the direction                rapidly at point                            intensity vector at
              toward point
         b. Show that, at any point                  c. What is the maximum rate                 b. Show that, at each
              in the sphere, the                          of change of the voltage at                 point in the plane, the
              direction of greatest                       point                                       electric potential
              increase in                                                                             decreases most rapidly
              temperature is given                                                                    in the direction of the
              by a vector that points                                                                 vector
              toward the origin.

309. In two dimensions, the

motion of an ideal fluid is

governed by a velocity

potential The velocity

components of the fluid

in the x-direction and in

the y-direction, are given

by                Find the

velocity components

associated with the

velocity potential

4.7 Maxima/Minima Problems

Learning Objectives

      4.7.1 Use partial derivatives to locate critical points for a function of two variables.
      4.7.2 Apply a second derivative test to identify a critical point as a local maximum, local minimum, or saddle

               point for a function of two variables.
      4.7.3 Examine critical points and boundary points to find absolute maximum and minimum values for a

               function of two variables.

One of the most useful applications for derivatives of a function of one variable is the determination of maximum and/or
minimum values. This application is also important for functions of two or more variables, but as we have seen in earlier
sections of this chapter, the introduction of more independent variables leads to more possible outcomes for the
calculations. The main ideas of finding critical points and using derivative tests are still valid, but new wrinkles appear
when assessing the results.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 387

Critical Points

For functions of a single variable, we defined critical points as the values of the function when the derivative equals zero
or does not exist. For functions of two or more variables, the concept is essentially the same, except for the fact that we
are now working with partial derivatives.

Definition

Let              be a function of two variables that is defined on an open set containing the point  The point

     is called a critical point of a function of two variables if one of the two following conditions holds:

1.                        does not exist.
2. Either

  EXAMPLE 4.38

Finding Critical Points
Find the critical points of each of the following functions:

 a.
b.

     Solution
 a. First, we calculate

     Next, we set each of these expressions equal to zero:

     Then, multiply each equation by its common denominator:

     Therefore,  and  so  is a critical point of

     We must also check for the possibility that the denominator of each partial derivative can equal zero, thus causing

     the partial derivative not to exist. Since the denominator is the same in each partial derivative, we need only do this

     once:

     This equation represents a hyperbola. We should also note that the domain of consists of points satisfying the
     inequality

     Therefore, any points on the hyperbola are not only critical points, they are also on the boundary of the domain. To
388 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

             put the hyperbola in standard form, we use the method of completing the square:

Dividing both sides by puts the equation in standard form:

     Notice that point           is the center of the hyperbola.
b. First, we calculate

Next, we set each of these expressions equal to zero, which gives a system of equations in

Subtracting the second equation from the first gives                              Substituting this into the first
                                                                  is a critical point of (Figure 4.46). There are no
equation gives                   so  Therefore

points in  that make either partial derivative not exist.

                                 Figure 4.46 The function         has a critical point at

       4.34 Find the critical point of the function

The main purpose for determining critical points is to locate relative maxima and minima, as in single-variable calculus.
When working with a function of one variable, the definition of a local extremum involves finding an interval around the
critical point such that the function value is either greater than or less than all the other function values in that interval.
When working with a function of two or more variables, we work with an open disk around the point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 389

Definition

Let             be a function of two variables that is defined and continuous on an open set containing the point

          Then f has a local maximum at              if

for all points  within some disk centered at                     The number       is called a local maximum value. If
                                                         in the domain of then  has a global maximum (also called an
the preceding inequality holds for every point

absolute maximum) at

The function has a local minimum at              if

for all points  within some disk centered at                     The number       is called a local minimum value. If
                                                         in the domain of then  has a global minimum (also called an
the preceding inequality holds for every point

absolute minimum) at

If          is either a local maximum or local minimum value, then it is called a local extremum (see the following
figure).

Figure 4.47 The graph of                 has a maximum value when                    It attains its minimum value at

the boundary of its domain, which is the circle

In Maxima and Minima (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-1/pages/4-3-maxima-and-minima), we showed that
extrema of functions of one variable occur at critical points. The same is true for functions of more than one variable, as
stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 4.16

Fermat's Theorem for Functions of Two Variables

Let             be a function of two variables that is defined and continuous on an open set containing the point

          Suppose and each exists at                     If has a local extremum at  then  is a critical

point of

Second Derivative Test

Consider the function     This function has a critical point at    since                   However, does
390 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

not have an extreme value at       Therefore, the existence of a critical value at             does not guarantee a local

extremum at         The same is true for a function of two or more variables. One way this can happen is at a saddle

point. An example of a saddle point appears in the following figure.

              Figure 4.48 Graph of the function                     This graph has a saddle point at the origin.

In this graph, the origin is a saddle point. This is because the first partial derivatives of          are both equal

to zero at this point, but it is neither a maximum nor a minimum for the function. Furthermore the vertical trace

corresponding to    is           (a parabola opening upward), but the vertical trace corresponding to             is

(a parabola opening downward). Therefore, it is both a global maximum for one trace and a global minimum for another.

Definition

Given the function               the point                          is a saddle point if both     and

                  but does not have a local extremum at

The second derivative test for a function of one variable provides a method for determining whether an extremum

occurs at a critical point of a function. When extending this result to a function of two variables, an issue arises related to

the fact that there are, in fact, four different second-order partial derivatives, although equality of mixed partials reduces

this to three. The second derivative test for a function of two variables, stated in the following theorem, uses a

discriminant that replaces         in the second derivative test for a function of one variable.

Theorem 4.17

Second Derivative Test

Let           be a function of two variables for which the first- and second-order partial derivatives are continuous

on some disk containing the point                          Suppose    and                      Define the quantity

                                                                                                                      (4.43)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 391

 i. If    and                      then has a local minimum at
ii. If
iii. If   and                      then has a local maximum at
iv. If
          then has a saddle point at

          then the test is inconclusive.

See Figure 4.49.

Figure 4.49 The second derivative test can often determine whether a function of two variables has a local minima (a), a
local maxima (b), or a saddle point (c).

To apply the second derivative test, it is necessary that we first find the critical points of the function. There are several
steps involved in the entire procedure, which are outlined in a problem-solving strategy.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Using the Second Derivative Test for Functions of Two Variables

Let           be a function of two variables for which the first- and second-order partial derivatives are continuous

on some disk containing the point         To apply the second derivative test to find local extrema, use the following

steps:

1. Determine the critical points   of the function where                         Discard any points

     where at least one of the partial derivatives does not exist.

2. Calculate the discriminant                                                    for each critical point of

3. Apply Second Derivative Test to determine whether each critical point is a local maximum, local minimum, or
     saddle point, or whether the theorem is inconclusive.

EXAMPLE 4.39

Using the Second Derivative Test
Find the critical points for each of the following functions, and use the second derivative test to find the local extrema:

 a.
b.

Solution

a. Step of the problem-solving strategy involves finding the critical points of  To do this, we first calculate

     and          then set each of them equal to zero:
392 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

             Setting them equal to zero yields the system of equations

The solution to this system is     and                     Therefore          is a critical point of
                                                                        To do this, we first calculate the second partial
Step 2 of the problem-solving strategy involves calculating

derivatives of

Therefore,

Step 3 states to check the Second Derivative Test for Functions of Two Variables.. Since         and

this corresponds to case 1. Therefore, has a local minimum at                   as shown in the following figure.

                                 Figure 4.50 The function        has a local minimum at
                                                           then set each of them equal to zero:
b. For step 1, we first calculate  and

Setting them equal to zero yields the system of equations

To solve this system, first solve the second equation for y. This gives         Substituting this into the first
equation gives

Therefore,      or                 Substituting these values into the equation  yields the critical points
and

Step 2 involves calculating the second partial derivatives of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 393

Then, we find a general formula for

Next, we substitute each critical point into this formula:

In step 3, we note that, applying the Second Derivative Test for Functions of Two Variables. to point  leads to

case which means that  is a saddle point. Applying the theorem to point       leads to case 1, which

means that  corresponds to a local minimum as shown in the following figure.

            Figure 4.51 The function  has a local minimum and a saddle point.

4.35 Use the second derivative to find the local extrema of the function

Absolute Maxima and Minima

When finding global extrema of functions of one variable on a closed interval, we start by checking the critical values
over that interval and then evaluate the function at the endpoints of the interval. When working with a function of two
variables, the closed interval is replaced by a closed, bounded set. A set is bounded if all the points in that set can be
contained within a ball (or disk) of finite radius. First, we need to find the critical points inside the set and calculate the
corresponding critical values. Then, it is necessary to find the maximum and minimum value of the function on the
boundary of the set. When we have all these values, the largest function value corresponds to the global maximum and
the smallest function value corresponds to the absolute minimum. First, however, we need to be assured that such
values exist. The following theorem does this.
394 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Theorem 4.18

Extreme Value Theorem

A continuous function            on a closed and bounded set in the plane attains an absolute maximum value at

some point of and an absolute minimum value at some point of

Now that we know any continuous function defined on a closed, bounded set attains its extreme values, we need to
know how to find them.

Theorem 4.19

Finding Extreme Values of a Function of Two Variables

Assume          is a differentiable function of two variables defined on a closed, bounded set Then will

attain the absolute maximum value and the absolute minimum value, which are, respectively, the largest and smallest

values found among the following:

i. The values of at the critical points of in
ii. The values of on the boundary of

The proof of this theorem is a direct consequence of the extreme value theorem and Fermat's theorem. In particular, if

either extremum is not located on the boundary of then it is located at an interior point of But an interior point

     of that's an absolute extremum is also a local extremum; hence,                 is a critical point of by Fermat's

theorem. Therefore the only possible values for the global extrema of on are the extreme values of on the interior

or boundary of

Problem-Solving Strategy

Finding Absolute Maximum and Minimum Values

Let             be a continuous function of two variables defined on a closed, bounded set and assume is

differentiable on To find the absolute maximum and minimum values of on do the following:

1. Determine the critical points of in
2. Calculate at each of these critical points.
3. Determine the maximum and minimum values of on the boundary of its domain.
4. The maximum and minimum values of will occur at one of the values obtained in steps

Finding the maximum and minimum values of on the boundary of can be challenging. If the boundary is a rectangle
or set of straight lines, then it is possible to parameterize the line segments and determine the maxima on each of these
segments, as seen in Example 4.40. The same approach can be used for other shapes such as circles and ellipses.

If the boundary of the set is a more complicated curve defined by a function              for some constant and the

first-order partial derivatives of exist, then the method of Lagrange multipliers can prove useful for determining the

extrema of on the boundary. The method of Lagrange multipliers is introduced in Lagrange Multipliers.

EXAMPLE 4.40

Finding Absolute Extrema
Use the problem-solving strategy for finding absolute extrema of a function to determine the absolute extrema of each
of the following functions:

a.                                                         on the domain defined by  and

b.                               on the domain defined by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 395

Solution

a. Using the problem-solving strategy, step involves finding the critical points of  on its domain. Therefore, we first

calculate          and              then set them each equal to zero:

Setting them equal to zero yields the system of equations

The solution to this system is       and       Therefore    is a critical point of Calculating           gives

The next step involves finding the extrema of on the boundary of its domain. The boundary of its domain consists
of four line segments as shown in the following graph:

           Figure 4.52 Graph of the domain of the function

     is the line segment connecting       and  and it can be parameterized by the equations

for        Define                         This gives                      Differentiating g leads to

Therefore, has a critical value at        which corresponds to the point  Calculating                    gives the z-value

     is the line segment connecting       and  and it can be parameterized by the equations

for        Again, define                       This gives                            Then,               has a

critical value at       which corresponds to the point      Calculating              gives the z-value

     is the line segment connecting       and  and it can be parameterized by the equations

for        Again, define                       This gives                            The critical value  corresponds to
                                                                                                                  Calculating
the point          So, calculating   gives the z-value

     is the line segment connecting       and  and it can be parameterized by the equations

for        This time,                          and the critical value     correspond to the point

           gives the z-value

We also need to find the values of        at the corners of its domain. These corners are located at

The absolute maximum value is which occurs at              and the global minimum value is which occurs at
        as shown in the following figure.
396 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

     Figure 4.53 The function                              has one global minimum and one global maximum over its domain.

b. Using the problem-solving strategy, step involves finding the critical points of on its domain. Therefore, we first

calculate  and                   then set them each equal to zero:

Setting them equal to zero yields the system of equations

The solution to this system is   and                       Therefore,  is a critical point of Calculating                  we

get

The next step involves finding the extrema of g on the boundary of its domain. The boundary of its domain consists
of a circle of radius centered at the origin as shown in the following graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 397

                    Figure 4.54 Graph of the domain of the function

The boundary of the domain of can be parameterized using the functions  for

            Define

Setting       leads to

This equation has two solutions over the interval   One is               and the other is
                              For the first angle,                      is a critical point on the

Therefore,              and                         so

boundary and

For the second angle,
398 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Therefore,                       and                            so  is a critical point on the

boundary and

The absolute minimum of g is     which is attained at the point     which is an interior point of D. The

absolute maximum of g is approximately equal to 44.844, which is attained at the boundary point

              These are the absolute extrema of g on D as shown in the following figure.

              Figure 4.55 The function                          has a local minimum and a local maximum.

4.36 Use the problem-solving strategy for finding absolute extrema of a function to find the absolute extrema
             of the function

on the domain defined by                                   and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 399

  EXAMPLE 4.41
Chapter Opener: Profitable Golf Balls

                                            Figure 4.56 (credit: modification of work by oatsy40, Flickr)

Pro- company has developed a profit model that depends on the number x of golf balls sold per month (measured in
thousands), and the number of hours per month of advertising y, according to the function

where is measured in thousands of dollars. The maximum number of golf balls that can be produced and sold is
           and the maximum number of hours of advertising that can be purchased is Find the values of and that

maximize profit, and find the maximum profit.

Solution

Using the problem-solving strategy, step involves finding the critical points of  on its domain. Therefore, we first

calculate  and                  then set them each equal to zero:

Setting them equal to zero yields the system of equations

The solution to this system is  and         Therefore       is a critical point of Calculating  gives
The domain of this function is
                                       and                 as shown in the following graph.

           Figure 4.57 Graph of the domain of the function

is the line segment connecting         and  and it can be parameterized by the equations                              for

           We then define
400 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Setting            yields the critical point               which corresponds to the point  in the domain of Calculating
            gives

     is the line segment connecting and                    and it can be parameterized by the equations                 for
                Once again, we define

This function has a critical point at         which corresponds to the point               This point is not in the domain of

     is the line segment connecting                        and it can be parameterized by the equations

for                We define

This function has a critical point at         which corresponds to the point               which is not in the domain.

     is the line segment connecting                        and it can be parameterized by the equations                     for
                We define

This function has a critical point at         which corresponds to the point               which is on the boundary of the

domain. Calculating              gives

We also need to find the values of            at the corners of its domain. These corners are located at

The maximum critical value is          which occurs at     Therefore, a maximum profit of                 is realized when

     golf balls are sold and hours of advertising are purchased per month as shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          4.7 · Maxima/Minima Problems 401

      Figure 4.58 The profit function                   has a maximum at

        SECTION 4.7 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find all critical points.

310.  311.                                              312.

313.

For the following exercises, find the critical points of the function by using algebraic techniques (completing the square)
or by examining the form of the equation. Verify your results using the partial derivatives test.

314.  315.

316.        317.

For the following exercises, use the second derivative test to classify any critical points and determine whether each
critical point is a maximum, minimum, saddle point, or none of these.

318.        319.                                              320.

321.  322.                                              323.

324.              325.                                              326.

327.        328.                                              329.

330.  331.                                              332.

333.  334.                                                          335.

336.              337.

338.        339.

340.
402 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

For the following exercises, determine the extreme values and the saddle points. Use a CAS to graph the function.

341. [T]                                 342. [T]

343. [T]

Find the absolute extrema of the given function on the indicated closed and bounded set

344.                                     345. Find the absolute            346.                                on

      is the triangular region           maximum and minimum

      with vertices                      values of

                                         on the region

347.                 on                  348. Find three positive          349. Find the points on the

                                         numbers the sum of                      surface      that

                                         which is such that the                  are closest to the origin.

                                         sum of their squares is as

                                         small as possible.

350. Find the maximum                    351. The sum of the length        352. A cardboard box without
        volume of a rectangular                  and the girth (perimeter          a lid is to be made with a
        box with three faces in                  of a cross-section) of a          volume of ft3. Find the
        the coordinate planes and                package carried by a              dimensions of the box
        a vertex in the first octant             delivery service cannot           that requires the least
        on the plane                             exceed in. Find the               amount of cardboard.
                                                 dimensions of the
                                                 rectangular package of
                                                 largest volume that can
                                                 be sent.

353. Find the point on the               354. Find the point in the
        surface                                  plane
                                                 that is closest to the
        nearest the plane                        origin.
                               Identify

        the point on the plane.

355. A company manufactures two types of                   356. A shipping company
        athletic shoes: jogging shoes and cross-                   handles rectangular
        trainers. The total revenue from units of                  boxes provided the sum
        jogging shoes and units of cross-trainers                  of the length, width, and
        is given by                                                height of the box does
                                                                   not exceed in. Find the
        where and are in thousands of units.                       dimensions of the box
        Find the values of x and y to maximize the                 that meets this condition
        total revenue.                                             and has the largest
                                                                   volume.

357. Find the maximum
        volume of a cylindrical
        soda can such that the
        sum of its height and
        circumference is cm.

4.8 Lagrange Multipliers

Learning Objectives

      4.8.1 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to solve optimization problems with one constraint.
      4.8.2 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to solve optimization problems with two constraints.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.8 · Lagrange Multipliers 403

Solving optimization problems for functions of two or more variables can be similar to solving such problems in single-
variable calculus. However, techniques for dealing with multiple variables allow us to solve more varied optimization
problems for which we need to deal with additional conditions or constraints. In this section, we examine one of the
more common and useful methods for solving optimization problems with constraints.

Lagrange Multipliers

Example 4.41 was an applied situation involving maximizing a profit function, subject to certain constraints. In that

example, the constraints involved a maximum number of golf balls that could be produced and sold in month and

a maximum number of advertising hours that could be purchased per month Suppose these were combined into a

budgetary constraint, such as  that took into account the cost of producing the golf balls and the

number of advertising hours purchased per month. The goal is, still, to maximize profit, but now there is a different type

of constraint on the values of and This constraint, when combined with the profit function

                               is an example of an optimization problem, and the function                     is called

the objective function. A graph of various level curves of the function           follows.

Figure 4.59 Graph of level curves of the function                                           corresponding to

In Figure 4.59, the value represents different profit levels (i.e., values of the function As the value of increases, the
curve shifts to the right. Since our goal is to maximize profit, we want to choose a curve as far to the right as possible. If
there was no restriction on the number of golf balls the company could produce, or the number of units of advertising
available, then we could produce as many golf balls as we want, and advertise as much as we want, and there would not
be a maximum profit for the company. Unfortunately, we have a budgetary constraint that is modeled by the inequality

                        To see how this constraint interacts with the profit function, Figure 4.60 shows the graph of the line
                       superimposed on the previous graph.

Figure 4.60 Graph of level curves of the function                                           corresponding to
                                       The red graph is the constraint function.

As mentioned previously, the maximum profit occurs when the level curve is as far to the right as possible. However, the
level of production corresponding to this maximum profit must also satisfy the budgetary constraint, so the point at
which this profit occurs must also lie on (or to the left of) the red line in Figure 4.60. Inspection of this graph reveals that
404 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

this point exists where the line is tangent to the level curve of Trial and error reveals that this profit level seems to be

around  when and are both just less than We return to the solution of this problem later in this section. From a

theoretical standpoint, at the point where the profit curve is tangent to the constraint line, the gradient of both of the

functions evaluated at that point must point in the same (or opposite) direction. Recall that the gradient of a function of

more than one variable is a vector. If two vectors point in the same (or opposite) directions, then one must be a constant

multiple of the other. This idea is the basis of the method of Lagrange multipliers.

Theorem 4.20

Method of Lagrange Multipliers: One Constraint

Let and be functions of two variables with continuous partial derivatives at every point of some open set

containing the smooth curve                 Suppose that when restricted to points on the curve                             has a

local extremum at the point      and that                  Then there is a number called a Lagrange

multiplier, for which

Proof                                                            Furthermore, we assume that the equation

Assume that a constrained extremum occurs at the point
                can be smoothly parameterized as

where s is an arc length parameter with reference point    at                     Therefore, the quantity                    has

a relative maximum or relative minimum at                  and this implies that        at that point. From the chain rule,

where the derivatives are all evaluated at                 However, the first factor in the dot product is the gradient of  and the
second factor is the unit tangent vector                                                                                         it
follows from this equation that                            to the constraint curve. Since the point  corresponds to

which implies that the gradient is either   or is normal to the constraint curve at a constrained relative extremum.
However, the constraint curve
                                            is a level curve for the function           so that if                then
                is normal to this curve at
                                                           It follows, then, that there is some scalar such that



To apply Method of Lagrange Multipliers: One Constraint to an optimization problem similar to that for the golf ball
manufacturer, we need a problem-solving strategy.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Steps for Using Lagrange Multipliers

1. Determine the objective function                        and the constraint function  Does the optimization problem

involve maximizing or minimizing the objective function?

2. Set up a system of equations using the following template:

3. Solve for and                 at the solutions found in step  maximizes              the smallest of those values
4. The largest of the values of

     minimizes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     4.8 · Lagrange Multipliers 405

EXAMPLE 4.42

Using Lagrange Multipliers                                                                             subject to the
Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the minimum value of
constraint

     Solution
Let's follow the problem-solving strategy:

1. The optimization function is                                   To determine the constraint function, we must first

subtract from both sides of the constraint. This gives               The constraint function is equal to the left-

hand side, so                     The problem asks us to solve for the minimum value of subject to the

constraint (see the following graph).

     Figure 4.61 Graph of level curves of the function               corresponding to                  and The
     red graph is the constraint function.

2. We then must calculate the gradients of both f and g:

The equation                                becomes

which can be rewritten as

Next, we set the coefficients of            equal to each other:

The equation                     becomes                  Therefore, the system of equations that needs to be solved
is

3. This is a linear system of three equations in three variables. We start by solving the second equation for and

substituting it into the first equation. This gives               so substituting this into the first equation gives

Solving this equation for gives                      We then substitute this into the third equation:
406 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

Since                   this gives

4. Next, we substitute           into                               gives                   To

ensure this corresponds to a minimum value on the constraint function, let's try some other values, such as the

intercepts of                    Which are                 and      We get  and        so it appears has

a minimum at

       4.37 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the maximum value of
                                                                              subject to the constraint

Let's now return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section.

  EXAMPLE 4.43

Golf Balls and Lagrange Multipliers
The golf ball manufacturer, Pro-T, has developed a profit model that depends on the number of golf balls sold per
month (measured in thousands), and the number of hours per month of advertising y, according to the function

where is measured in thousands of dollars. The budgetary constraint function relating the cost of the production of

thousands golf balls and advertising units is given by                      Find the values of and that maximize profit,

and find the maximum profit.

     Solution
Again, we follow the problem-solving strategy:

1. The optimization function is                                             To determine the constraint function, we first

subtract 216 from both sides of the constraint, then divide both sides by which gives  The

constraint function is equal to the left-hand side, so                      The problem asks us to solve for the

maximum value of subject to this constraint.

2. So, we calculate the gradients of both

The equation                                               becomes

which can be rewritten as

We then set the coefficients of             equal to each other:

The equation                     becomes                            Therefore, the system of equations that needs to be
solved is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4.8 · Lagrange Multipliers 407

3. We use the left-hand side of the second equation to replace in the first equation:

Then we substitute this into the third equation:

     Since             this gives                                   which gives
4. We then substitute       into

Therefore the maximum profit that can be attained, subject to budgetary constraints, is  with a production

level of       golf balls and hours of advertising bought per month. Let's check to make sure this truly is a

maximum. The endpoints of the line that defines the constraint are           and         Let's evaluate at both of

these points:

The second value represents a loss, since no golf balls are produced. Neither of these values exceed  so it seems
that our extremum is a maximum value of

4.38 A company has determined that its production level is given by the Cobb-Douglas function

                                   where x represents the total number of labor hours in year and y represents the

          total capital input for the company. Suppose unit of labor costs and unit of capital costs           Use

          the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the maximum value of                             subject to a

          budgetary constraint of      per year.

In the case of an optimization function with three variables and a single constraint function, it is possible to use the

method of Lagrange multipliers to solve an optimization problem as well. An example of an optimization function with

three variables could be the Cobb-Douglas function in the previous example:              where

represents the cost of labor, represents capital input, and represents the cost of advertising. The method is the same

as for the method with a function of two variables; the equations to be solved are

EXAMPLE 4.44

Lagrange Multipliers with a Three-Variable Optimization Function

Find the minimum of the function                  subject to the constraint

Solution

1. The optimization function is                     To determine the constraint function, we subtract from
                                       which gives the constraint function as
each side of the constraint:

2. Next, we calculate             and
408 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

This leads to the equations
which can be rewritten in the following form:

3. Since each of the first three equations has on the right-hand side, we know that                  and all three
                                                                                                                   so
variables are equal to each other. Substituting            and  into the last equation yields

and  and                             which corresponds to a critical point on the constraint curve.

4. Then, we evaluate f at the point

      Therefore, an extremum of the function is To verify it is a minimum, choose other points that satisfy the
      constraint and calculate at that point. For example,

      Both of these values are greater than leading us to believe the extremum is a minimum.

       4.39 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the minimum value of the function
                    subject to the constraint

Problems with Two Constraints

The method of Lagrange multipliers can be applied to problems with more than one constraint. In this case the
optimization function, is a function of three variables:
and it is subject to two constraints:
There are two Lagrange multipliers, and and the system of equations becomes

  EXAMPLE 4.45

Lagrange Multipliers with Two Constraints
Find the local extreme values of the function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.8 · Lagrange Multipliers 409

subject to the constraints        and

     Solution
Let's follow the problem-solving strategy:

1. The optimization function is                            To determine the constraint functions, we first subtract
     from both sides of the first constraint, which gives
     constraint function is                                so                                    The second

2. We then calculate the gradients of

The equation                                                                            becomes
which can be rewritten as                       equal to each other:
Next, we set the coefficients of

The two equations that arise from the constraints are      and                                   Combining these

equations with the previous three equations gives

3. The first three equations contain the variable Solving the third equation for                 and replacing into the first and
     second equations reduces the number of equations to four:

Next, we solve the first and second equation for The first equation gives                        the second equation gives

We set the right-hand side of each equation equal to each other and cross-multiply:

Therefore, either           or              If  then the first constraint becomes                              The only real
                                                                                                 This point does not satisfy the
solution to this equation is      and           which gives the ordered triple

second constraint, so it is not a solution.

Next, we consider               which reduces the number of equations to three:
410 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

We substitute the first equation into the second and third equations:

Then, we solve the second equation for which gives                          We then substitute this into the first equation,

and use the quadratic formula to solve for

Recall            so this solves for as well. Then,                     so

Therefore, there are two ordered triplet solutions:

4. We substitute                                           into             which gives

Then, we substitute                                               into      which gives

        and                      are the local extreme values of        subject to the given constraints.

4.40 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the minimum value of the function

        subject to the constraints                         and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4.8 · Lagrange Multipliers 411

        SECTION 4.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the method of Lagrange multipliers to find the maximum and minimum values of the
function subject to the given constraints.

358.                              359.

360.                              361.

362.                                                     363.

364.                                               365.

366.                                               367.

368.                                          369. Minimize                     370. Minimize                               on
                                                      hyperbola
371. Maximize                                                           on the  the ellipse
        on the sphere             372. Maximize
                                                                                373. The curve                          is

                                                                                asymptotic to the line

                                                                                Find the point(s) on

                                                                                the curve

                                                                                farthest from the line

374. Maximize                                375. Minimize

376. Maximize                                      377. Minimize

378. Minimize                     379. Minimize

                         subject

      to the constraint                      when                and

For the next group of exercises, use the method of Lagrange multipliers to solve the following applied problems.

380. A pentagon is formed by placing an381. A rectangular box without           382. Find the minimum and
                                                                                        maximum distances
      isosceles triangle on a rectangle, as        a top (a topless box) is to          between the ellipse
      shown in the diagram. If the                 be made from ft2 of                                             and
                                                                                        the origin.
      perimeter of the pentagon is in.,            cardboard. Find the

      find the lengths of the sides of the         maximum volume of such

      pentagon that will maximize the area a box.

      of the pentagon.
412 4 · Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables

383. Find the point on the               384. Show that, of all the triangles  385. Find the minimum
        surface
                                         inscribed in a circle of radius (see         distance from point
        closest to the point
                                         diagram), the equilateral triangle has to the parabola

                                         the largest perimeter.

386. Find the minimum                    387. Find the minimum                 388. A large container in the
                                                 distance from the plane
distance from the                                                    to point          shape of a rectangular

parabola        to point                 390. Find the point on the                    solid must have a volume
                                                 plane                                 of m3. The bottom of
                                                 that is closest to the point          the container costs $5/m2

                                         393. [T] By investing x units of              to construct whereas the
                                                 labor and y units of                  top and sides cost $3/m2
                                                 capital, a watch
                                                 manufacturer can                      to construct. Use
                                                 produce
                                                 watches. Find the                     Lagrange multipliers to
                                                 maximum number of
                                                 watches that can be                   find the dimensions of the
                                                 produced on a budget of
                                                             if labor costs            container of this size that
                                                 $100/unit and capital
                                                 costs $200/unit. Use a                has the minimum cost.
                                                 CAS to sketch a contour
389. Find the point on the line                  plot of the function.         391. Find the maximum value
                        that is closest
                                                                               of
        to point
                                                                               where         denote the

                                                                               acute angles of a right

                                                                               triangle. Draw the

                                                                               contours of the function

                                                                               using a CAS.

392. A rectangular solid is
        contained within a
        tetrahedron with vertices
        at

and the origin. The base

of the box has

dimensions      and the

height of the box is If

the sum of                       is

1.0, find the dimensions

that maximizes the

volume of the rectangular

solid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    4 · Chapter Review 413

Chapter Review

Key Terms

boundary point a point of is a boundary point if every disk centered around contains points both inside and

outside

closed set a set that contains all its boundary points

connected set an open set that cannot be represented as the union of two or more disjoint, nonempty open subsets

constraint an inequality or equation involving one or more variables that is used in an optimization problem; the

constraint enforces a limit on the possible solutions for the problem

contour map a plot of the various level curves of a given function

critical point of a function of two variables the point        is called a critical point of        if one of the two

following conditions holds:

1.

2. At least one of              and            do not exist

differentiable a function            is differentiable at      if      can be expressed in the form

where the error term            satisfies

directional derivative the derivative of a function in the direction of a given unit vector

discriminant the discriminant of the function              is given by the formula

function of two variables a function           that maps each ordered pair            in a subset of  to a unique

real number

generalized chain rule the chain rule extended to functions of more than one independent variable, in which each

independent variable may depend on one or more other variables

gradient the gradient of the function        is defined to be                                  which can be

generalized to a function of any number of independent variables

graph of a function of two variables a set of ordered triples          that satisfies the equation           plotted in

three-dimensional Cartesian space

higher-order partial derivatives second-order or higher partial derivatives, regardless of whether they are mixed

partial derivatives

interior point a point of is a boundary point if there is a disk centered around contained completely in

intermediate variable given a composition of functions (e.g.,                       the intermediate variables are the

variables that are independent in the outer function but dependent on other variables as well; in the function

                 the variables         are examples of intermediate variables

Lagrange multiplier the constant (or constants) used in the method of Lagrange multipliers; in the case of one

constant, it is represented by the variable

level curve of a function of two variables the set of points satisfying the equation           for some real number

in the range of

level surface of a function of three variables the set of points satisfying the equation             for some real

number in the range of

linear approximation given a function          and a tangent plane to the function at a point        we can

approximate           for points near          using the tangent plane formula

method of Lagrange multipliers a method of solving an optimization problem subject to one or more constraints

mixed partial derivatives second-order or higher partial derivatives, in which at least two of the differentiations are

with respect to different variables

objective function the function that is to be maximized or minimized in an optimization problem

open set a set that contains none of its boundary points

optimization problem calculation of a maximum or minimum value of a function of several variables, often using

Lagrange multipliers

partial derivative a derivative of a function of more than one independent variable in which all the variables but one

are held constant

partial differential equation an equation that involves an unknown function of more than one independent variable

and one or more of its partial derivatives

region an open, connected, nonempty subset of 
414 4 · Chapter Review

saddle point given the function               the point                          is a saddle point if both  and

                but does not have a local extremum at

surface the graph of a function of two variables,

tangent plane given a function                that is differentiable at a point            the equation of the tangent plane to
                                                                                 is given by the formula
the surface                      is given by

total differential the total differential of the function  at

tree diagram illustrates and derives formulas for the generalized chain rule, in which each independent variable is

accounted for

vertical trace the set of ordered triples       that solves the equation             for a given constant   or the

set of ordered triples           that solves the equation       for a given constant

ball all points in  lying at a distance of less than from

disk an open disk of radius centered at point

Key Equations

Vertical trace                                             for                   or  for

Level surface of a function of three variables

Partial derivative of with respect to

Partial derivative of with respect to
Tangent plane
Linear approximation
Total differential

Differentiability (two variables) where the error term satisfies

Differentiability (three variables) where the error term satisfies

Chain rule, one independent variable
Chain rule, two independent variables
Generalized chain rule

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    4 · Chapter Review 415

directional derivative (two dimensions) or

gradient (two dimensions)
gradient (three dimensions)
directional derivative (three
dimensions)
Discriminant

Method of Lagrange multipliers, one constraint

Method of Lagrange multipliers, two constraints

Key Concepts

4.1 Functions of Several Variables

· The graph of a function of two variables is a surface in  and can be studied using level curves and vertical traces.

· A set of level curves is called a contour map.

4.2 Limits and Continuity

· To study limits and continuity for functions of two variables, we use a disk centered around a given point.
· A function of several variables has a limit if for any point in a ball centered at a point the value of the function at

    that point is arbitrarily close to a fixed value (the limit value).
· The limit laws established for a function of one variable have natural extensions to functions of more than one

    variable.
· A function of two variables is continuous at a point if the limit exists at that point, the function exists at that point,

    and the limit and function are equal at that point.

4.3 Partial Derivatives

· A partial derivative is a derivative involving a function of more than one independent variable.
· To calculate a partial derivative with respect to a given variable, treat all the other variables as constants and use the

    usual differentiation rules.
· Higher-order partial derivatives can be calculated in the same way as higher-order derivatives.

4.4 Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations

· The analog of a tangent line to a curve is a tangent plane to a surface for functions of two variables.

· Tangent planes can be used to approximate values of functions near known values.

· A function is differentiable at a point if it is "smooth" at that point (i.e., no corners or discontinuities exist at that

point).

· The total differential can be used to approximate the change in a function        at the point           for

given values of and

4.5 The Chain Rule

· The chain rule for functions of more than one variable involves the partial derivatives with respect to all the
    independent variables.

· Tree diagrams are useful for deriving formulas for the chain rule for functions of more than one variable, where
416 4 · Chapter Review

      each independent variable also depends on other variables.

4.6 Directional Derivatives and the Gradient

· A directional derivative represents a rate of change of a function in any given direction.
· The gradient can be used in a formula to calculate the directional derivative.
· The gradient indicates the direction of greatest change of a function of more than one variable.

4.7 Maxima/Minima Problems

· A critical point of the function               is any point      where either                               or at least one

      of  and                              do not exist.

· A saddle point is a point                where                           but             is neither a maximum nor a

      minimum at that point.

· To find extrema of functions of two variables, first find the critical points, then calculate the discriminant and apply

      the second derivative test.

4.8 Lagrange Multipliers

· An objective function combined with one or more constraints is an example of an optimization problem.
· To solve optimization problems, we apply the method of Lagrange multipliers using a four-step problem-solving

    strategy.

Review Exercises

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false. Justify your answer with a proof or a
counterexample.

394. The domain of                         395. If the function            396. The linear approximation to the
                                       is          and all its second
                                                   derivatives are               function of
              all real numbers, and                continuous everywhere,
                                                   then                          at        is given by

397.      is a critical point of

For the following exercises, sketch the function in one graph and, in a second, sketch several level curves.

398.                                       399.

For the following exercises, evaluate the following limits, if they exist. If they do not exist, prove it.

400.                                       401.

For the following exercises, find the largest region of continuity for the function.

402.                                       403.

For the following exercises, find all first derivatives, full or partial, as appropriate.

404.                                       405.

For the following exercises, find all second partial derivatives.

406.                                       407.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4 · Chapter Review 417

For the following exercises, find the equation of the tangent plane to the specified surface at the given point.

408.                       at         409.       at point            410. Approximate
        point
                                                                                       at

                                                                               Write down

                                                                     your linear approximation

                                                                     function          How

                                                                     accurate is the

                                                                     approximation to the

                                                                     exact answer, rounded to

                                                                     four digits?

411. Find the differential of         412. Find the directional      413. Find the maximal directional
                                              derivative of                  derivative magnitude and
      and approximate at                                                     direction for the function
                                              in the direction
      the point       Let                                                    at point

                 and

For the following exercises, find the gradient.

414.                                  415.

For the following exercises, find and classify the critical points.
416.

For the following exercises, use Lagrange multipliers to find the maximum and minimum values for the functions with
the given constraints.

417.                                  418.                           419. A machinist is
                                                                             constructing a right
                                                                             circular cone out of a
                                                                             block of aluminum. The
                                                                             machine gives an error of
                                                                                  in height and in
                                                                             radius. Find the maximum
                                                                             error in the volume of the
                                                                             cone if the machinist
                                                                             creates a cone of height
                                                                             cm and radius cm.

420. A trash compactor is in
        the shape of a cuboid.
        Assume the trash
        compactor is filled with
        incompressible liquid. The
        length and width are
        decreasing at rates of ft/
        sec and ft/sec,
        respectively. Find the rate
        at which the liquid level is
        rising when the length is
            ft, the width is ft,
        and the height is ft.
418 4 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                         5 · Introduction 419

5  MULTIPLE INTEGRATION

Figure 5.1 The City of Arts and Sciences in Valencia, Spain, has a unique structure along an axis of just two kilometers
that was formerly the bed of the River Turia. The l'Hemisfèric has an IMAX cinema with three systems of modern digital
projections onto a concave screen of 900 square meters. An oval roof over 100 meters long has been made to look like a
huge human eye that comes alive and opens up to the world as the "Eye of Wisdom." (credit: modification of work by
Javier Yaya Tur, Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions
  5.2 Double Integrals over General Regions
  5.3 Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates
  5.4 Triple Integrals
  5.5 Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates
  5.6 Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia
  5.7 Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals

      Introduction

In this chapter we extend the concept of a definite integral of a single variable to double and triple integrals of functions
of two and three variables, respectively. We examine applications involving integration to compute volumes, masses, and
centroids of more general regions. We will also see how the use of other coordinate systems (such as polar, cylindrical,
and spherical coordinates) makes it simpler to compute multiple integrals over some types of regions and functions. As
an example, we will use polar coordinates to find the volume of structures such as l'Hemisfèric. (See Example 5.51.)

In the preceding chapter, we discussed differential calculus with multiple independent variables. Now we examine
integral calculus in multiple dimensions. Just as a partial derivative allows us to differentiate a function with respect to
one variable while holding the other variables constant, we will see that an iterated integral allows us to integrate a
function with respect to one variable while holding the other variables constant.
420 5 · Multiple Integration

5.1 Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions

Learning Objectives

      5.1.1 Recognize when a function of two variables is integrable over a rectangular region.
      5.1.2 Recognize and use some of the properties of double integrals.
      5.1.3 Evaluate a double integral over a rectangular region by writing it as an iterated integral.
      5.1.4 Use a double integral to calculate the area of a region, volume under a surface, or average value of a

               function over a plane region.

In this section we investigate double integrals and show how we can use them to find the volume of a solid over a
rectangular region in the -plane. Many of the properties of double integrals are similar to those we have already
discussed for single integrals.

Volumes and Double Integrals                                                                        of two

We begin by considering the space above a rectangular region R. Consider a continuous function
variables defined on the closed rectangle R:

                                                           

Here                          denotes the Cartesian product of the two closed intervals        and  It consists of rectangular
pairs
          such that              and    The graph of represents a surface above the -plane with equation
graph of
solid     where is the height of the surface at the point    Let be the solid that lies above and under the

          (Figure 5.2). The base of the solid is the rectangle in the -plane. We want to find the volume of the

               Figure 5.2 The graph of  over the rectangle in the -plane is a curved surface.

We divide the region into small rectangles each with area and with sides                         and (Figure 5.3). We do this
                                                                                               subintervals. Hence
by dividing the interval         into subintervals and dividing the interval             into

          and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 421

Figure 5.3 Rectangle is divided into small rectangles  each with area
                                                       is an arbitrary sample point in each
The volume of a thin rectangular box above is  where
as shown in the following figure.

                                     Figure 5.4 A thin rectangular box above with height

Using the same idea for all the subrectangles, we obtain an approximate volume of the solid as
                                      This sum is known as a double Riemann sum and can be used to approximate the value of

the volume of the solid. Here the double sum means that for each subrectangle we evaluate the function at the chosen
point, multiply by the area of each rectangle, and then add all the results.
As we have seen in the single-variable case, we obtain a better approximation to the actual volume if m and n become
larger.
422 5 · Multiple Integration

                                                

Note that the sum approaches a limit in either case and the limit is the volume of the solid with the base R. Now we are
ready to define the double integral.

    Definition

    The double integral of the function   over the rectangular region in the -plane is defined as
                                                             
                                                                                                               (5.1)

If              then the volume V of the solid S, which lies above in the -plane and under the graph of f, is the

double integral of the function          over the rectangle If the function is ever negative, then the double integral can

be considered a "signed" volume in a manner similar to the way we defined net signed area in The Definite Integral

(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/1-2-the-definite-integral).

    EXAMPLE 5.1

Setting up a Double Integral and Approximating It by Double Sums

Consider the function                     over the rectangular region                           (Figure 5.5).

a. Set up a double integral for finding the value of the signed volume of the solid S that lies above and "under" the

    graph of

b. Divide R into four squares with        and choose the sample point as the upper right corner point of each

    square                       and      (Figure 5.6) to approximate the signed volume of the solid S that lies above

    and "under" the graph of

c. Divide R into four squares with        and choose the sample point as the midpoint of each square:

                                          to approximate the signed volume.

                 Figure 5.5 The function  graphed over the rectangular region

    Solution

a. As we can see, the function            is both above and below the plane. To find the signed volume of

    S, we need to divide the region R into small rectangles each with area and with sides and and

    choose                    as sample points in each Hence, a double integral is set up as

                                          

b. Approximating the signed volume using a Riemann sum with            we have                                 Also,

    the sample points are (1, 1), (2, 1), (1, 2), and (2, 2) as shown in the following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 423

        Figure 5.6 Subrectangles for the rectangular region

Hence,

c. Approximating the signed volume using a Riemann sum with          we have     In this
     case the sample points are (1/2, 1/2), (3/2, 1/2), (1/2, 3/2),
     and (3/2, 3/2).
     Hence

     Analysis
Notice that the approximate answers differ due to the choices of the sample points. In either case, we are introducing
some error because we are using only a few sample points. Thus, we need to investigate how we can achieve an accurate
answer.

5.1 Use the same function                           over the rectangular region

        Divide R into the same four squares with       and choose the sample points as the upper left corner
                                                    (Figure 5.6) to approximate the signed volume of the solid
        point of each square  and

        S that lies above and "under" the graph of
424 5 · Multiple Integration

Note that we developed the concept of double integral using a rectangular region R. This concept can be extended to

any general region. However, when a region is not rectangular, the subrectangles may not all fit perfectly into R,

particularly if the base area is curved. We examine this situation in more detail in the next section, where we study

regions that are not always rectangular and subrectangles may not fit perfectly in the region R. Also, the heights may not

be exact if the surface                  is curved. However, the errors on the sides and the height where the pieces may not

fit perfectly within the solid S approach 0 as m and n approach infinity. Also, the double integral of the function

         exists provided that the function is not too discontinuous. If the function is bounded and continuous over

R except on a finite number of smooth curves, then the double integral exists and we say that is integrable over R.

Since                                   we can express as   or          This means that, when we are using rectangular

coordinates, the double integral over a region denoted by                            can be written as       or

Now let's list some of the properties that can be helpful to compute double integrals.

Properties of Double Integrals

The properties of double integrals are very helpful when computing them or otherwise working with them. We list here

six properties of double integrals. Properties 1 and 2 are referred to as the linearity of the integral, property 3 is the

additivity of the integral, property 4 is the monotonicity of the integral, and property 5 is used to find the bounds of the

integral. Property 6 is used if          is a product of two functions  and

Theorem 5.1

Properties of Double Integrals

Assume that the functions                and      are integrable over the rectangular region R; S and T are subregions of

R; and assume that m and M are real numbers.

i. The sum                               is integrable and

ii. If c is a constant, then             is integrable and

iii. If                       and        except an overlap on the boundaries, then

iv. If                             for   in then

v. If                              then

vi. In the case where                    can be factored as a product of a function  of only and a function  of only,
      then over the region
                                                                the double integral can be written as

These properties are used in the evaluation of double integrals, as we will see later. We will become skilled in using these

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 425

properties once we become familiar with the computational tools of double integrals. So let's get to that now.

Iterated Integrals

So far, we have seen how to set up a double integral and how to obtain an approximate value for it. We can also imagine
that evaluating double integrals by using the definition can be a very lengthy process if we choose larger values for
and Therefore, we need a practical and convenient technique for computing double integrals. In other words, we need
to learn how to compute double integrals without employing the definition that uses limits and double sums.

The basic idea is that the evaluation becomes easier if we can break a double integral into single integrals by integrating
first with respect to one variable and then with respect to the other. The key tool we need is called an iterated integral.

Definition

Assume        and are real numbers. We define an iterated integral for a function  over the rectangular
region                       as                                                                               (5.2)

 a.

b.
                                                                                                                                                              (5.3)

The notation                  means that we integrate  with respect to y while holding x constant. Similarly,

the notation                  means that we integrate  with respect to x while holding y constant. The fact

that double integrals can be split into iterated integrals is expressed in Fubini's theorem. Think of this theorem as an
essential tool for evaluating double integrals.

  Theorem 5.2

Fubini's Theorem   is a function of two variables that is continuous over a rectangular region            over the region
Suppose that                                     Then we see from Figure 5.7 that the double integral of

                 

equals an iterated integral,

More generally, Fubini's theorem is true if is bounded on and  is discontinuous only on a finite number of
continuous curves. In other words, has to be integrable over
426 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.7 (a) Integrating first with respect to and then with respect to to find the area  and then the volume V;

(b) integrating first with respect to and then with respect to to find the area  and then the volume V.

EXAMPLE 5.2

Using Fubini's Theorem                               where                       and
Use Fubini's theorem to compute the double integral

     Solution
Fubini's theorem offers an easier way to evaluate the double integral by the use of an iterated integral. Note how the
boundary values of the region R become the upper and lower limits of integration.

The double integration in this example is simple enough to use Fubini's theorem directly, allowing us to convert a double

integral into an iterated integral. Consequently, we are now ready to convert all double integrals to iterated integrals and

demonstrate how the properties listed earlier can help us evaluate double integrals when the function    is more

complex. Note that the order of integration can be changed (see Example 5.7).

EXAMPLE 5.3

Illustrating Properties i and ii  where
Evaluate the double integral

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 427

     Solution                                                     Also, the second piece has a constant Notice how
This function has two pieces: one piece is and the other is
we use properties i and ii to help evaluate the double integral.

  EXAMPLE 5.4             we have                                     Find a lower and an upper bound for the

Illustrating Property v.
Over the region
integral

     Solution                                                         For an upper bound, integrate the constant
For a lower bound, integrate the constant function 2 over the region
function 13 over the region

Hence, we obtain
428 5 · Multiple Integration

  EXAMPLE 5.5                    over the region
Illustrating Property vi
Evaluate the integral

Solution

This is a great example for property vi because the function           is clearly the product of two single-variable functions

and       Thus we can split the integral into two parts and then integrate each one as a single-variable integration

problem.

5.2       a. Use the properties of the double integral and Fubini's theorem to evaluate the integral

          b. Show that                                          where

As we mentioned before, when we are using rectangular coordinates, the double integral over a region denoted by

          can be written as                  or                        The next example shows that the results are the

same regardless of which order of integration we choose.

EXAMPLE 5.6

Evaluating an Iterated Integral in Two Ways

Let's return to the function     from Example 5.1, this time over the rectangular region

                              Use Fubini's theorem to evaluate         in two different ways:

 a. First integrate with respect to y and then with respect to x;
b. First integrate with respect to x and then with respect to y.

     Solution
Figure 5.7 shows how the calculation works in two different ways.

 a. First integrate with respect to y and then integrate with respect to x:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 429

b. First integrate with respect to x and then integrate with respect to y:

Analysis

With either order of integration, the double integral gives us an answer of 15. We might wish to interpret this answer as

a volume in cubic units of the solid below the function                     over the region                    However,

remember that the interpretation of a double integral as a (non-signed) volume works only when the integrand is a

nonnegative function over the base region

5.3 Evaluate

In the next example we see that it can actually be beneficial to switch the order of integration to make the computation
easier. We will come back to this idea several times in this chapter.

EXAMPLE 5.7

Switching the Order of Integration         over the region                                      (Figure 5.8).
Consider the double integral

a. Express the double integral in two different ways.
b. Analyze whether evaluating the double integral in one way is easier than the other and why.
c. Evaluate the integral.

             Figure 5.8 The function                        over the rectangular region
430 5 · Multiple Integration

    Solution                               in the following two ways: first by integrating with respect to and then with
a. We can express

respect to second by integrating with respect to and then with respect to

b. If we want to integrate with respect to y first and then integrate with respect to      we see that we can use the
                                                                                                    and we can change the
substitution                  which gives      Hence the inner integral is simply

limits to be functions of x,

However, integrating with respect to           first and then integrating with respect to  requires integration by parts for

the inner integral, with      and

Then          and                          so

     Since the evaluation is getting complicated, we will only do the computation that is easier to do, which is clearly the
     first method.
c. Evaluate the double integral using the easier way.

5.4 Evaluate the integral                      where

Applications of Double Integrals

Double integrals are very useful for finding the area of a region bounded by curves of functions. We describe this

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 431

situation in more detail in the next section. However, if the region is a rectangular shape, we can find its area by

integrating the constant function           over the region

Definition

The area of the region is given by

This definition makes sense because using            and evaluating the integral make it a product of length and width.

Let's check this formula with an example and see how this works.

EXAMPLE 5.8

Finding Area Using a Double Integral                         by using a double integral, that is, by integrating 1 over
Find the area of the region
the region

     Solution
The region is rectangular with length 3 and width 2, so we know that the area is 6. We get the same answer when we use
a double integral:

We have already seen how double integrals can be used to find the volume of a solid bounded above by a function

over a region provided                      for all  in Here is another example to illustrate this concept.

EXAMPLE 5.9

Volume of an Elliptic Paraboloid                                              the planes                              and
Find the volume of the solid that is bounded by the elliptic paraboloid

         and the three coordinate planes.

Solution

First notice the graph of the surface                in Figure 5.9(a) and above the square region

             However, we need the volume of the solid bounded by the elliptic paraboloid

             the planes                and  and the three coordinate planes.
432 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.9 (a) The surface                           above the square region           (b) The solid S lies under
the surface                      above the square region

Now let's look at the graph of the surface in Figure 5.9(b). We determine the volume V by evaluating the double integral
over

       5.5 Find the volume of the solid bounded above by the graph of                          and below by the
                      -plane on the rectangular region                                 as

Recall that we defined the average value of a function of one variable on an interval

Similarly, we can define the average value of a function of two variables over a region R. The main difference is that we
divide by an area instead of the width of an interval.

  Definition

  The average value of a function of two variables over a region is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 433

                                                                                                                                                                 (5.4)

In the next example we find the average value of a function over a rectangular region. This is a good example of
obtaining useful information for an integration by making individual measurements over a grid, instead of trying to find
an algebraic expression for a function.

  EXAMPLE 5.10
Calculating Average Storm Rainfall
The weather map in Figure 5.10 shows an unusually moist storm system associated with the remnants of Hurricane Karl,
which dumped 4-8 inches (100-200 mm) of rain in some parts of the Midwest on September 22-23, 2010. The area of
rainfall measured 300 miles east to west and 250 miles north to south. Estimate the average rainfall over the entire area
in those two days.

Figure 5.10 Effects of Hurricane Karl, which dumped 4-8 inches (100-200 mm) of rain in some parts of southwest
Wisconsin, southern Minnesota, and southeast South Dakota over a span of 300 miles east to west and 250 miles north
to south.

    Solution

Place the origin at the southwest corner of the map so that all the values can be considered as being in the first

quadrant and hence all are positive. Now divide the entire map into six rectangles                  as shown in Figure

5.11. Assume          denotes the storm rainfall in inches at a point approximately miles to the east of the origin and y

miles to the north of the origin. Let represent the entire area of                  square miles. Then the area of

each subrectangle is

Assume        are approximately the midpoints of each subrectangle Note the color-coded region at each of

these points, and estimate the rainfall. The rainfall at each of these points can be estimated as:

At            the rainfall is 0.08.

At            the rainfall is 0.08.

At            the rainfall is 0.01.

At            the rainfall is 1.70.
434 5 · Multiple Integration

At  the rainfall is 1.74.

At  the rainfall is 3.00.

                Figure 5.11 Storm rainfall with rectangular axes and showing the midpoints of each subrectangle.
According to our definition, the average storm rainfall in the entire area during those two days was

During September 22-23, 2010 this area had an average storm rainfall of approximately 1.10 inches.

    5.6 A contour map is shown for a function       on the rectangle

    a. Use the midpoint rule with              and  to estimate the value of

    b. Estimate the average value of the function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 435

    SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, use the midpoint rule with         and      to estimate the volume of the solid bounded by
                                                                   and       and the horizontal plane
the surface  the vertical planes

1.                                    2.

In the following exercises, estimate      by using a Riemann sum with                and the sample points to be

the lower left corners of the subrectangles of the partition.

3.                                    4.                                5. Use the midpoint rule with

                                                                        to estimate                    where the

                                                                        values of the function f on
                                                                                                       are given in the

                                                                        following table.

                                                                        x9                     y
                                                                                     9.5 10 10.5 11

                                                                        8 9.8 5 6.7 5                  5.6

                                                                        8.5 9.4 4.5 8 5.4 3.4

                                                                        9 8.7 4.6 6 5.5 3.4

                                                                        9.5 6.7 6 4.5 5.4 6.7

                                                                        10 6.8 6.4 5.5 5.7 6.8
436 5 · Multiple Integration

6. The values of the function f on the            7. The depth of a children's 4-ft by 4-ft
                                                      swimming pool, measured at 1-ft
rectangle                              are given      intervals, is given in the following
                                                      table.
in the following table. Estimate the                   a. Estimate the volume of water in
                                                             the swimming pool by using a
double integral                        by using              Riemann sum with
                                                             Select the sample points using the
a Riemann sum with                     Select                midpoint rule on

the sample points to be the upper

right corners of the subsquares of R.

           10.22 10.21 9.85                       b. Approximate the average depth of
                                                       the swimming pool.
           6.73               9.75     9.63                                       y

           5.62               7.83     8.21              x01 2 3 4

                                                          0 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

                                                             1 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

                                                             2 1 1.5 1.5 2.5 3

                                                             3 1 1 1.5 2 2.5

                                                             4 1 1 1 1.5 2

8. The depth of a 3-ft by 3-ft hole in       9. The level curves               of the 10. The level curves  of the

the ground, measured at 1-ft                      function f are given in the       function f are given in the following

intervals, is given in the                        following graph, where k is a     graph, where k is a constant.

following table.                                  constant.                         a. Apply the midpoint rule with

a. Estimate the volume of the                     a. Apply the midpoint rule with                to estimate the

hole by using a Riemann sum                                  to estimate the        double integral

with                          and the             double integral

sample points to be the                                                                  where

upper left corners of the                              where                        b. Estimate the average value of the
                                                  b. Estimate the average value of       function f on R.
subsquares of R.
                                                       the function f on R.
b. Approximate the average

depth of the hole.

                              y

x0 1 2 3

0 6 6.5 6.4 6

1 6.5 7 7.5 6.5

2 6.5 6.7 6.5 6

3 6 6.5 5 5.6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 437

11. The solid lying under the surface 12. The solid lying under the plane

             and above the                                      and above the rectangular

     rectangular region                                 region         is
                                is illustrated in
                                                        illustrated in the following graph.
     the following graph. Evaluate the
                                                        Evaluate the double integral

     double integral                                            where

     where            by finding                                               by finding the
                                                        volume of the corresponding solid.
     the volume of the corresponding

     solid.

In the following exercises, calculate the integrals by interchanging the order of integration.

13.                         14.                                        15.

16.                         17.                                        18.

19.                         20.

In the following exercises, evaluate the iterated integrals by choosing the order of integration.

21.                         22.

23.                                                     24.

25.                                                26.                                27.

28.                                                29.                                30.
438 5 · Multiple Integration

31.                              32.                                               33.

34.

In the following exercises, find the average value of the function over the given rectangles.

35.                              36.                                 37.

38.                              39. Let f and g be two continuous functions such that                              for
                                                                                                 Show that the
                                      any              and                              for any

                                      following inequality is true:

In the following exercises, use property v. of double integrals and the answer from the preceding exercise to show that
the following inequalities are true.

40.                              41.                                      42.
      where                            where                                    where

43.

     where

44. Let f and g be two continuous functions such that                                for any
                                                            Show that the following
             and                      for any

     inequality is true:

In the following exercises, use property v. of double integrals and the answer from the preceding exercise to show that
the following inequalities are true.

45.                                   46.

     where                                 where

47.                                        48.
      where                                      where

In the following exercises, the function f is given in terms of double integrals.

a. Determine the explicit form of the function f.           and above the region R.
b. Find the volume of the solid under the surface
c. Find the average value of the function f on R.      and           in the same system of coordinates.
d. Use a computer algebra system (CAS) to plot

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.1 · Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions 439

49. [T]                                          50. [T]

     where                                       where

51. Show that if f and g are continuous on                and  respectively,

     then

52. Show that

53. [T] Consider the function                    54. [T] Consider the function
                                  where
                                                       where
       a. Use the midpoint rule with
                                         to             a. Use the midpoint rule with
                                                                                          to
             estimate the double
             integral                                         estimate the double integral

                                          Round

           your answers to the nearest                    Round your answers to the

           hundredths.                                    nearest hundredths.

     b. For               find the               b. For                  find the

           average value of f over the                    average value of f over the

           region R. Round your                           region R. Round your answer

           answer to the nearest                          to the nearest hundredths.

           hundredths.                           c. Use a CAS to graph in the

     c. Use a CAS to graph in the                         same coordinate system the

           same coordinate system                         solid whose volume is given

           the solid whose volume is                      by

           given by

                                                          and the plane

           and the plane

In the following exercises, the functions are given, where               is a natural number.

a. Find the volume of the solids under the surfaces                      and above the region R.

b. Determine the limit of the volumes of the solids as n increases without bound.

55.                                                            56.
440 5 · Multiple Integration

57. Show that the average value        58. Use the midpoint rule with  to show that the
      of a function f on a
      rectangular region                        average value of a function f on a rectangular
                                 is
                                                region  is approximated by

where                         are the

sample points of the partition

of R, where                   and

59. An isotherm map is a chart

connecting points having the same

temperature at a given time for a

given period of time. Use the

preceding exercise and apply the

midpoint rule with                     to find

the average temperature over the

region given in the following figure.

5.2 Double Integrals over General Regions

Learning Objectives

      5.2.1 Recognize when a function of two variables is integrable over a general region.
      5.2.2 Evaluate a double integral by computing an iterated integral over a region bounded by two vertical

               lines and two functions of or two horizontal lines and two functions of
      5.2.3 Simplify the calculation of an iterated integral by changing the order of integration.
      5.2.4 Use double integrals to calculate the volume of a region between two surfaces or the area of a plane

               region.
      5.2.5 Solve problems involving double improper integrals.
In Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions, we studied the concept of double integrals and examined the tools
needed to compute them. We learned techniques and properties to integrate functions of two variables over rectangular
regions. We also discussed several applications, such as finding the volume bounded above by a function over a
rectangular region, finding area by integration, and calculating the average value of a function of two variables.
In this section we consider double integrals of functions defined over a general bounded region on the plane. Most of
the previous results hold in this situation as well, but some techniques need to be extended to cover this more general
case.

General Regions of Integration

An example of a general bounded region on a plane is shown in Figure 5.12. Since is bounded on the plane, there
must exist a rectangular region on the same plane that encloses the region that is, a rectangular region exists
such that is a subset of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 441

Figure 5.12 For a region that is a subset of  we can define a function  to equal  at every point in and
  at every point of not in

Suppose          is defined on a general planar bounded region as in Figure 5.12. In order to develop double

integrals of over we extend the definition of the function to include all points on the rectangular region and then

use the concepts and tools from the preceding section. But how do we extend the definition of to include all the points

on We do this by defining a new function          on as follows:

Note that we might have some technical difficulties if the boundary of is complicated. So we assume the boundary to

be a piecewise smooth and continuous simple closed curve. Also, since all the results developed in Double Integrals over

Rectangular Regions used an integrable function   we must be careful about        and verify that              is an

integrable function over the rectangular region This happens as long as the region is bounded by simple closed

curves. For now we will concentrate on the descriptions of the regions rather than the function and extend our theory

appropriately for integration.

We consider two types of planar bounded regions.

Definition

A region in the  -plane is of Type I if it lies between two vertical lines and the graphs of two continuous
                        That is (Figure 5.13),
functions   and

A region in the  plane is of Type II if it lies between two horizontal lines and the graphs of two continuous
functions                  That is (Figure 5.14),

            Figure 5.13 A Type I region lies between two vertical lines and the graphs of two functions of
442 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.14 A Type II region lies between two horizontal lines and the graphs of two functions of

EXAMPLE 5.11

Describing a Region as Type I and Also as Type II                and            (Figure 5.15). Describe the region
Consider the region in the first quadrant between the functions
first as Type I and then as Type II.

                                 Figure 5.15 Region can be described as Type I or as Type II.

Solution

When describing a region as Type I, we need to identify the function that lies above the region and the function that lies

below the region. Here, region is bounded above by  and below by                in the interval for  Hence,

as Type I, is described as the set

However, when describing a region as Type II, we need to identify the function that lies on the left of the region and the

function that lies on the right of the region. Here, the region is bounded on the left by      and on the right by

in the interval for y in            Hence, as Type II, is described as the set

5.7 Consider the region in the first quadrant between the functions             and            Describe the region

          first as Type I and then as Type II.

Double Integrals over Nonrectangular Regions

To develop the concept and tools for evaluation of a double integral over a general, nonrectangular region, we need to
first understand the region and be able to express it as Type I or Type II or a combination of both. Without
understanding the regions, we will not be able to decide the limits of integrations in double integrals. As a first step, let
us look at the following theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 443

Theorem 5.3

Double Integrals over Nonrectangular Regions

Suppose         is the extension to the rectangle of the integrable function    defined on the region , where

     is inside . Sample regions are as shown in Figure 5.12. Then   is integrable and we define the double

integral of        over by

The right-hand side of this equation is what we have seen before, so this theorem is reasonable because is a rectangle

and                has been discussed in the preceding section. Also, the equality works because the values of

are for any point          that lies outside and hence these points do not add anything to the integral. However, it is

important that the rectangle contains the region

As a matter of fact, if the region is bounded by smooth curves on a plane and we are able to describe it as Type I or
Type II or a mix of both, then we can use the following theorem and not have to find a rectangle containing the region.

Theorem 5.4

Fubini's Theorem (Strong Form)

For a function             that is continuous on a region  of Type I, we have

                                                                                                                (5.5)

Similarly, for a function   that is continuous on a region of Type II, we have

                                                                                                                (5.6)

The integral in each of these expressions is an iterated integral, similar to those we have seen before. Notice that, in the

inner integral in the first expression, we integrate       with being held constant and the limits of integration being

                In the inner integral in the second expression, we integrate    with being held constant and the

limits of integration are

EXAMPLE 5.12

Evaluating an Iterated Integral over a Type I Region

Evaluate the integral           where is shown in Figure 5.16.

     Solution               as a Type I region (Figure 5.16). Here              Then we have
First construct the region
444 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.16 We can express region as a Type I region and integrate from                   to  between the lines
Therefore, we have

In Example 5.12, we could have looked at the region in another way, such as                                      (Figure
5.17).

                                                                             Figure 5.17
This is a Type II region and the integral would then look like

However, if we integrate first with respect to  this integral is lengthy to compute because we have to use integration by
parts twice.

EXAMPLE 5.13

Evaluating an Iterated Integral over a Type II Region

Evaluate the integral            where

     Solution
Notice that can be seen as either a Type I or a Type II region, as shown in Figure 5.18. However, in this case describing

   as Type is more complicated than describing it as Type II. Therefore, we use as a Type II region for the integration.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 445

                              Figure 5.18 The region  in this example can be either (a) Type I or (b) Type II.
Choosing this order of integration, we have

    5.8 Sketch the region and evaluate the iterated integral  where is the region bounded by the

    curves  and  in the interval

Recall from Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions the properties of double integrals. As we have seen from the
examples here, all these properties are also valid for a function defined on a nonrectangular bounded region on a plane.
In particular, property states:

If  and     except at their boundaries, then

Similarly, we have the following property of double integrals over a nonrectangular bounded region on a plane.
446 5 · Multiple Integration                               where and do not overlap except at their
                                                                                                                                       (5.7)
         Theorem 5.5
         Decomposing Regions into Smaller Regions
         Suppose the region can be expressed as
         boundaries. Then

This theorem is particularly useful for nonrectangular regions because it allows us to split a region into a union of
regions of Type I and Type II. Then we can compute the double integral on each piece in a convenient way, as in the next
example.

  EXAMPLE 5.14

Decomposing Regions
Express the region shown in Figure 5.19 as a union of regions of Type I or Type II, and evaluate the integral

          Figure 5.19 This region can be decomposed into a union of three regions of Type I or Type II.

Solution

The region is not easy to decompose into any one type; it is actually a combination of different types. So we can write

it as a union of three regions                     where,

                                                           These regions are

illustrated more clearly in Figure 5.20.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 447

Here       Figure 5.20 Breaking the region into three subregions makes it easier to set up the integration.
      is Type and and are both of Type II. Hence,

Now we could redo this example using a union of two Type II regions (see the Checkpoint).

      5.9 Consider the region bounded by the curves        and      in the interval        Decompose the
                 region into smaller regions of Type II.

      5.10 Redo Example 5.14 using a union of two Type II regions.

Changing the Order of Integration

As we have already seen when we evaluate an iterated integral, sometimes one order of integration leads to a
computation that is significantly simpler than the other order of integration. Sometimes the order of integration does
not matter, but it is important to learn to recognize when a change in order will simplify our work.

  EXAMPLE 5.15

Changing the Order of Integration

Reverse the order of integration in the iterated integral           Then evaluate the new iterated
integral.
448 5 · Multiple Integration

            Solution
       The region as presented is of Type I. To reverse the order of integration, we must first express the region as Type II.
       Refer to Figure 5.21.

                                 Figure 5.21 Converting a region from Type I to Type II.

We can see from the limits of integration that the region is bounded above by             and below by  where is

in the interval  By reversing the order, we have the region bounded on the left by        and on the right by

       where is in the interval  We solved             in terms of to obtain

Hence

EXAMPLE 5.16

Evaluating an Iterated Integral by Reversing the Order of Integration

Consider the iterated integral                  where                  over a triangular region         that has sides on

       and the line              Sketch the region, and then evaluate the iterated integral by

a. integrating first with respect to and then
b. integrating first with respect to

     Solution
A sketch of the region appears in Figure 5.22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 449

                                          Figure 5.22 A triangular region  for integrating in two ways.
We can complete this integration in two different ways.                                vertically and then integrating from
 a. One way to look at it is by first integrating from

b. The other way to do this problem is by first integrating from                horizontally and then integrating
     from

5.11 Evaluate the iterated integral                                        over the region in the first quadrant between the

          functions    and                  Evaluate the iterated integral by integrating first with respect to and then

          integrating first with resect to

Calculating Volumes, Areas, and Average Values

We can use double integrals over general regions to compute volumes, areas, and average values. The methods are the
same as those in Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions, but without the restriction to a rectangular region, we can
now solve a wider variety of problems.

EXAMPLE 5.17

Finding the Volume of a Tetrahedron

Find the volume of the solid bounded by the planes                         and

Solution

The solid is a tetrahedron with the base on the -plane and a height             The base is the region

bounded by the lines,  and                          where                  (Figure 5.23). Note that we can consider the region as

Type I or as Type II, and we can integrate in both ways.
450 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.23 A tetrahedron consisting of the three coordinate planes and the plane  with the base bound

by  and

First, consider as a Type I region, and hence

Therefore, the volume is

Now consider as a Type II region, so                             In this calculation, the volume is

Therefore, the volume is cubic units.

    5.12 Find the volume of the solid bounded above by                             over the region enclosed by the

    curves                       and   where is in the interval

Finding the area of a rectangular region is easy, but finding the area of a nonrectangular region is not so easy. As we
have seen, we can use double integrals to find a rectangular area. As a matter of fact, this comes in very handy for
finding the area of a general nonrectangular region, as stated in the next definition.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 451

Definition
The area of a plane-bounded region is defined as the double integral

We have already seen how to find areas in terms of single integration. Here we are seeing another way of finding areas
by using double integrals, which can be very useful, as we will see in the later sections of this chapter.

EXAMPLE 5.18

Finding the Area of a Region                            and above by the line             in the first quadrant (Figure
Find the area of the region bounded below by the curve
5.24).

                  Figure 5.24 The region bounded by                         and

     Solution                                           over the region. Thus, the area   of the bounded region is
We just have to integrate the constant function

              or

    5.13 Find the area of a region bounded above by the curve               and below by  over the interval

We can also use a double integral to find the average value of a function over a general region. The definition is a direct
extension of the earlier formula.

Definition

If  is integrable over a plane-bounded region           with positive area       then the average value of the

function is
452 5 · Multiple Integration                   on the region bounded by the line  and the curve

         Note that the area is

         EXAMPLE 5.19
       Finding an Average Value
       Find the average value of the function
       (Figure 5.25).

                                 Figure 5.25 The region bounded by  and

     Solution           where the region is given by the figure. We have
First find the area

Then the average value of the given function over this region is

5.14 Find the average value of the function                       over the triangle with vertices

Improper Double Integrals                      where either is an unbounded region or is an unbounded

An improper double integral is an integral

function. For example,                                     is an unbounded region, and the function
over the ellipse                 is an unbounded function. Hence, both of the following integrals are improper integrals:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 453

i.           where

ii.                       where

In this section we would like to deal with improper integrals of functions over rectangles or simple regions such that
has only finitely many discontinuities. Not all such improper integrals can be evaluated; however, a form of Fubini's
theorem does apply for some types of improper integrals.

Theorem 5.6

Fubini's Theorem for Improper Integrals                                                                                         and also by
If is a bounded rectangle or simple region in the plane defined by                  with finitely many discontinuities in the

                                                  and is a nonnegative function on
interior of then

It is very important to note that we required that the function be nonnegative on           for the theorem to work. We
consider only the case where the function has finitely many discontinuities inside

EXAMPLE 5.20

Evaluating a Double Improper Integral

Consider the function            over the region

Notice that the function is nonnegative and continuous at all points on             except     Use Fubini's theorem to evaluate
the improper integral.

     Solution             (Figure 5.26); then we express it in another way.
First we plot the region

                           Figure 5.26 The function is continuous at all points of the region  except
The other way to express the same region is
454 5 · Multiple Integration

       Thus we can use Fubini's theorem for improper integrals and evaluate the integral as
       Therefore, we have

As mentioned before, we also have an improper integral if the region of integration is unbounded. Suppose now that the
function is continuous in an unbounded rectangle

Theorem 5.7

Improper Integrals on an Unbounded Region                               then when the limit exists, we have
If is an unbounded rectangle such as

                                                       

The following example shows how this theorem can be used in certain cases of improper integrals.

EXAMPLE 5.21

Evaluating a Double Improper Integral

Evaluate the integral            where     is the first quadrant of the plane.

     Solution
The region is the first quadrant of the plane, which is unbounded. So

                                                                       

Thus,                                   
                       is convergent and the value is

5.15 Evaluate the improper integral                      where

In some situations in probability theory, we can gain insight into a problem when we are able to use double integrals
over general regions. Before we go over an example with a double integral, we need to set a few definitions and become
familiar with some important properties.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 455

Definition

Consider a pair of continuous random variables and such as the birthdays of two people or the number of sunny

and rainy days in a month. The joint density function of and satisfies the probability that  lies in a certain

region

Since the probabilities can never be negative and must lie between and  the joint density function satisfies the
following inequality and equation:

Definition

The variables and are said to be independent random variables if their joint density function is the product of
their individual density functions:

EXAMPLE 5.22

Application to Probability
At Sydney's Restaurant, customers must wait an average of minutes for a table. From the time they are seated until
they have finished their meal requires an additional minutes, on average. What is the probability that a customer
spends less than an hour and a half at the diner, assuming that waiting for a table and completing the meal are
independent events?

     Solution                                                                    being the average waiting time, as
Waiting times are mathematically modeled by exponential density functions, with

If and are random variables for `waiting for a table' and `completing the meal,' then the probability density functions
are, respectively,

Clearly, the events are independent and hence the joint density function is the product of the individual functions

We want to find the probability that the combined time        is less than minutes. In terms of geometry, it means

that the region is in the first quadrant bounded by the line  (Figure 5.27).
456 5 · Multiple Integration

                              Figure 5.27 The region of integration for a joint probability density function.

Hence, the probability that        is in the region is

Since              is the same as  we have a region of Type I, so

Thus, there is an             chance that a customer spends less than an hour and a half at the restaurant.

Another important application in probability that can involve improper double integrals is the calculation of expected
values. First we define this concept and then show an example of a calculation.

Definition

In probability theory, we denote the expected values    and  respectively, as the most likely outcomes of

the events. The expected values    and  are given by

  where is the sample space of the random variables and

  EXAMPLE 5.23
Finding Expected Value
Find the expected time for the events `waiting for a table' and `completing the meal' in Example 5.22.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 457

Solution

Using the first quadrant of the rectangular coordinate plane as the sample space, we have improper integrals for

and  The expected time for a table is

                                                                 

                                       
                                                          

                                                         
                                  

A similar calculation shows that       This means that the expected values of the two random events are the

average waiting time and the average dining time, respectively.

     5.16 The joint density function for two random variables and is given by

          Find the probability that is at most and is at least
458 5 · Multiple Integration

        SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, specify whether the region is of Type I or Type II.

60. The region bounded by                 61. Find the average value of          62. Find the area of the region
                                                the function                               given in the previous
                              and     as        on the region graphed in
                                                the previous exercise.                 exercise.
given in the following figure.

63. The region bounded by                     64.  Find the average value of     65. Find the area of the region
      given in the following figure.      as       the function                            given in the previous

                                                                         on the        exercise.
                                                   region graphed in the
                                                   previous exercise.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 459

66. The region bounded by                   67. Find the volume of the              68. The region bounded by

                and                     as  solid under the graph of                                                as

     given in the following figure.         the function                            given in the following figure.
                                                                    and

                                            above the region in the

                                            figure in the previous

                                            exercise.

69. Find the volume of the              70. The region      bounded by              71. The region bounded by
      solid under the graph of                                             as
      the function                                                                              and         as
                             and above
      the region in the figure              given in the following figure.          given in the following
      from the previous exercise.
                                                                                    figure.

72. Let be the region                   73. Let be the region

     bounded by the curves of               bounded by the curves of

     equations                              equations            and

     and             Explain                            and the -axis.

     why is neither of Type I               Explain why is neither of

     nor II.                                Type I nor II.

In the following exercises, evaluate the double integral                       over the region

74.                  and                    75.                          and

76.             and                                         77.                and
460 5 · Multiple Integration

78.                           and is  79.                   and is

     the triangular region with            the triangular region with

     vertices                              vertices

Evaluate the iterated integrals.

80.                                   81.                              82.

83.                                   84.                              85.

86. Let be the region in the first quadrant bounded             87. Let be the region bounded by
                                                                                             and the -axis.
     by                               and the - and -axes.
                                                                       a. Show that
     a. Show that

          by dividing the region      into two regions of            by dividing into two regions of Type I.
          Type I.                                               b. Evaluate the integral

     b. Evaluate the integral

88. a. Show that                                                89. Let be the region bounded by
                                                                                                 and

                                                                       a. Show that

          by dividing the region      into two regions of Type
          I, where
                                                                       by dividing the region    into two regions of
     b. Evaluate the integral                                          Type II, where

                                                                       b. Evaluate the integral

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 461

90. The region bounded by                 91. The region bounded by

                   and                    is                             and

     shown in the following figure. Find                is shown in the following

     the area      of the region              figure. Find the area           of the

                                              region

92. Find the area  of the region                               93. Let be the region
                                                                     bounded by
                                                                                                     and
                                                                     the -axis. Find the area
                                                                              of the region

94. Find the average value of     95. Find the average value of

     the function                         the function

                   on the                                      on the

     triangular region with               triangular region with

     vertices      and                    vertices             and

In the following exercises, change the order of integration and evaluate the integral.

96.                               97.                                         98.

99.                               100. The region is shown in the                  101. The region is given in the

                                              following figure. Evaluate the          following figure. Evaluate

                                              double integral                 by the double integral

                                                                                                          by using

                                              using the easier order of               the easier order of
                                              integration.                            integration.
462 5 · Multiple Integration

102. Find the volume of the                 103. Find the volume in the            104. Find the volume of the
        solid under the surface                     first octant of the solid              solid under the plane
                          and above                 under the plane                                      and above the
        the region bounded by                                       and above the          region bounded by
                  and                               region determined by                                                  and
                                                              and
105. Find the volume of the
        solid under the surface             106. Let be a positive,                107. Let be a positive, increasing,
                  and above the
        plane region bounded by             increasing, and                        and differentiable function on
                                       and
                 for values of              differentiable function on             the interval       and let be
        between
                                            the interval             Show          a positive real number. Show

                                            that the volume of the                 that the volume of the solid

                                            solid under the surface                under the surface

                                                      and above the                and above the region

                                            region bounded by                      bounded by

                                                                   and

                                                      is given by                  and       is given by

108. Find the volume of the solid           109. Find the volume of the solid
        situated in the first octant and            situated in the first octant and
        determined by the planes                    bounded by the planes

110. Find the volume of the solid           111. Find the volume of the solid
        bounded by the planes                       bounded by the planes

        and                                 113. Let      be the                   114. Let      be the

112. Let and be the                         solids situated in the first           solids situated in the first
        solids situated in the first
        octant under the planes             octant under the planes                octant under the plane
                            and
                                                                   and                           and under
        respectively, and let be
        the solid situated                                                         the sphere
        between
                                            respectively, and let be               respectively. If the volume
         a. Find the volume of the          the solid situated                     of the solid is
              solid                         between
                                                                                   determine the volume of
         b. Find the volume of the          a. Find the volume of the              the solid situated
              solid                              solid                             between and by
                                                                                   subtracting the volumes
         c. Find the volume of the          b. Find the volume of the              of these solids.
              solid by subtracting               solid
              the volumes of the
              solids                        c. Find the volume of the
                                                 solid by subtracting
                                                 the volumes of the
                                                 solids

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.2 · Double Integrals over General Regions 463

115. Consider the plane      116. [T] The following figure shows            117. [T] The region bounded by
                                                                                    the curves
                   and the                   the region bounded by the                                                       is
                                                                                    shown in the following figure.
cylinder                 in                  curves                   and           Use a graphing calculator or
                                                                                    CAS to find the x-coordinates of
the first octant.                                     Use a graphing                the intersection points of the
                                                                                    curves and to determine the
a. Find the volume under                     calculator or CAS to find the          area of the region Round
                                                                                    your answers to six decimal
the plane.                                   -coordinates of the                    places.

b. Find the volume inside                    intersection points of the

the cylinder under the                       curves and to determine the

plane              .                         area of the region Round

c. Find the volume above                     your answers to six decimal

the plane, inside the                        places.

cylinder, and below the

plane              .

118. Suppose that        is the outcome of

an experiment that must occur in a

particular region in the -plane. In

this context, the region is called the

sample space of the experiment and

          are random variables. If is a

region included in then the

probability of           being in is

defined as

where              is the joint probability

density of the experiment. Here,

is a nonnegative function for which

                         Assume that a

point       is chosen arbitrarily in the

square                   with the

probability density

Find the probability that the point
         is inside the unit square and

interpret the result.
464 5 · Multiple Integration

119. Consider                 two random variables of probability densities  and

         respectively. The random variables            are said to be independent

if their joint density function is given by                       At a drive-thru

restaurant, customers spend, on average, minutes placing their orders and

an additional minutes paying for and picking up their meals. Assume that

placing the order and paying for/picking up the meal are two independent

events and If the waiting times are modeled by the exponential

probability densities

respectively, the probability that a customer will spend less than 6 minutes in

the drive-thru line is given by                                              where

                                      Find                  and interpret the

result.

120. [T] The Reuleaux triangle consists 121. [T] Show that the area of

of an equilateral triangle and three         the lunes of Alhazen, the

regions, each of them bounded by             two blue lunes in the

a side of the triangle and an arc of         following figure, is the

a circle of radius s centered at the         same as the area of the

opposite vertex of the triangle.             right triangle ABC. The

Show that the area of the Reuleaux           outer boundaries of the

triangle in the following figure of          lunes are semicircles of

side length is                               diameters
                                             respectively, and the

                                             inner boundaries are

                                             formed by the

                                             circumcircle of the

                                             triangle

5.3 Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      5.3.1 Recognize the format of a double integral over a polar rectangular region.
      5.3.2 Evaluate a double integral in polar coordinates by using an iterated integral.
      5.3.3 Recognize the format of a double integral over a general polar region.
      5.3.4 Use double integrals in polar coordinates to calculate areas and volumes.

Double integrals are sometimes much easier to evaluate if we change rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
However, before we describe how to make this change, we need to establish the concept of a double integral in a polar
rectangular region.

Polar Rectangular Regions of Integration

When we defined the double integral for a continuous function in rectangular coordinates--say, over a region in the
   -plane--we divided into subrectangles with sides parallel to the coordinate axes. These sides have either constant

 -values and/or constant -values. In polar coordinates, the shape we work with is a polar rectangle, whose sides have
constant -values and/or constant -values. This means we can describe a polar rectangle as in Figure 5.28(a), with

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 465

In this section, we are looking to integrate over polar rectangles. Consider a function  over a polar rectangle

We divide the interval   into subintervals  of length                         and divide the interval       into

subintervals             of width           This means that the circles       and rays   for                and

divide the polar rectangle into smaller polar subrectangles (Figure 5.28(b)).

Figure 5.28 (a) A polar rectangle (b) divided into subrectangles (c) Close-up of a subrectangle.

As before, we need to find the area of the polar subrectangle and the "polar" volume of the thin box above

Recall that, in a circle of radius the length of an arc subtended by a central angle of radians is     Notice that

the polar rectangle looks a lot like a trapezoid with parallel sides     and             and with a width Hence the

area of the polar subrectangle is

Simplifying and letting            we have             Therefore, the polar volume of the thin box above
     (Figure 5.29) is

                                 Figure 5.29 Finding the volume of the thin box above polar rectangle

Using the same idea for all the subrectangles and summing the volumes of the rectangular boxes, we obtain a double
Riemann sum as

As we have seen before, we obtain a better approximation to the polar volume of the solid above the region  when we
let and become larger. Hence, we define the polar volume as the limit of the double Riemann sum,
466 5 · Multiple Integration

                                                                       
This becomes the expression for the double integral.

Definition

The double integral of the function         over the polar rectangular region in the -plane is defined as

                                                                                                           (5.8)

                                                                         

Again, just as in Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions, the double integral over a polar rectangular region can be
expressed as an iterated integral in polar coordinates. Hence,

Notice that the expression for is replaced by                            when working in polar coordinates. Another way to look at the

polar double integral is to change the double integral in rectangular coordinates by substitution. When the function is

given in terms of and using                                              changes it to

Note that all the properties listed in Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions for the double integral in rectangular
coordinates hold true for the double integral in polar coordinates as well, so we can use them without hesitation.

EXAMPLE 5.24

Sketching a Polar Rectangular Region
Sketch the polar rectangular region

Solution

As we can see from Figure 5.30,      and       are circles of radius       and          covers the entire top half of

the plane. Hence the region looks like a semicircular band.

                                           Figure 5.30 The polar region lies between two semicircles.
Now that we have sketched a polar rectangular region, let us demonstrate how to evaluate a double integral over this
region by using polar coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 467

EXAMPLE 5.25

Evaluating a Double Integral over a Polar Rectangular Region

Evaluate the integral   over the region

     Solution                                                          From the figure we can see that we have
First we sketch a figure similar to Figure 5.30 but with outer radius

5.17 Sketch the region                                                 and evaluate

EXAMPLE 5.26

Evaluating a Double Integral by Converting from Rectangular Coordinates

Evaluate the integral          where is the unit disk on the -plane.

     Solution
The region is a unit disk, so we can describe it as

Using the conversion           and                   we have

EXAMPLE 5.27

Evaluating a Double Integral by Converting from Rectangular Coordinates

Evaluate the integral   where

     Solution    is an annular region that can be converted to polar coordinates and described as
We can see that                           (see the following graph).
468 5 · Multiple Integration

                                 Figure 5.31 The annular region of integration

Hence, using the conversion      and                                      we have

5.18 Evaluate the integral            where is the circle of radius on the -plane.

General Polar Regions of Integration

To evaluate the double integral of a continuous function by iterated integrals over general polar regions, we consider

two types of regions, analogous to Type I and Type II as discussed for rectangular coordinates in Double Integrals over

General Regions. It is more common to write polar equations as            than     so we describe a general polar

region as                             (see the following figure).

                              Figure 5.32 A general polar region between  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 469

Theorem 5.8

Double Integrals over General Polar Regions

If  is continuous on a general polar region  as described above, then

                                                                                                         (5.9)

EXAMPLE 5.28

Evaluating a Double Integral over a General Polar Region

Evaluate the integral           where is the region bounded by the polar axis and the upper half of the

cardioid                                                  as shown in the following figure.

     Solution
We can describe the region as

                               Figure 5.33 The region is the top half of a cardioid.

Hence, we have

    5.19 Evaluate the integral
470 5 · Multiple Integration

Polar Areas and Volumes

As in rectangular coordinates, if a solid is bounded by the surface     as well as by the surfaces

and                                  we can find the volume of by double integration, as

If the base of the solid can be described as                                              then the double integral for the
volume becomes

We illustrate this idea with some examples.                             and above the unit circle on the -plane

  EXAMPLE 5.29

Finding a Volume Using a Double Integral
Find the volume of the solid that lies under the paraboloid
(see the following figure).

                                     Figure 5.34 The paraboloid         .

     Solution
By the method of double integration, we can see that the volume is the iterated integral of the form

                              where

This integration was shown before in Example 5.26, so the volume is cubic units.

  EXAMPLE 5.30                                                          and above the disk                     on the
                                                                                       above the
Finding a Volume Using Double Integration                                                             -plane.
Find the volume of the solid that lies under the paraboloid

   -plane. See the paraboloid in Figure 5.35 intersecting the cylinder

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 471

               Figure 5.35 Finding the volume of a solid with a paraboloid cap and a circular base.

Solution

First change the disk  to polar coordinates. Expanding the square term, we have

Then simplify to get   which in polar coordinates becomes                and then either             or

Similarly, the equation of the paraboloid changes to          Therefore we can describe the disk

               on the -plane as the region

Hence the volume of the solid below the paraboloid            and above  is

Notice in the next example that integration is not always easy with polar coordinates. Complexity of integration depends
on the function and also on the region over which we need to perform the integration. If the region has a more natural
expression in polar coordinates or if has a simpler antiderivative in polar coordinates, then the change in polar
coordinates is appropriate; otherwise, use rectangular coordinates.

EXAMPLE 5.31

Finding a Volume Using a Double Integral

Find the volume of the region that lies under the paraboloid  and above the triangle enclosed by the lines

          and          in the -plane (Figure 5.36).

     Solution
First examine the region over which we need to set up the double integral and the accompanying paraboloid.
472 5 · Multiple Integration

              Figure 5.36 Finding the volume of a solid under a paraboloid and above a given triangle.

The region is                              Converting the lines  and                         in the -plane to
functions of and we have
                                      and                        respectively. Graphing the region on the
   -plane, we see that it looks like
the surface gives                                                Now converting the equation of

                                      Therefore, the volume of the solid is given by the double integral

As you can see, this integral is very complicated. So, we can instead evaluate this double integral in rectangular
coordinates as

Evaluating gives

To answer the question of how the formulas for the volumes of different standard solids such as a sphere, a cone, or a
cylinder are found, we want to demonstrate an example and find the volume of an arbitrary cone.

EXAMPLE 5.32

Finding a Volume Using a Double Integral                         and above the
Use polar coordinates to find the volume inside the cone

     Solution                                                                                             (see the following
The region for the integration is the base of the cone, which appears to be a circle on the
figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 473

                           Figure 5.37 Finding the volume of a solid inside the cone and above the  -plane.
We find the equation of the circle by setting

This means the radius of the circle is  so for the integration we have    and                       Substituting

and  in the equation                                  we have           Therefore, the volume of the cone is

                                        cubic units.

     Analysis                                                             units and height          units, then the equation of
Note that if we were to find the volume of an arbitrary cone with radius
the cone would be

We can still use Figure 5.37 and set up the integral as

Evaluating the integral, we get

     5.20 Use polar coordinates to find an iterated integral for finding the volume of the solid enclosed by the

     paraboloids                        and

As with rectangular coordinates, we can also use polar coordinates to find areas of certain regions using a double
integral. As before, we need to understand the region whose area we want to compute. Sketching a graph and
identifying the region can be helpful to realize the limits of integration. Generally, the area formula in double integration
will look like
474 5 · Multiple Integration

EXAMPLE 5.33

Finding an Area Using a Double Integral in Polar Coordinates
Evaluate the area bounded by the curve

     Solution                          reveals that it is a polar rose with eight petals (see the following figure).
Sketching the graph of the function

                                 Figure 5.38 Finding the area of a polar rose with eight petals.

Using symmetry, we can see that we need to find the area of one petal and then multiply it by Notice that the values of

for which the graph passes through the origin are the zeros of the function  and these are odd multiples of

Thus, one of the petals corresponds to the values of in the interval         Therefore, the area bounded by the

curve         is

EXAMPLE 5.34

Finding Area Between Two Polar Curves  and the cardioid
Find the area enclosed by the circle

     Solution
First and foremost, sketch the graphs of the region (Figure 5.39).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 475

                                     Figure 5.39 Finding the area enclosed by both a circle and a cardioid.

We can from see the symmetry of the graph that we need to find the points of intersection. Setting the two equations
equal to each other gives

One of the points of intersection is  The area above the polar axis consists of two parts, with one part defined by

the cardioid from  to                 and the other part defined by the circle from  to     By symmetry, the

total area is twice the area above the polar axis. Thus, we have

Evaluating each piece separately, we find that the area is

5.21 Find the area enclosed inside the cardioid                   and outside the cardioid

  EXAMPLE 5.35
Evaluating an Improper Double Integral in Polar Coordinates
Evaluate the integral

                             
476 5 · Multiple Integration

     Solution                                                                              In polar coordinates, the entire

This is an improper integral because we are integrating over an unbounded region 

plane  can be seen as                           

Using the changes of variables from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, we have
                                                                          

                                                                                         


                                                              

                                                    
                                                  

                                                            

5.22 Evaluate the integral
                                          

        SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES                     in polar coordinates.

In the following exercises, express the region

122. is the region of the disk       123. is the region between          124. is the region bounded
        of radius centered at                the circles of radius and           by the -axis and
        the origin that lies in the          radius centered at the
        first quadrant.                      origin that lies in the      127.
                                             second quadrant.

125. is the region bounded 126.
        by the -axis and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 477

In the following exercises, the graph of the polar rectangular region  is given. Express  in polar coordinates.
                                                                                130.
128.                                     129.

131.                                     132. In the following graph, the region

                                               is situated below       and is

                                               bounded by              and

133. In the following graph, the region

      is bounded by  and

In the following exercises, evaluate the double integral               over the polar rectangular region

134.
135.
478 5 · Multiple Integration                              138.                             where

       136.                      where        140.                        where
       137.
       139.                      where
       141.

142.
143.

In the following exercises, the integrals have been converted to polar coordinates. Verify that the identities are true and
choose the easiest way to evaluate the integrals, in rectangular or polar coordinates.

144.                                                145.

146.                                                147.

In the following exercises, convert the integrals to polar coordinates and evaluate them.

148.                                    149.                              150.

151.                                          152. Evaluate the integral  153. Find the area of the

                                                    where is the                region bounded by the
                                                                                polar axis and the upper

                                              region bounded by the             half of the cardioid

                                              polar axis and the upper

                                              half of the cardioid

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 479

154. Evaluate the integral            where155. Find the total area of the  156. Find the area of the
                                                                                    region which is the
                                         region enclosed by the                     region bounded by

   is the region bounded by the part     four-leaved rose                                    and
of the four-leaved rose                                (see the figure
situated in the first quadrant (see the
                                         in the previous exercise).

following figure).

157. Find the area of the             158. Determine the average value of the159. Determine the average value of the
        region which is the
        region inside the disk        function               over the             function                    over
                          and to the
        right of the line             region    bounded by the polar curve        the region  bounded by the polar
                                                                                  curve              where
                                                where                       (see

                                      the following graph).                       (see the following graph).
480 5 · Multiple Integration

160. Find the volume of the                  161. Find the volume of the             162. a. Find the volume of the
        solid situated in the first                  solid bounded by the
        octant and bounded by                        paraboloid                      solid bounded by
        the paraboloid                                                          and
                                   and               the plane                       the cylinder
        the planes
        and                                                                                        and the

                                                                                     planes        and

                                                                                     b. Find the volume of the
                                                                                          solid outside the
                                                                                          double cone
                                                                                                               inside
                                                                                          the cylinder
                                                                                                             and
                                                                                          above the plane

                                                                                     c. Find the volume of the
                                                                                          solid inside the cone
                                                                                                              and
                                                                                          below the plane
                                                                                          by subtracting the
                                                                                          volumes of the solids
                                                                                               and

163. a. Find the volume of the
              solid inside the unit
              sphere
                                        and
              above the plane

         b. Find the volume of the
              solid inside the
              double cone

              and above the plane

         c. Find the volume of the
              solid outside the
              double cone

              and inside the sphere

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 481

For the following two exercises, consider a spherical ring, which is a sphere with a cylindrical hole cut so that the axis of
the cylinder passes through the center of the sphere (see the following figure).

                                        164. If the sphere has radius            165. A cylindrical hole of
                                                and the cylinder has                     diameter cm is bored
                                                radius find the volume                   through a sphere of
                                                of the spherical ring.                   radius cm such that the
                                                                                         axis of the cylinder passes
                                                                                         through the center of the
                                                                                         sphere. Find the volume
                                                                                         of the resulting spherical
                                                                                         ring.

166. Find the volume of the                167. Find the volume of the           168. Find the volume of the
        solid that lies under the                  solid that lies under the
        double cone                                paraboloid                    solid that lies under the
                                inside             inside the cylinder
        the cylinder                                                  and above  plane           and
        and above the plane                        the plane
                                                                                 above the disk

169. Find the volume of the                170. A radial function is a function whose value at
        solid that lies under the
        plane                              each point depends only on the distance
        and above the unit disk
                                           between that point and the origin of the system

                                           of coordinates; that is,              where

                                                     Show that if is a continuous

                                           radial function, then

                                           where                  and

                                           with      and

171. Use the information from              172. Let  be a continuous                    173. Apply the preceding
        the preceding exercise to                                                               exercise to calculate the
        calculate the integral             radial function defined on the annular               integral
                                    where
                                           region                                               where is the annular
           is the unit disk.                                                                    region between the
                                           where                                                circles of radii and
                                           and is a differentiable function.                    situated in the third
                                           Show that                                            quadrant.
482 5 · Multiple Integration

174. Let be a continuous function that can be                    175. Apply the preceding exercise to
        expressed in polar coordinates as a product of a                 calculate the integral
        function of only and a function of only; that is,
                             where                                       where

with                               and  Show

that

where is an antiderivative of

176. Let be a continuous function that can be expressed          177. Evaluate
                                                                         where
in polar coordinates as a product of a function of

only and function of only; that is,

where

                                                           with

                              and       Show that

where  and                         are antiderivatives of  and

      , respectively.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              5.3 · Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates 483

178. A spherical cap is the region of a sphere that lies
        above or below a given plane.
         a. Show that the volume of the spherical cap in the
              figure below is

b. A spherical segment is the solid defined by
     intersecting a sphere with two parallel planes. If
     the distance between the planes is show that the
     volume of the spherical segment in the figure
     below is
484 5 · Multiple Integration

179. In statistics, the joint density for two

independent, normally distributed events with a

mean        and a standard distribution is

defined by                                     Consider

           the Cartesian coordinates of a ball in the
resting position after it was released from a
position on the z-axis toward the -plane.
Assume that the coordinates of the ball are
independently normally distributed with a mean

        and a standard deviation of (in feet). The
probability that the ball will stop no more than
feet from the origin is given by

                                               where

is the disk of radius a centered at the origin.
Show that

                                 

180. The double improper integral                              may
                                                  

        be defined as the limit value of the double integrals

                              over disks of radii a centered at the

origin, as a increases without bound; that is,
 

                                          


a. Use polar coordinates to show that
       

                                               by using the relation
                      
                                                         
b. Show that
                     

       

                                                         

5.4 Triple Integrals

Learning Objectives

      5.4.1 Recognize when a function of three variables is integrable over a rectangular box.
      5.4.2 Evaluate a triple integral by expressing it as an iterated integral.
      5.4.3 Recognize when a function of three variables is integrable over a closed and bounded region.
      5.4.4 Simplify a calculation by changing the order of integration of a triple integral.
      5.4.5 Calculate the average value of a function of three variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.4 · Triple Integrals 485

In Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions, we discussed the double integral of a function         of two variables

over a rectangular region in the plane. In this section we define the triple integral of a function  of three

variables over a rectangular solid box in space,  Later in this section we extend the definition to more general regions

in 

Integrable Functions of Three Variables

We can define a rectangular box in  as                             We follow a similar

procedure to what we did in Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions. We divide the interval        into subintervals

          of equal length  divide the interval  into subintervals  of equal length

and divide the interval    into subintervals    of equal length    Then the rectangular box is

subdivided into subboxes                                         as shown in Figure 5.40.

          Figure 5.40 A rectangular box in  divided into subboxes by planes parallel to the coordinate planes.

For each      consider a sample point           in each sub-box    We see that its volume is
          Form the triple Riemann sum

We define the triple integral in terms of the limit of a triple Riemann sum, as we did for the double integral in terms of a
double Riemann sum.
486 5 · Multiple Integration

Definition                                    over a rectangular box is defined as
The triple integral of a function
                                                                                                           (5.10)
                                            
if this limit exists.

When the triple integral exists on the function  is said to be integrable on Also, the triple integral exists if

     is continuous on Therefore, we will use continuous functions for our examples. However, continuity is

sufficient but not necessary; in other words, is bounded on and continuous except possibly on the boundary of

The sample point              can be any point in the rectangular sub-box           and all the properties of a double

integral apply to a triple integral. Just as the double integral has many practical applications, the triple integral also has
many applications, which we discuss in later sections.

Now that we have developed the concept of the triple integral, we need to know how to compute it. Just as in the case of
the double integral, we can have an iterated triple integral, and consequently, a version of Fubini's thereom for triple
integrals exists.

Theorem 5.9

Fubini's Theorem for Triple Integrals

If   is continuous on a rectangular box          then

This integral is also equal to any of the other five possible orderings for the iterated triple integral.

For          and real numbers, the iterated triple integral can be expressed in six different orderings:

For a rectangular box, the order of integration does not make any significant difference in the level of difficulty in
computation. We compute triple integrals using Fubini's Theorem rather than using the Riemann sum definition. We
follow the order of integration in the same way as we did for double integrals (that is, from inside to outside).

  EXAMPLE 5.36
Evaluating a Triple Integral
Evaluate the triple integral

     Solution
The order of integration is specified in the problem, so integrate with respect to first, then y, and then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     5.4 · Triple Integrals 487

  EXAMPLE 5.37                where  as shown in the
Evaluating a Triple Integral
Evaluate the triple integral

following figure.

                                     Figure 5.41 Evaluating a triple integral over a given rectangular box.
     Solution
The order is not specified, but we can use the iterated integral in any order without changing the level of difficulty.
Choose, say, to integrate y first, then x, and then z.

Now try to integrate in a different order just to see that we get the same answer. Choose to integrate with respect to
488 5 · Multiple Integration

       first, then and then

5.23 Evaluate the triple integral                        where

Triple Integrals over a General Bounded Region

We now expand the definition of the triple integral to compute a triple integral over a more general bounded region in

 The general bounded regions we will consider are of three types. First, let be the bounded region that is a
projection of onto the -plane. Suppose the region in  has the form

for two functions                and          such that              for all  in as shown in the following

figure.

Figure 5.42 We can describe region as the space between         and  above the projection of onto the

-plane.

Theorem 5.10

Triple Integral over a General Region         over a general three-dimensional region
The triple integral of a continuous function

in  where is the projection of onto the -plane, is

Similarly, we can consider a general bounded region in the -plane and two functions    and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5.4 · Triple Integrals 489

such that  for all  in Then we can describe the solid region in  as

where is the projection of onto the -plane and the triple integral is

Finally, if is a general bounded region in the -plane and we have two functions     and                   such

that       for all  in then the solid region in  can be described as

where is the projection of onto the -plane and the triple integral is

Note that the region in any of the planes may be of Type I or Type II as described in Double Integrals over General
Regions. If in the -plane is of Type I (Figure 5.43), then

                                   Figure 5.43 A box  where the projection  in the  -plane is of Type I.
Then the triple integral becomes

If in the -plane is of Type II (Figure 5.44), then
490 5 · Multiple Integration

                                  Figure 5.44 A box  where the projection    in the  -plane is of Type II.
Then the triple integral becomes

EXAMPLE 5.38

Evaluating a Triple Integral over a General Bounded Region

Evaluate the triple integral of the function                             over the solid tetrahedron bounded by the planes

                              and

     Solution                                        and its projection  on the  -plane.
Figure 5.45 shows the solid tetrahedron

                                     Figure 5.45 The solid has a projection  on the  -plane of Type I.
We can describe the solid region tetrahedron as

Hence, the triple integral is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.4 · Triple Integrals 491

To simplify the calculation, first evaluate the integral                    We have

Now evaluate the integral                                 obtaining
Finally, evaluate
Putting it all together, we have

Just as we used the double integral  to find the area of a general bounded region we can use  to find

the volume of a general solid bounded region The next example illustrates the method.

EXAMPLE 5.39

Finding a Volume by Evaluating a Triple Integral                    -plane             and vertex at the point
Find the volume of a right pyramid that has the square base in the

           as shown in the following figure.

              Figure 5.46 Finding the volume of a pyramid with a square base.
492 5 · Multiple Integration

     Solution                    changes from     and at each height the cross section of the pyramid for any value of
In this pyramid the value of
                                                 Hence, the volume of the pyramid is  where
  is the square

Thus, we have

Hence, the volume of the pyramid is cubic units.

     5.24 Consider the solid sphere               Write the triple integral                                for
                                                                                                       Notice
               an arbitrary function as an iterated integral. Then evaluate this triple integral with
               that this gives the volume of a sphere using a triple integral.

Changing the Order of Integration

As we have already seen in double integrals over general bounded regions, changing the order of the integration is done
quite often to simplify the computation. With a triple integral over a rectangular box, the order of integration does not
change the level of difficulty of the calculation. However, with a triple integral over a general bounded region, choosing
an appropriate order of integration can simplify the computation quite a bit. Sometimes making the change to polar
coordinates can also be very helpful. We demonstrate two examples here.

  EXAMPLE 5.40

Changing the Order of Integration
Consider the iterated integral

The order of integration here is first with respect to z, then y, and then x. Express this integral by changing the order of
integration to be first with respect to x, then z, and then Verify that the value of the integral is the same if we let

     Solution                                    and its projections onto each of the three coordinate planes. Thus, let
The best way to do this is to sketch the region

and

We need to express this triple integral as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.4 · Triple Integrals 493

Knowing the region  we can draw the following projections (Figure 5.47):
on the -plane is

on the -plane is    and

on the -plane is

                                 Figure 5.47 The three cross sections of  on the three coordinate planes.
                                                                                                               and consequently, the triple
Now we can describe the same region as
integral becomes

Now assume that     in each of the integrals. Then we have

The answers match.
494 5 · Multiple Integration

              5.25 Write five different iterated integrals equal to the given integral

EXAMPLE 5.41

Changing Integration Order and Coordinate Systems

Evaluate the triple integral                  where is the region bounded by the paraboloid     (Figure

5.48) and the plane

                                 Figure 5.48 Integrating a triple integral over a paraboloid.

     Solution                       onto the  -plane is the region bounded above by            and below by the parabola
The projection of the solid region

          as shown.

                     Figure 5.49 Cross section in the -plane of the paraboloid in Figure 5.48.

Thus, we have

The triple integral becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           5.4 · Triple Integrals 495

This expression is difficult to compute, so consider the projection of  onto the  -plane. This is a circular disc
                  So we obtain

Here the order of integration changes from being first with respect to then and then to being first with respect to
   then to and then to It will soon be clear how this change can be beneficial for computation. We have

Now use the polar substitution                           and                 in the -plane. This is essentially the same
thing as when we used polar coordinates in the
integration change and we have, by using        -plane, except we are replacing by Consequently the limits of

Average Value of a Function of Three Variables

Recall that we found the average value of a function of two variables by evaluating the double integral over a region on
the plane and then dividing by the area of the region. Similarly, we can find the average value of a function in three
variables by evaluating the triple integral over a solid region and then dividing by the volume of the solid.

Theorem 5.11

Average Value of a Function of Three Variables

If            is integrable over a solid bounded region  with positive volume     then the average value of the

function is

Note that the volume is

EXAMPLE 5.42

Finding an Average Temperature

The temperature at a point      of a solid bounded by the coordinate planes and the plane                          is

                            Find the average temperature over the solid.

    Solution

Use the theorem given above and the triple integral to find the numerator and the denominator. Then do the division.

Notice that the plane           has intercepts                          and       The region looks like
496 5 · Multiple Integration

       Hence the triple integral of the temperature is

The volume evaluation is                                degrees Celsius.
Hence the average value is

      5.26 Find the average value of the function                  over the cube with sides of length units in the

          first octant with one vertex at the origin and edges parallel to the coordinate axes.

        SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the rectangular solid box

181.                             where                  182.                              where

183.                             where                  184.                              where

In the following exercises, change the order of integration by integrating first with respect to then then

185.                                        186.

187.                                        188.

189. Let  be continuous functions on                          and

      respectively, where                   are real numbers such that

                                 Show that

190. Let  be differential functions on                        and         respectively, where
           are real numbers such that
                                                                          Show that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5.4 · Triple Integrals 497

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the bounded region

191.                where

192.         where

193.         where

194.                where

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the indicated bounded region

195.         where

196.                where

197.  where

198.  where

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the bounded region of the form

199.  where

200.         where

201.         where
498 5 · Multiple Integration

202.         where

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the bounded region

203.         where

204.                          where

205.                          where

206.                          where

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals over the bounded region                   onto the  -plane.
                                                                        where is the projection of

207.                                 208.        where

      where

209.                                 where 210.         where

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         5.4 · Triple Integrals 499

211. The solid bounded by                         212. The solid bounded by                     213. [T] The volume of a solid
                                             and
                                                                                 , and      is          is given by the integral
        is shown in the following figure.
                                                        given in the following figure. Evaluate

      Evaluate the integral              by             the integral             by

      integrating first with respect to                 integrating first with respect to             Use a computer algebra
      then                                              then and then                                 system (CAS) to graph
                                                                                                      and find its volume.
                                                                                                      Round your answer to
                                                                                                      two decimal places.

214. [T] The volume of a solid
        is given by the integral

      Use a CAS to graph and
      find its volume Round
      your answer to two decimal
      places.

In the following exercises, use two circular permutations of the variables                             to write new integrals whose values
equal the value of the original integral. A circular permutation of                         is the arrangement of the numbers in one of
the following orders:

215.                                              216.                                          217.

218.                                              219. Set up the integral that         220. Set up the integral that
                                                                                                gives the volume of the
221. Find the average value of the                gives the volume of the                       solid bounded by
        function                                                                                                  and
        over the parallelepiped                   solid bounded by                              where
        determined by
        and                                              and

                                                  where  and

                                                  222. Find the average value of            223. Find the volume of the
                                                          the function
                                                                                  over the       solid that lies under the
                                                          solid
                                                                                                 plane                   and
                                                          situated in the first octant.
                                                                                                 whose projection onto the

                                                                                                 -plane is bounded by

                                                                                                                         and
500 5 · Multiple Integration

224. Find the volume of the           225. Consider the pyramid
                                              with the base in the
solid E that lies under the                      -plane of
                                                                       and the
plane                            and          vertex at the point

whose projection onto the                      a. Show that the
                                                    equations of the
-plane is bounded by                                planes of the lateral
                                                    faces of the pyramid
                              and                   are

                                      and

                                      b. Find the volume of the
                                           pyramid.

226. Consider the pyramid with the base in the -plane of                        227. The solid bounded by the sphere of
                                 and the vertex at the point
                                                                                equation  with
         a. Show that the equations of the planes of the side faces
              of the pyramid are                                                and located in the first octant is

                                                                                represented in the following figure.

b. Find the volume of the pyramid.

                                                                                a. Write the triple integral that gives
                                                                                     the volume of by integrating
                                                                                     first with respect to then with
                                                                                     and then with

                                                                                b. Rewrite the integral in part a. as
                                                                                     an equivalent integral in five other
                                                                                     orders.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.4 · Triple Integrals 501

228. The solid bounded by the equatio2n29. Find the volume of the prism

                   and located in          with vertices

the first octant is represented in the

following figure.

a. Write the triple integral that gives
     the volume of by integrating
     first with respect to then with
     and then with

b. Rewrite the integral in part a. as
     an equivalent integral in five other
     orders.

230. Find the volume of the prism  231. The solid bounded by                             and
        with vertices
                                           situated in the first octant is given in the

                                           following figure. Find the volume of the solid.
502 5 · Multiple Integration

232. The solid bounded by              and         and      233. The midpoint rule for the triple integral
                                                                                              over the rectangular solid
situated in the first octant is given in the following

figure. Find the volume of the solid.

                                                                    box is a generalization of the midpoint rule
                                                                    for double integrals. The region is divided
                                                                    into subboxes of equal sizes and the integral is
                                                                    approximated by the triple Riemann sum

                                                                                                              where

                                                                    is the center of the box           and

                                                                    is the volume of each subbox. Apply the

                                                                    midpoint rule to approximate       over

                                                                    the solid

                                                                    by using a partition of eight cubes of equal
                                                                    size. Round your answer to three decimal
                                                                    places.

234. [T]                                                    235. Suppose that the
         a. Apply the midpoint rule to approximate                  temperature in degrees
                                 over the solid                     Celsius at a point
                                                                    of a solid bounded by
              by using a partition of eight cubes of equal          the coordinate planes and
              size. Round your answer to three decimal                                  is
              places.
         b. Use a CAS to improve the above integral                 Find the average
              approximation in the case of a partition of           temperature over the
              cubes of equal size, where                            solid.

236. Suppose that the            237. Show that the volume of a     238. Show that the volume of a
        temperature in degrees           right square pyramid of            regular right hexagonal
        Fahrenheit at a point            height and side length             prism of edge length is
                   of a solid
        bounded by the                 is          by using triple                    by using triple
        coordinate planes and                                               integrals.
                            is         integrals.

Find the average
temperature over the
solid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 503

239. Show that the volume of a   240. If the charge density at an
        regular right hexagonal
        pyramid of edge length   arbitrary point             of

                                 a solid is given by the

is           by using triple     function           then

integrals.                       the total charge inside the

                                 solid is defined as the

                                 triple integral

                                                    Assume

                                                          that the charge density of
                                                          the solid enclosed by
                                                          the paraboloids

                                                                                  and
                                                                                  is equal
                                                          to the distance from an
                                                          arbitrary point of to the
                                                          origin. Set up the integral
                                                          that gives the total charge
                                                          inside the solid

5.5 Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates

Learning Objectives

      5.5.1 Evaluate a triple integral by changing to cylindrical coordinates.
      5.5.2 Evaluate a triple integral by changing to spherical coordinates.

Earlier in this chapter we showed how to convert a double integral in rectangular coordinates into a double integral in
polar coordinates in order to deal more conveniently with problems involving circular symmetry. A similar situation
occurs with triple integrals, but here we need to distinguish between cylindrical symmetry and spherical symmetry. In
this section we convert triple integrals in rectangular coordinates into a triple integral in either cylindrical or spherical
coordinates.

Also recall the chapter opener, which showed the opera house l'Hemisphèric in Valencia, Spain. It has four sections with

one of the sections being a theater in a five-story-high sphere (ball) under an oval roof as long as a football field. Inside is

an IMAX screen that changes the sphere into a planetarium with a sky full of  twinkling stars. Using triple integrals

in spherical coordinates, we can find the volumes of different geometric shapes like these.

Review of Cylindrical Coordinates                   a point with rectangular coordinates            can be identified with
                                                                                               and         are the
As we have seen earlier, in two-dimensional space 

       in polar coordinates and vice versa, where
relationships between the variables.

In three-dimensional space  a point with rectangular coordinates              can be identified with cylindrical

coordinates  and vice versa. We can use these same conversion relationships, adding as the vertical distance to

the point from the -plane as shown in the following figure.
504 5 · Multiple Integration

        Figure 5.50 Cylindrical coordinates are similar to polar coordinates with a vertical coordinate added.

To convert from rectangular to cylindrical coordinates, we use the conversion   and    To convert from

cylindrical to rectangular coordinates, we use           and            The    -coordinate remains the same in both

cases.

In the two-dimensional plane with a rectangular coordinate system, when we say  (constant) we mean an

unbounded vertical line parallel to the -axis and when        (constant) we mean an unbounded horizontal line parallel

to the -axis. With the polar coordinate system, when we say         (constant), we mean a circle of radius units and

when    (constant) we mean an infinite ray making an angle with the positive -axis.

Similarly, in three-dimensional space with rectangular coordinates      the equations  and

where and are constants, represent unbounded planes parallel to the -plane, -plane and -plane,

respectively. With cylindrical coordinates          by             and         where and are constants, we mean

an unbounded vertical cylinder with the -axis as its radial axis; a plane making a constant angle with the -plane;

and an unbounded horizontal plane parallel to the -plane, respectively. This means that the circular cylinder

        in rectangular coordinates can be represented simply as         in cylindrical coordinates. (Refer to

Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates for more review.)

Integration in Cylindrical Coordinates

Triple integrals can often be more readily evaluated by using cylindrical coordinates instead of rectangular coordinates.
Some common equations of surfaces in rectangular coordinates along with corresponding equations in cylindrical
coordinates are listed in Table 5.1. These equations will become handy as we proceed with solving problems using triple
integrals.

                                 Circular cylinder  Circular cone       Sphere         Paraboloid

        Rectangular

        Cylindrical

        Table 5.1 Equations of Some Common Shapes

As before, we start with the simplest bounded region     in   to describe in cylindrical coordinates, in the form of a
cylindrical box,                                              (Figure 5.51). Suppose we divide each interval into
                                                         and
              subdivisions such that                                      Then we can state the following definition for a
triple integral in cylindrical coordinates.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 505

                                   Figure 5.51 A cylindrical box described by cylindrical coordinates.
Definition
Consider the cylindrical box (expressed in cylindrical coordinates)

If the function           is continuous on and if       is any sample point in the cylindrical subbox

                            (Figure 5.51), then we can define the triple integral in cylindrical

coordinates as the limit of a triple Riemann sum, provided the following limit exists:

                          

Note that if     is the function in rectangular coordinates and the box      is expressed in rectangular coordinates,
                                                                                                                  and we have
then the triple integral  is equal to the triple integral

                                                                                                                  (5.11)

As mentioned in the preceding section, all the properties of a double integral work well in triple integrals, whether in
rectangular coordinates or cylindrical coordinates. They also hold for iterated integrals. To reiterate, in cylindrical
coordinates, Fubini's theorem takes the following form:

Theorem 5.12

Fubini's Theorem in Cylindrical Coordinates

Suppose that              is continuous on a portion of a circular cylinder  which when described in cylindrical

coordinates looks like

Then                                               and
506 5 · Multiple Integration

The iterated integral may be replaced equivalently by any one of the other five iterated integrals obtained by integrating
with respect to the three variables in other orders.

Cylindrical coordinate systems work well for solids that are symmetric around an axis, such as cylinders and cones. Let
us look at some examples before we define the triple integral in cylindrical coordinates on general cylindrical regions.

EXAMPLE 5.43

Evaluating a Triple Integral over a Cylindrical Box

Evaluate the triple integral       where the cylindrical box is

     Solution
As stated in Fubini's theorem, we can write the triple integral as the iterated integral

The evaluation of the iterated integral is straightforward. Each variable in the integral is independent of the others, so we
can integrate each variable separately and multiply the results together. This makes the computation much easier:

5.27 Evaluate the triple integral

If the cylindrical region over which we have to integrate is a general solid, we look at the projections onto the coordinate

planes. Hence the triple integral of a continuous function  over a general solid region

                                   in  where is the projection of onto the -plane, is

In particular, if                                           then we have

Similar formulas exist for projections onto the other coordinate planes. We can use polar coordinates in those planes if
necessary.

EXAMPLE 5.44

Setting up a Triple Integral in Cylindrical Coordinates over a General Region

Consider the region inside the right circular cylinder with equation           bounded below by the  -plane and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 507

bounded above by the sphere with radius centered at the origin (Figure 5.52). Set up a triple integral over this region

with a function  in cylindrical coordinates.

                 Figure 5.52 Setting up a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates over a cylindrical region.

     Solution                                           We can see that the limits for are from to
First, identify that the equation for the sphere is   Finally, the limits for are from to Hence the region is

                     Then the limits for are from to

Therefore, the triple integral is

    5.28 Consider the region inside the right circular cylinder with equation      bounded below by the

                 -plane and bounded above by          Set up a triple integral with a function                   in cylindrical

    coordinates.

EXAMPLE 5.45

Setting up a Triple Integral in Two Ways

Let be the region bounded below by the cone           and above by the paraboloid                                (Figure

5.53). Set up a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates to find the volume of the region, using the following orders of
integration:

a.
b.
508 5 · Multiple Integration

                              Figure 5.53 Setting up a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates over a conical region.

    Solution

a. The cone is of radius 1 where it meets the paraboloid. Since         and

    (assuming is nonnegative), we have                Solving, we have                     Since                            we
                                                                                                                          The
    have      Therefore          So the intersection of these two surfaces is a circle of radius in the plane             -plane

    cone is the lower bound for and the paraboloid is the upper bound. The projection of the region onto the

    is the circle of radius centered at the origin.

    Thus, we can describe the region as

    Hence the integral for the volume is

b. We can also write the cone surface as     and the paraboloid as      The lower bound for is zero, but the

    upper bound is sometimes the cone and the other times it is the paraboloid. The plane  divides the region into

    two regions. Then the region can be described as

    Now the integral for the volume becomes

    5.29 Redo the previous example with the order of integration

EXAMPLE 5.46

Finding a Volume with Triple Integrals in Two Ways

Let E be the region bounded below by the -plane, above by the sphere                       and on the sides by the

cylinder                      (Figure 5.54). Set up a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates to find the volume of the region using

the following orders of integration, and in each case find the volume and check that the answers are the same:

a.
b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 509

                          Figure 5.54 Finding a cylindrical volume with a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates.
    Solution
a. Note that the equation for the sphere is

     and the equation for the cylinder is

     Thus, we have for the region

     Hence the integral for the volume is

b. Since the sphere is                which is  and the cylinder is  which is                                          we have
                      that is,                                                                                          in the
                                Thus we have two regions, since the sphere and the cylinder intersect at
        -plane

and
Hence the integral for the volume is
510 5 · Multiple Integration

5.30 Redo the previous example with the order of integration

Review of Spherical Coordinates

In three-dimensional space  in the spherical coordinate system, we specify a point by its distance from the origin,

the polar angle from the positive  (same as in the cylindrical coordinate system), and the angle from the

positive  and the line (Figure 5.55). Note that  and          (Refer to Cylindrical and Spherical

Coordinates for a review.) Spherical coordinates are useful for triple integrals over regions that are symmetric with

respect to the origin.

          Figure 5.55 The spherical coordinate system locates points with two angles and a distance from the origin.
Recall the relationships that connect rectangular coordinates with spherical coordinates.
From spherical coordinates to rectangular coordinates:
From rectangular coordinates to spherical coordinates:
Other relationships that are important to know for conversions are

and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 511

The following figure shows a few solid regions that are convenient to express in spherical coordinates.

Figure 5.56 Spherical coordinates are especially convenient for working with solids bounded by these types of surfaces.
(The letter indicates a constant.)

Integration in Spherical Coordinates

We now establish a triple integral in the spherical coordinate system, as we did before in the cylindrical coordinate

system. Let the function  be continuous in a bounded spherical box,

                                      We then divide each interval into                         subdivisions such that

Now we can illustrate the following theorem for triple integrals in spherical coordinates with         being any

sample point in the spherical subbox  For the volume element of the subbox  in spherical coordinates, we have

                          as shown in the following figure.

                                    Figure 5.57 The volume element of a box in spherical coordinates.
Definition
The triple integral in spherical coordinates is the limit of a triple Riemann sum,
512 5 · Multiple Integration

                                                
provided the limit exists.

As with the other multiple integrals we have examined, all the properties work similarly for a triple integral in the
spherical coordinate system, and so do the iterated integrals. Fubini's theorem takes the following form.

  Theorem 5.13

Fubini's Theorem for Spherical Coordinates

If  is continuous on a spherical solid box                                     then

                                                                                     (5.12)

  This iterated integral may be replaced by other iterated integrals by integrating with respect to the three variables in
  other orders.

As stated before, spherical coordinate systems work well for solids that are symmetric around a point, such as spheres
and cones. Let us look at some examples before we consider triple integrals in spherical coordinates on general
spherical regions.

  EXAMPLE 5.47
Evaluating a Triple Integral in Spherical Coordinates

Evaluate the iterated triple integral

     Solution
As before, in this case the variables in the iterated integral are actually independent of each other and hence we can
integrate each piece and multiply:

The concept of triple integration in spherical coordinates can be extended to integration over a general solid, using the
projections onto the coordinate planes. Note that and mean the increments in volume and area, respectively. The
variables and are used as the variables for integration to express the integrals.

The triple integral of a continuous function      over a general solid region

in  where is the projection of onto the -plane, is

In particular, if                                   then we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 513

Similar formulas occur for projections onto the other coordinate planes.      and the hemisphere

  EXAMPLE 5.48
Setting up a Triple Integral in Spherical Coordinates
Set up an integral for the volume of the region bounded by the cone

                           (see the figure below).

                                Figure 5.58 A region bounded below by a cone and above by a hemisphere.

     Solution
Using the conversion formulas from rectangular coordinates to spherical coordinates, we have:

For the cone:    or                          or                           or

For the sphere:  or                          or              or

Thus, the triple integral for the volume is

    5.31 Set up a triple integral for the volume of the solid region bounded above by the sphere         and bounded
                below by the cone

EXAMPLE 5.49

Interchanging Order of Integration in Spherical Coordinates

Let be the region bounded below by the cone      and above by the sphere                                 (Figure 5.59).

Set up a triple integral in spherical coordinates and find the volume of the region using the following orders of
integration:

a.
b.
514 5 · Multiple Integration

                                      Figure 5.59 A region bounded below by a cone and above by a sphere.
    Solution
a. Use the conversion formulas to write the equations of the sphere and cone in spherical coordinates.
     For the sphere:

     For the cone:

Hence the integral for the volume of the solid region becomes

b. Consider the -plane. Note that the ranges for and (from part a.) are

The curve                     meets the line  at the point     Thus, to change the order of integration, we

need to use two pieces:

Hence the integral for the volume of the solid region becomes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 515

      In each case, the integration results in

Before we end this section, we present a couple of examples that can illustrate the conversion from rectangular
coordinates to cylindrical coordinates and from rectangular coordinates to spherical coordinates.

  EXAMPLE 5.50
Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Cylindrical Coordinates
Convert the following integral into cylindrical coordinates:

     Solution
The ranges of the variables are

The first two inequalities describe the right half of a circle of radius Therefore, the ranges for and are

The limits of are  hence

  EXAMPLE 5.51

Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Spherical Coordinates
Convert the following integral into spherical coordinates:

     Solution
The ranges of the variables are

The first two ranges of variables describe a quarter disk in the first quadrant of the -plane. Hence the range for is

The lower bound                  is the upper half of a cone and the upper bound  is the upper half of
516 5 · Multiple Integration

a sphere. Therefore, we have      which is

For the ranges of we need to find where the cone and the sphere intersect, so solve the equation

This gives
Putting this together, we obtain

5.32 Use rectangular, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates to set up triple integrals for finding the volume of

the region inside the sphere                but outside the cylinder

Now that we are familiar with the spherical coordinate system, let's find the volume of some known geometric figures,
such as spheres and ellipsoids.

  EXAMPLE 5.52
Chapter Opener: Finding the Volume of l'Hemisphèric
Find the volume of the spherical planetarium in l'Hemisphèric in Valencia, Spain, which is five stories tall and has a radius
of approximately ft, using the equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 517

              Figure 5.60 (credit: modification of work by Javier Yaya Tur, Wikimedia Commons)

     Solution                                                           and    using spherical coordinates, and
We calculate the volume of the ball in the first octant, where
then multiply the result by for symmetry. Since we consider the region  as the first octant in the integral, the ranges
of the variables are

Therefore,

This exactly matches with what we knew. So for a sphere with a radius of approximately ft, the volume is

For the next example we find the volume of an ellipsoid.

EXAMPLE 5.53

Finding the Volume of an Ellipsoid
Find the volume of the ellipsoid

Solution

We again use symmetry and evaluate the volume of the ellipsoid using spherical coordinates. As before, we use the first

octant        and  and then multiply the result by

In this case the ranges of the variables are

Also, we need to change the rectangular to spherical coordinates in this way:
Then the volume of the ellipsoid becomes
518 5 · Multiple Integration

EXAMPLE 5.54

Finding the Volume of the Space Inside an Ellipsoid and Outside a Sphere

Find the volume of the space inside the ellipsoid             and outside the sphere

     Solution
This problem is directly related to the l'Hemisphèric structure. The volume of space inside the ellipsoid and outside the
sphere might be useful to find the expense of heating or cooling that space. We can use the preceding two examples for
the volume of the sphere and ellipsoid and then substract.

First we find the volume of the ellipsoid using          and              in the result from Example 5.53. Hence
the volume of the ellipsoid is

From Example 5.52, the volume of the sphere is                            and outside the sphere

Therefore, the volume of the space inside the ellipsoid
                             is approximately

STUDENT PROJECT

Hot air balloons
Hot air ballooning is a relaxing, peaceful pastime that many people enjoy. Many balloonist gatherings take place
around the world, such as the Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta. The Albuquerque event is the largest hot air
balloon festival in the world, with over balloons participating each year.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 519

Figure 5.61 Balloons lift off at the  Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta. (credit: David Herrera, Flickr)

As the name implies, hot air balloons use hot air to generate lift. (Hot air is less dense than cooler air, so the balloon
floats as long as the hot air stays hot.) The heat is generated by a propane burner suspended below the opening of
the basket. Once the balloon takes off, the pilot controls the altitude of the balloon, either by using the burner to heat
the air and ascend or by using a vent near the top of the balloon to release heated air and descend. The pilot has very
little control over where the balloon goes, however--balloons are at the mercy of the winds. The uncertainty over
where we will end up is one of the reasons balloonists are attracted to the sport.

In this project we use triple integrals to learn more about hot air balloons. We model the balloon in two pieces. The
top of the balloon is modeled by a half sphere of radius feet. The bottom of the balloon is modeled by a frustum of
a cone (think of an ice cream cone with the pointy end cut off). The radius of the large end of the frustum is feet
and the radius of the small end of the frustum is feet. A graph of our balloon model and a cross-sectional diagram
showing the dimensions are shown in the following figure.
520 5 · Multiple Integration

Figure 5.62 (a) Use a half sphere to model the top part of the balloon and a frustum of a cone to model the bottom
part of the balloon. (b) A cross section of the balloon showing its dimensions.

We first want to find the volume of the balloon. If we look at the top part and the bottom part of the balloon
separately, we see that they are geometric solids with known volume formulas. However, it is still worthwhile to set
up and evaluate the integrals we would need to find the volume. If we calculate the volume using integration, we can
use the known volume formulas to check our answers. This will help ensure that we have the integrals set up
correctly for the later, more complicated stages of the project.

1. Find the volume of the balloon in two ways.

a. Use triple integrals to calculate the volume. Consider each part of the balloon separately. (Consider using

spherical coordinates for the top part and cylindrical coordinates for the bottom part.)

b. Verify the answer using the formulas for the volume of a sphere,  and for the volume of a cone,

In reality, calculating the temperature at a point inside the balloon is a tremendously complicated endeavor. In
fact, an entire branch of physics (thermodynamics) is devoted to studying heat and temperature. For the
purposes of this project, however, we are going to make some simplifying assumptions about how temperature
varies from point to point within the balloon. Assume that just prior to liftoff, the temperature (in degrees
Fahrenheit) of the air inside the balloon varies according to the function

2. What is the average temperature of the air in the balloon just prior to liftoff? (Again, look at each part of the
     balloon separately, and do not forget to convert the function into spherical coordinates when looking at the top
     part of the balloon.)
     Now the pilot activates the burner for seconds. This action affects the temperature in a -foot-wide column
         feet high, directly above the burner. A cross section of the balloon depicting this column in shown in the
     following figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 521

Figure 5.63 Activating the burner heats the air in a -foot-high, -foot-wide column directly above the burner.

Assume that after the pilot activates the burner for  seconds, the temperature of the air in the column
described above increases according to the formula

Then the temperature of the air in the column is given by

     while the temperature in the remainder of the balloon is still given by
3. Find the average temperature of the air in the balloon after the pilot has activated the burner for seconds.
522 5 · Multiple Integration                                      over the solid

             SECTION 5.5 EXERCISES

       In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integrals
       241.

242.
243.

244.
245.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 523

246.

247. a. Let be a cylindrical shell with inner radius outer radius

      and height where                   and      Assume that a

      function defined on can be expressed in cylindrical

      coordinates as                              where and are

      differentiable functions. If                and            where

      and are antiderivatives of and respectively, show that

      b. Use the previous result to show that

                                                         where is a

      cylindrical shell with inner radius outer radius and height

248. a. Let be a cylindrical shell with inner radius outer radius and

      height where                  and           Assume that a function

      defined on can be expressed in cylindrical coordinates as

                                    where                are differentiable

      functions. If                 where is an antiderivative of show

      that

           where and are antiderivatives of and          respectively.
      b. Use the previous result to show that

                                                  where is a cylindrical shell

      with inner radius outer radius and height

In the following exercises, the boundaries of the solid  are given in cylindrical coordinates. Let                be the
corresponding function in cylindrical coordinates.

a. Define the region in cylindrical coordinates.

b. Convert the integral             to cylindrical coordinates.

249. is inside the right           250. is inside the right               251. is located in the first
        circular cylinder                  circular cylinder                      octant and is bounded by
                        above the          above the plane, and                   the circular paraboloid
           -plane, and inside the          inside the sphere                                        the cylinder
        sphere
                                                                                              and the plane
524 5 · Multiple Integration

252. is located in the first
        octant outside the circular
        paraboloid
        and inside the cylinder

                   and is bounded
        also by the planes
        and

In the following exercises, the function and region are given in rectangular coordinates.

a. Express the region and the function in cylindrical coordinates. Let                be the corresponding function in
     cylindrical coordinates.

b. Convert the integral                  to cylindrical coordinates and evaluate it.

253.

254.
255.
256.

In the following exercises, find the volume of the solid whose boundaries are given in rectangular coordinates.

257. is above the -plane,                258. is below the plane              259. is bounded by the
        inside the cylinder                              and inside the               circular cone
                           and below                                                                       and
        the plane                                paraboloid

260. is located above the                261. is located inside the           262. is located inside the
           -plane, below                                                              sphere
                                         cylinder                        and          above the -plane, and
        outside the one-sheeted                                                       inside the circular cone
        hyperboloid                      between the circular

                                  and    paraboloids
        inside the cylinder
                                                      and

263. is located inside the               264. is located inside the           265. [T] Use a computer
        circular cone                                                                 algebra system (CAS) to
                                    and  cylinder                        ,            graph the solid whose
        between the planes                                                            volume is given by the
        and                              above the circular cone                      iterated integral in
                                                                                      cylindrical coordinates
                                                             , and
                                                                                      Find the volume of the
                                         below the circular                           solid. Round your answer
                                                                                      to four decimal places.
                                         paraboloid

                                                      , and

                                         between the planes

                                         and       .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 525

266. [T] Use a CAS to graph the              267. Convert the integral                268. Convert the integral
        solid whose volume is
        given by the iterated                        into an integral in cylindrical          into an integral in
        integral in cylindrical                      coordinates.                             cylindrical coordinates.
        coordinates

                                       Find

        the volume of the solid
        Round your answer to
        four decimal places.

In the following exercises, evaluate the triple integral                              over the solid

269.                                                     270.

271.                                         272.               is
        is bounded above by the
        half-sphere                                bounded above by the
                                 with
                and below by the                   half-sphere
        cone
                                                                    with

                                                         and below by the

                                                   cone

273. Show that if                                        is a continuous
        function on the spherical box                                then
526 5 · Multiple Integration

274. a. A function is said to have spherical symmetry 275. a. Let be the region between the upper

      if it depends on the distance to the origin only,               concentric hemispheres of radii a and b

      that is, it can be expressed in spherical                       centered at the origin and situated in

      coordinates as                        where                     the first octant, where

                                 Show that                            Consider F a function defined on B

                                                                      whose form in spherical coordinates

                                                                               is                   Show

                                                                      that if                  and

      where is the region between the upper                                         then

      concentric hemispheres of radii and                     where is an antiderivative of and
                                                              is an antiderivative of
      centered at the origin, with             and a     b. Use the previous result to show that

      spherical function defined on

      b. Use the previous result to show that

      where

                                                                      where is the region between the
                                                                      upper concentric hemispheres of radii

                                                                        and centered at the origin and
                                                                      situated in the first octant.

In the following exercises, the function and region are given in rectangular coordinates.

a. Express the region and the function in spherical coordinates. Let               be the corresponding function in
     spherical coordinates

b. Convert the integral             to spherical coordinates and evaluate it.

276.                                               277.

278.

279.

In the following exercises, find the volume of the solid whose boundaries are given in rectangular coordinates.
280.

281.                                                     282. Use spherical coordinates

                                                                      to find the volume of the

                                                                      solid situated inside the

                                                                      sphere       and outside

                                                                      the sphere

                                                                      with

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             5.5 · Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates 527

283. Use spherical coordinates       284. Convert the integral

to find the volume of the

ball  that is situated

between the cones

285. Convert the integral                              into an integral in spherical coordinates.
                                                                                  286. Convert the integral

into an integral in spherical coordinates.                      into an integral in spherical
                                                                coordinates and evaluate it.

287. [T] Use a CAS to graph the      288. [T] Use a CAS to graph the                       289. [T] Use a CAS to evaluate
        solid whose volume is given          solid whose volume is given                           the integral
        by the iterated integral in          by the iterated integral in
        spherical coordinates                spherical coordinates as                                                         where

Find the volume of the                                 Find the volume of the                 lies above the
solid. Round your answer to                            solid. Round your answer to         paraboloid
three decimal places.                                  three decimal places.               and below the plane

290. [T]                             291. Express the volume of the          292. Express the volume of the
         a. Evaluate the integral            solid inside the sphere                 solid inside the sphere
                                                                        and                                     and
              where is bounded               outside the cylinder                    outside the cylinder
              by the spheres                                   as triple                               that is
                                             integrals in cylindrical                located in the first octant
              and                            coordinates and spherical               as triple integrals in
         b. Use a CAS to find an             coordinates.                            cylindrical coordinates
                                                                                     and spherical
              approximation of the                                                   coordinates.
              previous integral.
              Round your answer to
              two decimal places.

293. The power emitted by an antenna                   294. Use the preceding exercise
        has a power density per unit                           to find the total power
        volume given in spherical                              within a sphere of radius
        coordinates by                                         5 meters when the power
                                                               density per unit volume is
                                                where          given by

            is a constant with units in
        watts. The total power within a
        sphere of radius meters is

        defined as

Find the total power within a
sphere of radius 20 meters.
528 5 · Multiple Integration

295. A charge cloud contained in a         296. Use the preceding exercise to find
        sphere of radius r centimeters             the total charge cloud contained in
        centered at the origin has its             the unit sphere if the charge
        charge density given by                    density is

     where    The total charge

     contained in is given by

                                 Find the

        total charge

5.6 Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia

Learning Objectives

      5.6.1 Use double integrals to locate the center of mass of a two-dimensional object.
      5.6.2 Use double integrals to find the moment of inertia of a two-dimensional object.
      5.6.3 Use triple integrals to locate the center of mass of a three-dimensional object.

We have already discussed a few applications of multiple integrals, such as finding areas, volumes, and the average
value of a function over a bounded region. In this section we develop computational techniques for finding the center of
mass and moments of inertia of several types of physical objects, using double integrals for a lamina (flat plate) and
triple integrals for a three-dimensional object with variable density. The density is usually considered to be a constant
number when the lamina or the object is homogeneous; that is, the object has uniform density.

Center of Mass in Two Dimensions

The center of mass is also known as the center of gravity if the object is in a uniform gravitational field. If the object has
uniform density, the center of mass is the geometric center of the object, which is called the centroid. Figure 5.64 shows
a point as the center of mass of a lamina. The lamina is perfectly balanced about its center of mass.

     Figure 5.64 A lamina is perfectly balanced on a spindle if the lamina's center of mass sits on the spindle.

To find the coordinates of the center of mass      of a lamina, we need to find the moment of the lamina about
                                               We also need to find the mass of the lamina. Then
the        and the moment about the

Refer to Moments and Centers of Mass (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/2-6-moments-and-centers-
of-mass) for the definitions and the methods of single integration to find the center of mass of a one-dimensional object
(for example, a thin rod). We are going to use a similar idea here except that the object is a two-dimensional lamina and
we use a double integral.

If we allow a constant density function, then           give the centroid of the lamina.

Suppose that the lamina occupies a region      in the   and let  be its density (in units of mass per unit area)
                                                 where
at any point  Hence,                                    and are the mass and area of a small rectangle containing

the point     and the limit is taken as the dimensions of the rectangle go to (see the following figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 529

Figure 5.65 The density of a lamina at a point is the limit of its mass per area in a small rectangle about the point as the
area goes to zero.

Just as before, we divide the region into tiny rectangles with area and choose  as sample points. Then

the mass of each is equal to                (Figure 5.66). Let and be the number of subintervals in and

respectively. Also, note that the shape might not always be rectangular but the limit works anyway, as seen in previous
sections.

              Figure 5.66 Subdividing the lamina into tiny rectangles  each containing a sample point
Hence, the mass of the lamina is

                                                                                                       (5.13)

                                            

Let's see an example now of finding the total mass of a triangular lamina.

EXAMPLE 5.55

Finding the Total Mass of a Lamina            and with density                                         Find the total
Consider a triangular lamina with vertices
mass.

     Solution           is always helpful, as shown in the following figure.
A sketch of the region
530 5 · Multiple Integration

                                         Figure 5.67 A lamina in the  with density
Using the expression developed for mass, we see that

The computation is straightforward, giving the answer

5.33 Consider the same region as in the previous example, and use the density function                               Find

       the total mass. Hint: Use trigonometric substitution                         and then use the power reducing
       formulas for trigonometric functions.

Now that we have established the expression for mass, we have the tools we need for calculating moments and centers

of mass. The moment about the               for is the limit of the sums of moments of the regions about the

Hence

                                                                                                  (5.14)

                                                           

Similarly, the moment            about the  for is the limit of the sums of moments of the regions about the
          Hence

                                                                                                  (5.15)

                                                           

EXAMPLE 5.56

Finding Moments                             with vertices             and with density  Find the
Consider the same triangular lamina
moments and

     Solution
Use double integrals for each moment and compute their values:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 531

The computation is quite straightforward.

5.34 Consider the same lamina as above, and use the density function  Find the moments
                   and

Finally we are ready to restate the expressions for the center of mass in terms of integrals. We denote the x-coordinate
of the center of mass by and the y-coordinate by Specifically,

                                                                                      (5.16)

EXAMPLE 5.57

Finding the Center of Mass                  with vertices  and with density function
Again consider the same triangular region
Find the center of mass.

     Solution
Using the formulas we developed, we have

Therefore, the center of mass is the point

Analysis

If we choose the density  instead to be uniform throughout the region (i.e., constant), such as the value 1 (any

constant will do), then we can compute the centroid,
532 5 · Multiple Integration

Notice that the center of mass   is not exactly the same as the centroid  of the triangular region. This is due

to the variable density of If the density is constant, then we just use   (constant). This value cancels out from

the formulas, so for a constant density, the center of mass coincides with the centroid of the lamina.

5.35 Again use the same region as above and the density function          Find the center of mass.

Once again, based on the comments at the end of Example 5.57, we have expressions for the centroid of a region on the
plane:

We should use these formulas and verify the centroid of the triangular region referred to in the last three examples.

EXAMPLE 5.58

Finding Mass, Moments, and Center of Mass

Find the mass, moments, and the center of mass of the lamina of density   occupying the region under

the curve     in the interval    (see the following figure).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 533

Figure 5.68 Locating the center of mass of a lamina with density

     Solution              We need to describe the region between the graph of  and the vertical lines
First we compute the mass
and

Now compute the moments and

Finally, evaluate the center of mass,
534 5 · Multiple Integration

Hence the center of mass is

5.36 Calculate the mass, moments, and the center of mass of the region between the curves           and

with the density function                        in the interval

  EXAMPLE 5.59                                   over the interval  (see the following figure).

Finding a Centroid
Find the centroid of the region under the curve

                                       Figure 5.69 Finding a centroid of a region below the curve

     Solution
To compute the centroid, we assume that the density function is constant and hence it cancels out:

Thus the centroid of the region is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 535

5.37 Calculate the centroid of the region between the curves               and  with uniform density in the

           interval

Moments of Inertia

For a clear understanding of how to calculate moments of inertia using double integrals, we need to go back to the

general definition of moments and centers of mass in Section 6.6 of Volume 1. The moment of inertia of a particle of

mass about an axis is         where is the distance of the particle from the axis. We can see from Figure 5.66 that the

moment of inertia of the subrectangle about the         is                      Similarly, the moment of inertia of the

subrectangle about the            is                The moment of inertia is related to the rotation of the mass;

specifically, it measures the tendency of the mass to resist a change in rotational motion about an axis.

The moment of inertia about the          for the region is the limit of the sum of moments of inertia of the regions

about the     Hence

                                              
                                             for is the limit of the sum of moments of inertia of the regions
Similarly, the moment of inertia  about the

about the     Hence

                                                 

Sometimes, we need to find the moment of inertia of an object about the origin, which is known as the polar moment of
inertia. We denote this by and obtain it by adding the moments of inertia and Hence

All these expressions can be written in polar coordinates by substituting       and                        For
example,

EXAMPLE 5.60

Finding Moments of Inertia for a Triangular Lamina

Use the triangular region with vertices            and      and with density    as in previous examples.

Find the moments of inertia.

     Solution
Using the expressions established above for the moments of inertia, we have
536 5 · Multiple Integration

5.38 Again use the same region as above and the density function                                 Find the moments of
             inertia.

As mentioned earlier, the moment of inertia of a particle of mass  about an axis is    where is the distance of the
particle from the axis, also known as the radius of gyration.

Hence the radii of gyration with respect to the       the          and the origin are

respectively. In each case, the radius of gyration tells us how far (perpendicular distance) from the axis of rotation the
entire mass of an object might be concentrated. The moments of an object are useful for finding information on the
balance and torque of the object about an axis, but radii of gyration are used to describe the distribution of mass around
its centroidal axis. There are many applications in engineering and physics. Sometimes it is necessary to find the radius
of gyration, as in the next example.

EXAMPLE 5.61

Finding the Radius of Gyration for a Triangular Lamina                 and     and with density       as in previous
Consider the same triangular lamina with vertices                 the       and the origin.
examples. Find the radii of gyration with respect to the

Solution

If we compute the mass of this region we find that         We found the moments of inertia of this lamina in Example

5.58. From these data, the radii of gyration with respect to the            and the origin are, respectively,

5.39 Use the same region from Example 5.61 and the density function                                   Find the radii of

          gyration with respect to the           the       and the origin.

Center of Mass and Moments of Inertia in Three Dimensions

All the expressions of double integrals discussed so far can be modified to become triple integrals.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 537

Definition                                                 at any point        in space, then its mass is
If we have a solid object with a density function

Its moments about the       the                   and the        are

If the center of mass of the object is the point           then

Also, if the solid object is homogeneous (with constant density), then the center of mass becomes the centroid of the

solid. Finally, the moments of inertia about the           the        and the       are

EXAMPLE 5.62

Finding the Mass of a Solid                                     and the coordinate planes and has density
Suppose that is a solid region bounded by

                          Find the total mass.

Solution

The region is a tetrahedron (Figure 5.70) meeting the axes at the points            and                    To find the

limits of integration, let  in the slanted plane                      Then for and  find the projection of onto the

which is bounded by the axes and the line                        Hence the mass is
538 5 · Multiple Integration

                                 Figure 5.70 Finding the mass of a three-dimensional solid

5.40 Consider the same region (Figure 5.70), and use the density function                   Find the mass.

EXAMPLE 5.63

Finding the Center of Mass of a Solid

Suppose is a solid region bounded by the plane           and the coordinate planes with density

              (see Figure 5.70). Find the center of mass using decimal approximation. Use the mass found in

Example 5.62

Solution

We have used this tetrahedron before and know the limits of integration, so we can proceed to the computations right

away. First, we need to find the moments about the  the  and the

Hence the center of mass is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 539

The center of mass for the tetrahedron is the point

5.41 Consider the same region (Figure 5.70) and use the density function                   Find the center
            of mass.

We conclude this section with an example of finding moments of inertia  and

EXAMPLE 5.64

Finding the Moments of Inertia of a Solid

Suppose that is a solid region and is bounded by           and the coordinate planes with density

              (see Figure 5.70). Find the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron about the  the

and the

Solution

Once again, we can almost immediately write the limits of integration and hence we can quickly proceed to evaluating

the moments of inertia. Using the formula stated before, the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron about the

         the  and the        are

and
Proceeding with the computations, we have

Thus, the moments of inertia of the tetrahedron about the  the               and the       are

              respectively.
540 5 · Multiple Integration                                                                         Find the

              5.42 Consider the same region (Figure 5.70), and use the density function
                           moments of inertia about the three coordinate planes.

SECTION 5.6 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, the region   occupied by a lamina is shown in a graph. Find the mass of  with the density
function

297. is the triangular region with       298. is the triangular region  299. is the rectangular region
                                                 with vertices                  with vertices
vertices                         and                                                                        and

300. is the rectangular region           301. is the trapezoidal region determined by the
        with vertices
                                    and  lines                          and

Access for free at openstax.org
302. is the trapezoidal region determined by the                          5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 541

                                                  303. is the disk of radius centered at

      lines             and

304. is the unit disk;       305. is the region enclosed by the
                                     ellipse

306.                         307. is the region bounded by
542 5 · Multiple Integration

       308. is the region bounded by
                                             and

In the following exercises, consider a lamina occupying the region and having the density function given in the
preceding group of exercises. Use a computer algebra system (CAS) to answer the following questions.

a. Find the moments and about the                           and           respectively.

b. Calculate and plot the center of mass of the lamina.

c. [T] Use a CAS to locate the center of mass on the graph of

309. [T] is the triangular                        310. [T] is the triangular region with
        region with vertices                              vertices
                           and

311. [T] is the rectangular region                312. [T] is the rectangular region      313. [T] is the trapezoidal
        with vertices                                     with vertices                           region determined by the
                                                                                                  lines

314. [T] is the trapezoidal                       315. [T] is the disk of radius          316. [T] is the unit disk;
                                                          centered at
region determined by the

lines                            and

317. [T] is the region                            318. [T]
        enclosed by the ellipse

319. [T] is the region                            320. [T] is the region
        bounded by                                        bounded by

        and

In the following exercises, consider a lamina occupying the region               and having the density function given in the first
two groups of Exercises.

a. Find the moments of inertia                    and about the              and origin, respectively.
                                                                 and origin, respectively.
b. Find the radii of gyration with respect to the

321. is the triangular region                     322. is the triangular region   323. is the rectangular
        with vertices                                     with vertices                   region with vertices
        and                                               and                                                         and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              5.6 · Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia 543

324. is the rectangular                     325. is the trapezoidal region    326. is the trapezoidal region
        region with vertices                        determined by the lines           determined by the lines
                                    and                                                                           and
                                                    and
                                                                                           329. is the region enclosed
327. is the disk of radius centered 328. is the unit disk;                                         by the ellipse
        at

330.                                                  332. is the region bounded by
331. is the region bounded by

333. Let be the solid unit                  334. Let be the solid unit        335. The solid of constant
        cube. Find the mass of                      hemisphere. Find the              density is situated
        the solid if its density is                 mass of the solid if its          inside the sphere
        equal to the square of the                  density is equal to the                                      and
        distance of an arbitrary                    distance of an arbitrary          outside the sphere
        point of to the                             point of to the origin.                                     Show
                                                                                      that the center of mass of
                                                                                      the solid is not located
                                                                                      within the solid.

336. Find the mass of the solid

        whose density is                    where
337. [T] The solid
                                                                  338. Consider the solid

has density equal to the distance to the                                      with the density function

Use a CAS to answer the following questions.

a. Find the mass of                                                           a. Find the mass of

b. Find the moments                                   about                   b. Find the moments

the                                         and                               about the                        and

respectively.                                                                 respectively.

c. Find the center of mass of                                                 c. Find the center of mass of

d. Graph and locate its center of mass.

339. [T] The solid has the                  340. The solid is bounded by the planes        341. The solid is bounded by
        mass given by the triple
        integral                                                                                   the planes

                                       Use       Its density at any point is equal to the                             and

                                                 distance to the              Find the             Its density is

                                                 moment of inertia of the solid about                                      where

                                                 the                                                      Show that the

                                                                                                   center of mass of the

a CAS to answer the                                                                                solid is located in the
following questions.
 a. Show that the center                                                                           plane              for any value

      of mass of is located                                                                        of
      in the
b. Graph and locate its
      center of mass.
544 5 · Multiple Integration

342. Let be the solid                      343. The mass of a solid is given by
        situated outside the
        sphere                                     where is an integer. Determine such that the
        and inside the upper                       mass of the solid is
        hemisphere

where                         If the

density of the solid is

        find such that the mass            345. The solid                 Show that the moment
        of the solid is
                                                   has the density     is half of the moment     about
344. Let be the solid above                               about the
        the cone
        and below the sphere                       the

        Its density is a constant          347. Let be a solid of         348. The solid has the mass
                 Find such that                                                   given by the triple integral
                                           constant density where
        the center of mass of the                                                  a. Find the density of the
        solid is situated units                    that is located in                   solid in rectangular
        from the origin.                                                                coordinates.
                                           the first octant, inside the
346. The solid is bounded by                                                       b. Find the moment
        the cylinder                       circular cone                                about the
                            the
        paraboloid                                                   and
                                  and the
                      where                above the plane
                       Find the mass
        of the solid if its density is     Show that the moment
        given by
                                                   about the

                                           is the same as the

                                           moment         about the

349. The solid has the moment of inertia           about the         350. The solid has the mass given by the
                     given by the triple integral                            triple integral

                                                                          a. Find the density of the solid in

a. Find the density of                                                    rectangular coordinates.
b. Find the moment of inertia
                                           about the                      b. Find the moment     about the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 545

351. Let be the solid               352. A solid has a volume          353. Consider the solid

      bounded by the                                                        enclosed by the cylinder

      the cylinder                       given by                                         and the

                      and the                                               planes        and

      plane         where                where is the projection            where         and

      is a real number. Find the         of the solid onto the              are real numbers. The

      moment          of the solid                 and        are           density of is given by

      about the            if its        real numbers, and its                                   where

      density given in cylindrical       density does not depend            is a differential function

      coordinates is                     on the variable Show               whose derivative is

                                         that its center of mass lies       continuous on

                                         in the plane                       Show that if

      where is a differentiable                                             then the moment of
      function with the first and
      second derivatives                                                    inertia about the
      continuous and
      differentiable on                                                     of is null.

354. [T] The average density of a solid is       355. Show that the moments
        defined as                                       of inertia
                                                         about the
      where         and are the volume and                             and
                                                         respectively, of the unit
      the mass of respectively. If the                   ball centered at the origin
                                                         whose density is
      density of the unit ball centered at the

      origin is                          use a         are the same. Round your
                                                       answer to two decimal
      CAS to find its average density. Round           places.

      your answer to three decimal places.

5.7 Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals

Learning Objectives

      5.7.1 Determine the image of a region under a given transformation of variables.
      5.7.2 Compute the Jacobian of a given transformation.
      5.7.3 Evaluate a double integral using a change of variables.
      5.7.4 Evaluate a triple integral using a change of variables.

Recall from Substitution Rule (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/1-5-substitution) the method of

integration by substitution. When evaluating an integral such as                      we substitute

Then              or                and the limits change to                and                         Thus the

integral becomes                   and this integral is much simpler to evaluate. In other words, when solving integration

problems, we make appropriate substitutions to obtain an integral that becomes much simpler than the original
integral.

We also used this idea when we transformed double integrals in rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates and
transformed triple integrals in rectangular coordinates to cylindrical or spherical coordinates to make the computations
simpler. More generally,

Where                               and     and    satisfy             and

A similar result occurs in double integrals when we substitute                                          and

                      Then we get
546 5 · Multiple Integration

where the domain is replaced by the domain in polar coordinates. Generally, the function that we use to change the
variables to make the integration simpler is called a transformation or mapping.

Planar Transformations

A planar transformation          is a function that transforms a region in one plane into a region       in another plane by a
change of variables. Both                                                                                in the
                                 and are subsets of  For example, Figure 5.71 shows a region

transformed into a region        in the        by the change of variables              and               or sometimes we

write         and                        We shall typically assume that each of these functions has continuous first partial

derivatives, which means                 and exist and are also continuous. The need for this requirement will become

clear soon.

             Figure 5.71 The transformation of a region in the                 into a region in the

Definition

A transformation                 defined as             is said to be a one-to-one transformation if no two points

map to the same image point.

To show that is a one-to-one transformation, we assume                                 and show that as a consequence we

obtain                           If the transformation is one-to-one in the domain     then the inverse  exists with the

domain such that                 and         are identity functions.

Figure 5.71 shows the mapping                     where and are related to and by the equations              and
                  The region is the domain of  and the region is the range of also known as the image of  under the

transformation

EXAMPLE 5.65

Determining How the Transformation Works

Suppose a transformation is defined as                 where                                  Find the image of the polar
                                                           to a region                            Show that is a one-to-one
rectangle                                      in the                          in the

transformation in and find

Solution

Since varies from 0 to 1 in the              we have a circular disc of radius 0 to 1 in the             Because varies from 0
                                                                                                                    (Figure 5.72).
to in the                     we end up getting a quarter circle of radius in the first quadrant of the

Hence is a quarter circle bounded by                   in the first quadrant.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 547

               Figure 5.72 A rectangle in the           is mapped into a quarter circle in the

In order to show that is a one-to-one transformation, assume           and show as a consequence that
                           In this case, we have

Dividing, we obtain

since the cotangent function is one-one function in the interval  Also, since               we have
                                                                                    into
               Therefore,                  and is a one-to-one transformation from
                                                                                            Thus
To find        solve for in terms of       We already know that        and

               is defined as               and

EXAMPLE 5.66

Finding the Image under

Let the transformation be defined by                    where     and          Find the image of the triangle in

the            with vertices          and

     Solution

The triangle and its image are shown in Figure 5.73. To understand how the sides of the triangle transform, call the side

that joins     and            side the side that joins  and       side and the side that joins  and  side
548 5 · Multiple Integration

              Figure 5.73 A triangular region in the          is transformed into an image in the

For the side                     transforms to                so this is the side that joins             and

For the side                     transforms to                so this is the side that joins           and

For the side                     transforms to                (hence                so this is the side that makes the

upper half of the parabolic arc joining      and

All the points in the entire region of the triangle in the    are mapped inside the parabolic region in the

     5.43 Let a transformation be defined as                  where                           Find the image of the

              rectangle                                       from the      after the transformation into a region in

              the                Show that is a one-to-one transformation and find

Jacobians

Recall that we mentioned near the beginning of this section that each of the component functions must have continuous

first partial derivatives, which means that           and exist and are also continuous. A transformation that has this

property is called a transformation (here denotes continuous). Let                                          where

and                  be a one-to-one transformation. We want to see how it transforms a small rectangular region

units by units, in the           (see the following figure).

              Figure 5.74 A small rectangle in the            is transformed into a region in the

Since                and         we have the position vector                                  of the image of the point

       Suppose that              is the coordinate of the point at the lower left corner that mapped to

The line      maps to the image curve with vector function                  and the tangent vector at         to the image

curve is

Similarly, the line           maps to the image curve with vector function  and the tangent vector at              to the
image curve is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 549

Now, note that

Similarly,

This allows us to estimate the area of the image by finding the area of the parallelogram formed by the sides

and         By using the cross product of these two vectors by adding the k component as the area of the image

(refer to The Cross Product) is approximately                                  In determinant form, the cross

product is

Since           we have

Definition

The Jacobian of the      transformation                         is denoted by  and is defined by the
determinant

Using the definition, we have
Note that the Jacobian is frequently denoted simply by
Note also that

Hence the notation       suggests that we can write the Jacobian determinant with partials of  in the first

row and partials of in the second row.

EXAMPLE 5.67

Finding the Jacobian
Find the Jacobian of the transformation given in Example 5.65.

     Solution                                                   where  and     Thus the Jacobian is
The transformation in the example is
550 5 · Multiple Integration

EXAMPLE 5.68

Finding the Jacobian
Find the Jacobian of the transformation given in Example 5.66.

     Solution                                                   where          and          Thus the Jacobian is
The transformation in the example is

5.44 Find the Jacobian of the transformation given in the previous checkpoint:

Change of Variables for Double Integrals

We have already seen that, under the change of variables                       where        and          a small
                                                                                    in the
region in the                    is related to the area formed by the product               by the approximation

Now let's go back to the definition of double integral for a minute:

                                                          

Referring to Figure 5.75, observe that we divided the region in the            into small subrectangles  and we let the

subrectangles in the               be the images of under the transformation

               Figure 5.75 The subrectangles  in the        transform into subrectangles in the
Then the double integral becomes

                                                          

Notice this is exactly the double Riemann sum for the integral

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 551

Theorem 5.14

Change of Variables for Double Integrals

Let                     where       and               be a one-to-one transformation, with a nonzero Jacobian on

the interior of the region in the         it maps     into the region in the            If is continuous on then

With this theorem for double integrals, we can change the variables from          to    in a double integral simply by

replacing

when we use the substitutions             and         and then change the limits of integration accordingly. This

change of variables often makes any computations much simpler.

EXAMPLE 5.69

Changing Variables from Rectangular to Polar Coordinates
Consider the integral

Use the change of variables         and               and find the resulting integral.

Solution

First we need to find the region of integration. This region is bounded below by        and above by                  (see

the following figure).

                        Figure 5.76 Changing a region from rectangular to polar coordinates.

Squaring and collecting terms, we find that the region is the upper half of the circle                that is,

                 In polar coordinates, the circle is            so the region of integration in polar coordinates is

bounded by                     and

The Jacobian is                as shown in Example 5.67. Since  we have

The integrand           changes to in polar coordinates, so the double iterated integral is
552 5 · Multiple Integration

5.45 Considering the integral                                             use the change of variables               and

                              and find the resulting integral.

Notice in the next example that the region over which we are to integrate may suggest a suitable transformation for the
integration. This is a common and important situation.

EXAMPLE 5.70

Changing Variables

Consider the integral            where is the parallelogram joining the points                                      and

(Figure 5.77). Make appropriate changes of variables, and write the resulting integral.

                                 Figure 5.77 The region of integration for the given integral.

     Solution
First, we need to understand the region over which we are to integrate. The sides of the parallelogram are

                                                                                            (Figure 5.78). Another way to look at them is
                                                    and

Clearly the parallelogram is bounded by the lines                                        and

Notice that if we were to make   and                                      then the limits on the integral would be                         and

To solve for and              we multiply the first equation by           and subtract the second equation,
the first, we get                                    Then we have                  Moreover, if we simply subtract the second equation from
                                                                     and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 553

                  Figure 5.78 A parallelogram in the  that we want to transform by a change in variables.
Thus, we can choose the transformation

and compute the Jacobian  We have

Therefore,            Also, the original integrand becomes

Therefore, by the use of the transformation the integral changes to

which is much simpler to compute. In fact, it is easily found to be zero. And this is just one example of why we transform
integrals like this.

5.46 Make appropriate changes of variables in the integral                                  where is the trapezoid
             bounded by the lines                                         Write the resulting integral.

We are ready to give a problem-solving strategy for change of variables.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Change of Variables

1. Sketch the region given by the problem in the      and then write the equations of the curves that form the

boundary.

2. Depending on the region or the integrand, choose the transformations   and

3. Determine the new limits of integration in the

4. Find the Jacobian

5. In the integrand, replace the variables to obtain the new integrand.
554 5 · Multiple Integration

6. Replace                    or   whichever occurs, by

In the next example, we find a substitution that makes the integrand much simpler to compute.

EXAMPLE 5.71

Evaluating an Integral

Using the change of variables                     and       evaluate the integral

where is the region bounded by the lines                    and          and the curves        and                 (see

the first region in Figure 5.79).

     Solution
As before, first find the region and picture the transformation so it becomes easier to obtain the limits of integration
after the transformations are made (Figure 5.79).

       Figure 5.79 Transforming the region into the region to simplify the computation of an integral.

Given         and                  we have             and            and hence the transformation to use is
and
                                  The lines       and            become  and             respectively. The curves

              become                         and       respectively.

Thus we can describe the region (see the second region Figure 5.79) as

The Jacobian for this transformation is

Therefore, by using the transformation the integral changes to

Doing the evaluation, we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 555

5.47 Using the substitutions             and             evaluate the integral          where is the

            region bounded by the lines

Change of Variables for Triple Integrals

Changing variables in triple integrals works in exactly the same way. Cylindrical and spherical coordinate substitutions
are special cases of this method, which we demonstrate here.

Suppose that is a region in       and is mapped to in    (Figure 5.80) by a one-to-one
transformation               where                        and

                   Figure 5.80 A region in               mapped to a region in

Then any function         defined on can be thought of as another function      that is defined on

Now we need to define the Jacobian for three variables.

Definition

The Jacobian determinant      in three variables is defined as follows:

This is also the same as

  The Jacobian can also be simply denoted as

With the transformations and the Jacobian for three variables, we are ready to establish the theorem that describes
change of variables for triple integrals.
556 5 · Multiple Integration

Theorem 5.15

Change of Variables for Triple Integrals

Let                              where                      and        be a one-to-one
                                                                       into the region in the
transformation, with a nonzero Jacobian, that maps the region in the

As in the two-dimensional case, if is continuous on then

Let us now see how changes in triple integrals for cylindrical and spherical coordinates are affected by this theorem. We
expect to obtain the same formulas as in Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates.

EXAMPLE 5.72

Obtaining Formulas in Triple Integrals for Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates
Derive the formula in triple integrals for

a. cylindrical and
b. spherical coordinates.

Solution

a. For cylindrical coordinates, the transformation is                  from the Cartesian  to the Cartesian

              (Figure 5.81). Here                      and       The Jacobian for the transformation is

     We know that             so          Then the triple integral is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 557

Figure 5.81 The transformation from rectangular coordinates to cylindrical coordinates can be treated as a change

of variables from region in  to region in

b. For spherical coordinates, the transformation is            from the Cartesian  to the Cartesian
                    (Figure 5.82). Here
                                                          and  The Jacobian for the
     transformation is

Expanding the determinant with respect to the third row:

Since  we must have          Thus
558 5 · Multiple Integration

    Figure 5.82 The transformation from rectangular coordinates to spherical coordinates can be treated as a change of

    variables from region in               to region in

    Then the triple integral becomes

Let's try another example with a different substitution.

  EXAMPLE 5.73

Evaluating a Triple Integral with a Change of Variables
Evaluate the triple integral

in            by using the transformation

Then integrate over an appropriate region in

    Solution

As before, some kind of sketch of the region in           over which we have to perform the integration can help

identify the region in           (Figure 5.83). Clearly in  is bounded by the planes

                                                 We also know that we have to use

                                      for the transformations. We need to solve for  Here we find that

              and

Using elementary algebra, we can find the corresponding surfaces for the region      and the limits of integration in
                It is convenient to list these equations in a table.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 559

Equations in       for the  Corresponding equations in                 for the  Limits for the integration in
           region                                  region

                   Figure 5.83 The region in               is transformed to region in

Now we can calculate the Jacobian for the transformation:

The function to be integrated becomes
We are now ready to put everything together and complete the problem.
560 5 · Multiple Integration

      5.48 Let be the region in                defined by

             Evaluate                                by using the transformation       and

        SECTION 5.7 EXERCISES                                           on the region

In the following exercises, the function        is the image of under
bounded by the unit square is given, where

a. Justify that the function is a transformation.
b. Find the images of the vertices of the unit square through the function
c. Determine the image of the unit square and graph it.

356.                             357.                              358.

359.                             360.                              361.

In the following exercises, determine whether the transformations                 are one-to-one or not.

362.                             is the  363.
        rectangle of vertices                    is the triangle of vertices

364.                             is the        365.                           where
        square of vertices
                                                     is the triangle of vertices

366.                                     367.

      where                                    where       

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 561

In the following exercises, the transformations  are one-to-one. Find their related inverse transformations

368.             where  369.                                          370.

                              where                                         where  and

371.                    372.                                                373.
        where                                                                       where
                              where                                                            
      and                                                                                   are given. Find the

In the following exercises, the transformation                        and the region

region 

374.                                             375.
        where                                            where

376.                          377.
        where                         where

In the following exercises, find the Jacobian of the transformation.

378.                    379.                                          380.

381.                    382.                                          383.

384.                          385.

386.                    387.
562 5 · Multiple Integration

388. The triangular region        with the vertices  389. The triangular region with the
        following figure.        is shown in the
                                                            vertices                        is shown

                                                            in the following figure.

                                                            a. Find a transformation

a. Find a transformation                             where  where     and are real numbers
                                                      and   with            such that
              and are real numbers with
                       such that                                                      and

                                                            b. Use the transformation to find the

b. Use the transformation        to find the area           area      of the region
              of the region

In the following exercises, use the transformation                    to evaluate the integrals on the parallelogram of

vertices                         shown in the following figure.

                                 390.                                                 391.

Access for free at openstax.org
In the following exercises, use the transformation                                                         5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 563

determined by the lines                             and                               to evaluate the integrals on the square
                                                                                shown in the following figure.

                         392.                                                                       393.
                                                                                to evaluate the integrals on the region bounded by
In the following exercises, use the transformation

the ellipse              shown in the following figure.

                                                                          394.          to evaluate the integrals on the trapezoidal
                                                                                shown in the following figure.
395.

In the following exercises, use the transformation
region determined by the points

                         396.
564 5 · Multiple Integration                     398. The circular annulus sector

       397.

                                                 bounded by the circles

                                                         and

                                                                the line

                                                         and the          is

                                                 shown in the following figure.

                                                 Find a transformation from a

                                                 rectangular region in the

                                                         to the region in the

                                                         Graph

399. The solid bounded by the circular400. Show that

cylinder                         and the planes

                                 is

shown in the following figure. Find a

transformation from a cylindrical                where is a continuous function on        and

box in                        to the solid in    is the region bounded by the ellipse

401. Show that                                           402. [T] Find the area of the
                                                                 region bounded by the
        where is a continuous function on                        curves
        the region bounded by the ellipsoid
                                                 and is           and              by using the

                                                                  transformation

                                                                  and              Use a

                                                                  computer algebra system

                                                                  (CAS) to graph the

                                                                  boundary curves of the

                                                                  region

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.7 · Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals 565

403. [T] Find the area of the    404. Evaluate the triple integral 405. Evaluate the triple integral
        region bounded by the
        curves

and           by using the          by using the                                  by using the transformation
                                    transformation
transformation

and           Use a CAS to

graph the boundary

curves of the region

406. A transformation               407. The transformation                         408. [T] Use the results of the
                                                                                            previous exercise to find
                                                                                            the region in the
                                                                                                         whose image
        of the form                             where                                       through a rotation of
                                                                                            angle is the region
                                                                  is called a
                                                                                            enclosed by the ellipse
where                  are real                 rotation of angle Show that                                     Use a CAS

numbers, is called linear.                      the inverse transformation of               to answer the following
                                                                                            questions.
Show that a linear                              satisfies              where                 a. Graph the region
                                                                                             b. Evaluate the integral
transformation for which                        is the rotation of angle
                                                                                                                         Round
              maps

parallelograms to

parallelograms.

                                                                                           your answer to two
                                                                                           decimal places.

409. [T] The transformations                           410. [T] The transformation

                        defined by                                    

                                                           of the form                     where

and                    are called reflections                     is a positive real number, is called a

about the                      origin, and the             stretch if         and a compression if

line          respectively.                                               in the    Use a CAS to

a. Find the image of the region                            evaluate the integral

      in the           through the                                                         on the

      transformation

b. Use a CAS to graph                                      solid

c. Evaluate the integral                                   by considering the compression
                                                                                              defined by

      by using a CAS. Round your answer to                                and       Round your
      two decimal places.
                                                           answer to four decimal places.
566 5 · Multiple Integration

411. [T] The transformation                  412. Use the transformation,

                                                     and spherical coordinates
                                                     to show that the volume
where         is a real number, is called a          of a region bounded by
                                                     the spheroid
shear in the                     The
                                                                             is
transformation,



where         is a real number, is called a

shear in the

a. Find transformations

b. Find the image of the trapezoidal

region bounded by

                                 and

through the transformation

c. Use a CAS to graph the image in
     the

d. Find the area of the region by using
     the area of region

413. Find the volume of a             414. [T] Lamé ovals (or superellipses) are415. [T] Lamé ovals have been
        football whose shape is a
                                      plane curves of equations                     consistently used by
        spheroid
                                                            where a, b, and n designers and architects.
        whose length from tip to
        tip is inches and             are positive real numbers.                    For instance, Gerald
        circumference at the                                                        Robinson, a Canadian
        center is inches. Round       a. Use a CAS to graph the regions             architect, has designed a
        your answer to two                                                          parking garage in a
        decimal places.                      bounded by Lamé ovals for              shopping center in
                                                                                    Peterborough, Ontario, in
                                                            and                     the shape of a
                                                                                    superellipse of the
                                             respectively.                          equation

                                      b. Find the transformations that map                                    with

                                             the region bounded by the

                                             Lamé oval            also called

                                             a squircle and graphed in the

                                             following figure, into the unit disk.

                                                                                    and             Use a

                                                                                    CAS to find an

                                                                                    approximation of the area

                                                                                    of the parking garage in

                                                                                    the case        yards,

                                                                                              yards, and

                                                                                              .

                                      c. Use a CAS to find an
                                           approximation of the area
                                           of the region bounded by
                                                              Round your answer
                                           to two decimal places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5 · Chapter Review 567

Chapter Review                             over the region in the -plane is defined as the limit of a double Riemann

Key Terms

double integral of the function

    sum,
                                         

double Riemann sum of the function         over a rectangular region is                   where is divided

into smaller subrectangles and              is an arbitrary point in

Fubini's theorem if    is a function of two variables that is continuous over a rectangular region
                                             then the double integral of over the region equals an iterated integral,
                    

improper double integral a double integral over an unbounded region or of an unbounded function

iterated integral for a function           over the region is

a.

b.

where         and are any real numbers and

Jacobian the Jacobian  in two variables is a             determinant:

the Jacobian           in three variables is a  determinant:

one-to-one transformation a transformation                    defined as                 is said to be one-to-one if no two

points map to the same image point

planar transformation a function that transforms a region in one plane into a region in another plane by a

change of variables

polar rectangle the region enclosed between the circles        and        and the angles  and    it is

described as

radius of gyration the distance from an object's center of mass to its axis of rotation

transformation a function that transforms a region in one plane into a region in another plane by a change of

variables

triple integral the triple integral of a continuous function          over a rectangular solid box is the limit of a

Riemann sum for a function of three variables, if this limit exists

triple integral in cylindrical coordinates the limit of a triple Riemann sum, provided the following limit exists:

                                                            
triple integral in spherical coordinates the limit of a triple Riemann sum, provided the following limit exists:

                                                      
Type I a region in the -plane is Type I if it lies between two vertical lines and the graphs of two continuous
568 5 · Chapter Review

    functions     and            -plane is Type II if it lies between two horizontal lines and the graphs of two continuous
Type II a region   in the

    functions

Key Equations

Double integral 

Iterated integral                or

Average value of a function of two variables

Iterated integral over a Type I region

Iterated integral over a Type II region

Double integral over a
polar rectangular  
region
Double integral over a
general polar region

Triple integral
                                 

Triple integral in cylindrical
coordinates
Triple integral in spherical
coordinates

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     5 · Chapter Review 569

Mass of a lamina                                                  
                                                                            
                                                                             
Moment about the x-axis
                                                           

Moment about the y-axis
                                                           

Center of mass of a lamina                                   and

Key Concepts

5.1 Double Integrals over Rectangular Regions

· We can use a double Riemann sum to approximate the volume of a solid bounded above by a function of two
    variables over a rectangular region. By taking the limit, this becomes a double integral representing the volume of
    the solid.

· Properties of double integral are useful to simplify computation and find bounds on their values.
· We can use Fubini's theorem to write and evaluate a double integral as an iterated integral.
· Double integrals are used to calculate the area of a region, the volume under a surface, and the average value of a

    function of two variables over a rectangular region.

5.2 Double Integrals over General Regions

· A general bounded region on the plane is a region that can be enclosed inside a rectangular region. We can use
    this idea to define a double integral over a general bounded region.

· To evaluate an iterated integral of a function over a general nonrectangular region, we sketch the region and
    express it as a Type I or as a Type II region or as a union of several Type I or Type II regions that overlap only on
    their boundaries.

· We can use double integrals to find volumes, areas, and average values of a function over general regions, similarly
    to calculations over rectangular regions.

· We can use Fubini's theorem for improper integrals to evaluate some types of improper integrals.

5.3 Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates

· To apply a double integral to a situation with circular symmetry, it is often convenient to use a double integral in

polar coordinates. We can apply these double integrals over a polar rectangular region or a general polar region,

using an iterated integral similar to those used with rectangular double integrals.

· The area in polar coordinates becomes

· Use                       and                              to convert an integral in rectangular coordinates to an integral in

polar coordinates.

· Use  and                       to convert an integral in polar coordinates to an integral in rectangular

coordinates, if needed.

· To find the volume in polar coordinates bounded above by a surface           over a region on the -plane, use

a double integral in polar coordinates.

5.4 Triple Integrals

· To compute a triple integral we use Fubini's theorem, which states that if         is continuous on a rectangular

box                              then
570 5 · Chapter Review

      and is also equal to any of the other five possible orderings for the iterated triple integral.
  · To compute the volume of a general solid bounded region we use the triple integral

  · Interchanging the order of the iterated integrals does not change the answer. As a matter of fact, interchanging the
      order of integration can help simplify the computation.

  · To compute the average value of a function over a general three-dimensional region, we use

5.5 Triple Integrals in Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates

  · To evaluate a triple integral in cylindrical coordinates, use the iterated integral

· To evaluate a triple integral in spherical coordinates, use the iterated integral

5.6 Calculating Centers of Mass and Moments of Inertia

Finding the mass, center of mass, moments, and moments of inertia in double integrals:

· For a lamina with a density function        at any point  in the plane, the mass is

· The moments about the           and    are

· The center of mass is given by

· The center of mass becomes the centroid of the plane when the density is constant.

· The moments of inertia about the                 and the origin are

Finding the mass, center of mass, moments, and moments of inertia in triple integrals:

· For a solid object with a density function       at any point           in space, the mass is

· The moments about the             the            and the           are

· The center of mass is given by

· The center of mass becomes the centroid of the solid when the density is constant.

· The moments of inertia about the            the           and the       are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5 · Chapter Review 571

5.7 Change of Variables in Multiple Integrals

· A transformation is a function that transforms a region in one plane (space) into a region in another plane

      (space) by a change of variables.

· A transformation                 defined as                                             is said to be a one-to-one

      transformation if no two points map to the same image point.

· If is continuous on then

· If is continuous on then

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

416.                                                      417. Fubini's theorem can be
418. The integral                                                 extended to three
                                                                  dimensions, as long as
                                                                  is continuous in all
                                                                  variables.

                                   419. The Jacobian of the
                                           transformation

                                         is given by

      represents the volume of
      a right cone.

Evaluate the following integrals.

420.

421.                                                  422.

                                                                      where    is a disk of
                                                                      radius  centered at the
                                                                      origin

423.                               424.
572 5 · Chapter Review

425.  where                                                               426.

427.                                  428.

For the following problems, find the specified area or volume.

429. The area of region               430. The volume of the solid              431. The volume of the solid
        enclosed by one petal of              that lies between the                     bounded by the cylinder
                                              paraboloid                                                    and from
                                              and the plane                                     and

432. The volume of the
        intersection between two
        spheres of radius 1, the
        top whose center is
                       and the
        bottom, which is centered
        at

For the following problems, find the center of mass of the region.

433.  on the circle                   434.                         in           435.              on the

      with radius in the first              the region bounded by                     inverted cone with radius

      quadrant only.                                 and                              and height

436. The volume an ice cream
        cone that is given by the
        solid above

                                 and

        below

The following problems examine Mount Holly in the state of Michigan. Mount Holly is a landfill that was converted into a

ski resort. The shape of Mount Holly can be approximated by a right circular cone of height       ft and radius       ft.

437. If the compacted trash           438. In reality, it is very likely
        used to build Mount Holly
        on average has a density            that the trash at the
                       find the
        amount of work required             bottom of Mount Holly
        to build the mountain.
                                            has become more

                                            compacted with all the

                                            weight of the above trash.

                                            Consider a density

                                            function with respect to

                                            height: the density at the

                                            top of the mountain is still

                                            density  and the

                                            density increases. Every

                                            feet deeper, the

                                            density doubles. What is

                                            the total weight of Mount

                                            Holly?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5 · Chapter Review 573

The following problems consider the temperature and density of Earth's layers.

439. [T] The temperature of Earth's          440. [T] The density of Earth's
        layers is exhibited in the table             layers is displayed in the
        below. Use your calculator to fit a          table below. Using your
        polynomial of degree to the                  calculator or a computer
        temperature along the radius of              program, find the best-fit
        the Earth. Then find the average             quadratic equation to the
        temperature of Earth. (Hint: begin           density. Using this equation,
        at in the inner core and increase            find the total mass of Earth.
        outward toward the surface)

            Depth      Temperature           Layer        Depth   Density
             from                                          from   (g/cm3)
    Layer   center                                        center
             (km)                                          (km)

    Rocky 0 to         0                     Inner
                                             Core

    Crust 40

    Upper 40 to 870                          Outer
    Mantle 150                               Core

                                             Mantle

    Mantle 400 to 870                        Upper
                  650                        Mantle

    Inner 650 to 870                         Crust
    Mantel 2700

    Molten  2890       4300                  Source:
    Outer   to         7200                  http://hyperphysics.phy-
    Core    5150                             astr.gsu.edu/hbase/geophys/
                                             earthstruct.html

    Inner   5150
    Core    to
            6378

    Source:
    http://www.enchantedlearning.com/
    subjects/astronomy/planets/earth/
    Inside.shtml

The following problems concern the Theorem of Pappus (see Moments and Centers of Mass (http://openstax.org/books/

calculus-volume-2/pages/2-6-moments-and-centers-of-mass) for a refresher), a method for calculating volume using

centroids. Assuming a region when you revolve around the        the volume is given by  and when you

revolve around the  the volume is given by                where is the area of Consider the region bounded

by          and above

441. Find the volume when       442. Find the volume when
        you revolve the region          you revolve the region
        around the                      around the
574 5 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                    6 · Introduction 575

6  VECTOR CALCULUS

Figure 6.1 Hurricanes form from rotating winds driven by warm temperatures over the ocean. Meteorologists forecast
the motion of hurricanes by studying the rotating vector fields of their wind velocity. Shown is Cyclone Catarina in the
South Atlantic Ocean in 2004, as seen from the International Space Station. (credit: modification of work by NASA)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Vector Fields
  6.2 Line Integrals
  6.3 Conservative Vector Fields
  6.4 Green's Theorem
  6.5 Divergence and Curl
  6.6 Surface Integrals
  6.7 Stokes' Theorem
  6.8 The Divergence Theorem

      Introduction

Hurricanes are huge storms that can produce tremendous amounts of damage to life and property, especially when they
reach land. Predicting where and when they will strike and how strong the winds will be is of great importance for
preparing for protection or evacuation. Scientists rely on studies of rotational vector fields for their forecasts (see
Example 6.3).

In this chapter, we learn to model new kinds of integrals over fields such as magnetic fields, gravitational fields, or
velocity fields. We also learn how to calculate the work done on a charged particle traveling through a magnetic field, the
work done on a particle with mass traveling through a gravitational field, and the volume per unit time of water flowing
through a net dropped in a river.

All these applications are based on the concept of a vector field, which we explore in this chapter. Vector fields have
many applications because they can be used to model real fields such as electromagnetic or gravitational fields. A deep
understanding of physics or engineering is impossible without an understanding of vector fields. Furthermore, vector
fields have mathematical properties that are worthy of study in their own right. In particular, vector fields can be used to
develop several higher-dimensional versions of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.
576 6 · Vector Calculus

    6.1 Vector Fields

      Learning Objectives

             6.1.1 Recognize a vector field in a plane or in space.
             6.1.2 Sketch a vector field from a given equation.
             6.1.3 Identify a conservative field and its associated potential function.
       Vector fields are an important tool for describing many physical concepts, such as gravitation and electromagnetism,
       which affect the behavior of objects over a large region of a plane or of space. They are also useful for dealing with large-
       scale behavior such as atmospheric storms or deep-sea ocean currents. In this section, we examine the basic definitions
       and graphs of vector fields so we can study them in more detail in the rest of this chapter.

     Examples of Vector Fields

       How can we model the gravitational force exerted by multiple astronomical objects? How can we model the velocity of
       water particles on the surface of a river? Figure 6.2 gives visual representations of such phenomena.
       Figure 6.2(a) shows a gravitational field exerted by two astronomical objects, such as a star and a planet or a planet and
       a moon. At any point in the figure, the vector associated with a point gives the net gravitational force exerted by the two
       objects on an object of unit mass. The vectors of largest magnitude in the figure are the vectors closest to the larger
       object. The larger object has greater mass, so it exerts a gravitational force of greater magnitude than the smaller object.
       Figure 6.2(b) shows the velocity of a river at points on its surface. The vector associated with a given point on the river's
       surface gives the velocity of the water at that point. Since the vectors to the left of the figure are small in magnitude, the
       water is flowing slowly on that part of the surface. As the water moves from left to right, it encounters some rapids
       around a rock. The speed of the water increases, and a whirlpool occurs in part of the rapids.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.1 · Vector Fields 577

Figure 6.2 (a) The gravitational field exerted by two astronomical bodies on a small object. (b) The vector velocity field of
water on the surface of a river shows the varied speeds of water. Red indicates that the magnitude of the vector is
greater, so the water flows more quickly; blue indicates a lesser magnitude and a slower speed of water flow.

Each figure illustrates an example of a vector field. Intuitively, a vector field is a map of vectors. In this section, we study

vector fields in  and 

Definition                                                           to each point  of a subset D of 

A vector field in  is an assignment of a two-dimensional vector      to each point  of a subset D of

The subset D is the domain of the vector field.

A vector field F in  is an assignment of a three-dimensional vector
 The subset D is the domain of the vector field.

Vector Fields in 

A vector field in  can be represented in either of two equivalent ways. The first way is to use a vector with components

that are two-variable functions:

                                                                                    (6.1)
578 6 · Vector Calculus

The second way is to use the standard unit vectors:

                                                                                                                        (6.2)

A vector field is said to be continuous if its component functions are continuous.

EXAMPLE 6.1

Finding a Vector Associated with a Given Point

Let                              be a vector field in   Note that this is an example of a continuous vector field

since both component functions are continuous. What vector is associated with point

     Solution
Substitute the point values for x and y:

     6.1 Let                              be a vector field in  What vector is associated with the point

Drawing a Vector Field

We can now represent a vector field in terms of its components of functions or unit vectors, but representing it visually

by sketching it is more complex because the domain of a vector field is in  as is the range. Therefore the "graph" of a

vector field in  lives in four-dimensional space. Since we cannot represent four-dimensional space visually, we instead

draw vector fields in  in a plane itself. To do this, draw the vector associated with a given point at the point in a plane.

For example, suppose the vector associated with point   is              Then, we would draw vector  at point

We should plot enough vectors to see the general shape, but not so many that the sketch becomes a jumbled mess. If
we were to plot the image vector at each point in the region, it would fill the region completely and is useless. Instead,
we can choose points at the intersections of grid lines and plot a sample of several vectors from each quadrant of a

rectangular coordinate system in 

There are two types of vector fields in  on which this chapter focuses: radial fields and rotational fields. Radial fields

model certain gravitational fields and energy source fields, and rotational fields model the movement of a fluid in a

vortex. In a radial field, all vectors either point directly toward or directly away from the origin. Furthermore, the

magnitude of any vector depends only on its distance from the origin. In a radial field, the vector located at point        is

perpendicular to the circle centered at the origin that contains point  and all other vectors on this circle have the

same magnitude.

EXAMPLE 6.2

Drawing a Radial Vector Field
Sketch the vector field

     Solution
To sketch this vector field, choose a sample of points from each quadrant and compute the corresponding vector. The
following table gives a representative sample of points in a plane and the corresponding vectors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.1 · Vector Fields 579

Figure 6.3(a) shows the vector field. To see that each vector is perpendicular to the corresponding circle, Figure 6.3(b)
shows circles overlain on the vector field.
580 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.3 (a) A visual representation of the radial vector field         (b) The radial vector field

                         with overlaid circles. Notice that each vector is perpendicular to the circle on which it is located.

6.2 Draw the radial field

In contrast to radial fields, in a rotational field, the vector at point  is tangent (not perpendicular) to a circle with

radius                   In a standard rotational field, all vectors point either in a clockwise direction or in a

counterclockwise direction, and the magnitude of a vector depends only on its distance from the origin. Both of the

following examples are clockwise rotational fields, and we see from their visual representations that the vectors appear

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   6.1 · Vector Fields 581

to rotate around the origin.
  EXAMPLE 6.3

Chapter Opener: Drawing a Rotational Vector Field

                                                   Figure 6.4 (credit: modification of work by NASA)

Sketch the vector field

     Solution
Create a table (see the one that follows) using a representative sample of points in a plane and their corresponding
vectors. Figure 6.6 shows the resulting vector field.
582 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.5 (a) A visual representation of vector field            (b) Vector field             with circles

centered at the origin. (c) Vector  is perpendicular to radial vector  at point

Analysis

Note that vector                    points clockwise and is perpendicular to radial vector     (We can verify this
                                                                                            Furthermore, vector
assertion by computing the dot product of the two vectors:

has length                       Thus, we have a complete description of this rotational vector field: the vector associated with

point       is the vector with length r tangent to the circle with radius r, and it points in the clockwise direction.

Sketches such as that in Figure 6.6 are often used to analyze major storm systems, including hurricanes and cyclones. In
the northern hemisphere, storms rotate counterclockwise; in the southern hemisphere, storms rotate clockwise. (This is
an effect caused by Earth's rotation about its axis and is called the Coriolis Effect.)

  EXAMPLE 6.4                                                           is zero for any point     Therefore, each
                                                                       the magnitude of        goes to infinity. To
Sketching a Vector Field
Sketch vector field

     Solution
To visualize this vector field, first note that the dot product
vector is tangent to the circle on which it is located. Also, as
see this, note that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         6.1 · Vector Fields 583

Since         as           then                      as                   This vector field looks similar to the vector

field in Example 6.3, but in this case the magnitudes of the vectors close to the origin are large. The table below shows a
sample of points and the corresponding vectors, and Figure 6.6 shows the vector field. Note that this vector field models

the whirlpool motion of the river in Figure 6.2(b). The domain of this vector field is all of  except for point

Figure 6.6 A visual representation of vector field                        This vector field could be used to model
whirlpool motion of a fluid.

6.3 Sketch vector field                             Is the vector field radial, rotational, or neither?

EXAMPLE 6.5

Velocity Field of a Fluid                   is the velocity field of a fluid. How fast is the fluid moving at point
Suppose that

(Assume the units of speed are meters per second.)

     Solution                               substitute the point into v:
To find the velocity of the fluid at point
584 6 · Vector Calculus

The speed of the fluid at          is the magnitude of this vector. Therefore, the speed is        m/sec.

    6.4 Vector field                          models the velocity of water on the surface of a river. What is the speed of
               the water at point     Use meters per second as the units.

We have examined vector fields that contain vectors of various magnitudes, but just as we have unit vectors, we can also
have a unit vector field. A vector field F is a unit vector field if the magnitude of each vector in the field is 1. In a unit
vector field, the only relevant information is the direction of each vector.

    EXAMPLE 6.6

A Unit Vector Field

Show that the vector field            is a unit vector field.

     Solution
To show that F is a unit field, we must show that the magnitude of each vector is 1. Note that

Therefore, F is a unit vector field.

    6.5 Is vector field               a unit vector field?

Why are unit vector fields important? Suppose we are studying the flow of a fluid, and we care only about the direction in
which the fluid is flowing at a given point. In this case, the speed of the fluid (which is the magnitude of the
corresponding velocity vector) is irrelevant, because all we care about is the direction of each vector. Therefore, the unit
vector field associated with velocity is the field we would study.

If                       is a vector field, then the corresponding unit vector field is            Notice that if

                         is the vector field from Example 6.3, then the magnitude of F is          and therefore the
corresponding unit vector field is the field G from the previous example.

If F is a vector field, then the process of dividing F by its magnitude to form unit vector field  is called normalizing
the field F.

Vector Fields in 

We have seen several examples of vector fields in  let's now turn our attention to vector fields in  These vector

fields can be used to model gravitational or electromagnetic fields, and they can also be used to model fluid flow or heat
flow in three dimensions. A two-dimensional vector field can really only model the movement of water on a two-
dimensional slice of a river (such as the river's surface). Since a river flows through three spatial dimensions, to model
the flow of the entire depth of the river, we need a vector field in three dimensions.

The extra dimension of a three-dimensional field can make vector fields in  more difficult to visualize, but the idea is
the same. To visualize a vector field in  plot enough vectors to show the overall shape. We can use a similar method

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              6.1 · Vector Fields 585

to visualizing a vector field in  by choosing points in each octant.

Just as with vector fields in  we can represent vector fields in      with component functions. We simply need an extra
                                                                                                                                        (6.3)
component function for the extra dimension. We write either

or
                                                                                                                                                                   (6.4)

EXAMPLE 6.7

Sketching a Vector Field in Three Dimensions
Describe vector field

     Solution

For this vector field, the x and y components are constant, so every point in  has an associated vector with x and y

components equal to one. To visualize F, we first consider what the field looks like in the xy-plane. In the xy-plane,

Hence, each point of the form  has vector     associated with it. For points not in the xy-plane but slightly

above it, the associated vector has a small but positive z component, and therefore the associated vector points slightly

upward. For points that are far above the xy-plane, the z component is large, so the vector is almost vertical. Figure 6.7

shows this vector field.

                          Figure 6.7 A visual representation of vector field

6.6 Sketch vector field

In the next example, we explore one of the classic cases of a three-dimensional vector field: a gravitational field.

EXAMPLE 6.8

Describing a Gravitational Vector Field       where G is the universal gravitational constant. It describes the
Newton's law of gravitation states that

gravitational field exerted by an object (object 1) of mass located at the origin on another object (object 2) of mass

located at point          Field F denotes the gravitational force that object 1 exerts on object 2, r is the distance between

the two objects, and indicates the unit vector from the first object to the second. The minus sign shows that the

gravitational force attracts toward the origin; that is, the force of object 1 is attractive. Sketch the vector field associated

with this equation.
586 6 · Vector Calculus

     Solution                                                                          The unit vector
Since object 1 is located at the origin, the distance between the objects is given by

from object 1 to object 2 is     and hence                        Therefore, gravitational vector field F exerted by

object 1 on object 2 is

This is an example of a radial vector field in 

Figure 6.8 shows what this gravitational field looks like for a large mass at the origin. Note that the magnitudes of the
vectors increase as the vectors get closer to the origin.

Figure 6.8 A visual representation of gravitational vector field                       for a large mass at the origin.

6.7 The mass of asteroid 1 is 750,000 kg and the mass of asteroid 2 is 130,000 kg. Assume asteroid 1 is located

at the origin, and asteroid 2 is located at                       measured in units of 10 to the eighth power

kilometers. Given that the universal gravitational constant is                         find the

gravitational force vector that asteroid 1 exerts on asteroid 2.

Gradient Fields

In this section, we study a special kind of vector field called a gradient field or a conservative field. These vector fields
are extremely important in physics because they can be used to model physical systems in which energy is conserved.
Gravitational fields and electric fields associated with a static charge are examples of gradient fields.

Recall that if is a (scalar) function of x and y, then the gradient of is

We can see from the form in which the gradient is written that    is a vector field in  Similarly, if is a function of x,
y, and z, then the gradient of is

The gradient of a three-variable function is a vector field in 

A gradient field is a vector field that can be written as the gradient of a function, and we have the following definition.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.1 · Vector Fields 587

Definition

A vector field in  or in  is a gradient field if there exists a scalar function such that

EXAMPLE 6.9

Sketching a Gradient Vector Field
Use technology to plot the gradient vector field of

     Solution                  To sketch the vector field, use a computer algebra system such as
The gradient of is
Mathematica. Figure 6.9 shows

                       Figure 6.9 The gradient vector field is where

6.8 Use technology to plot the gradient vector field of

Consider the function          from Example 6.9. Figure 6.11 shows the level curves of this function overlaid on

the function's gradient vector field. The gradient vectors are perpendicular to the level curves, and the magnitudes of the

vectors get larger as the level curves get closer together, because closely grouped level curves indicate the graph is

steep, and the magnitude of the gradient vector is the largest value of the directional derivative. Therefore, you can see

the local steepness of a graph by investigating the corresponding function's gradient field.
588 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.10 The gradient field of            and several level curves of             Notice that as the level curves get closer

together, the magnitude of the gradient vectors increases.

As we learned earlier, a vector field is a conservative vector field, or a gradient field if there exists a scalar function

such that                In this situation, is called a potential function for Conservative vector fields arise in many

applications, particularly in physics. The reason such fields are called conservative is that they model forces of physical

systems in which energy is conserved. We study conservative vector fields in more detail later in this chapter.

You might notice that, in some applications, a potential function for F is defined instead as a function such that
               This is the case for certain contexts in physics, for example.

EXAMPLE 6.10

Verifying a Potential Function

Is                               a potential function for vector field

     Solution                      We have
We need to confirm whether

Therefore,               and is a potential function for

    6.9 Is                                   a potential function for

EXAMPLE 6.11

Verifying a Potential Function

The velocity of a fluid is modeled by field                             Verify that       is a potential function

for v.

    Solution

To show that is a potential function, we must show that                 Note that    and  Therefore,

                         and is a potential function for v (Figure 6.11).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           6.1 · Vector Fields 589

             Figure 6.11 Velocity field             has a potential function and is a conservative field.

6.10 Verify that                         is a potential function for velocity field

If F is a conservative vector field, then there is at least one potential function such that       But, could there be

more than one potential function? If so, is there any relationship between two potential functions for the same vector

field? Before answering these questions, let's recall some facts from single-variable calculus to guide our intuition. Recall

that if  is an integrable function, then k has infinitely many antiderivatives. Furthermore, if F and G are both

antiderivatives of k, then F and G differ only by a constant. That is, there is some number C such that

Now let be a conservative vector field and let and g be potential functions for   . Since the gradient is like a
derivative, being conservative means that is "integrable" with "antiderivatives"   and g. Therefore, if the analogy with
single-variable calculus is valid, we expect there is some constant C such that                    The next theorem says
that this is indeed the case.

To state the next theorem with precision, we need to assume the domain of the vector field is connected and open. To be
connected means if and are any two points in the domain, then you can walk from to along a path that
stays entirely inside the domain.

Theorem 6.1

Uniqueness of Potential Functions

Let F be a conservative vector field on an open and connected domain and let  and g be functions such that

and          Then, there is a constant C such that

Proof                                                                                         Let          then we have

Since and g are both potential functions for F, then
           We would like to show that h is a constant function.

Assume h is a function of x and y (the logic of this proof extends to any number of independent variables). Since

we have      and  The expression                    implies that h is a constant function with respect to x--that is,

             for some function k1. Similarly,          implies                for some function k2. Therefore, function

h depends only on y and also depends only on x. Thus,            for some constant C on the connected domain of F.

Note that we really do need connectedness at this point; if the domain of F came in two separate pieces, then k could be

a constant C1 on one piece but could be a different constant C2 on the other piece. Since                  we have that
590 6 · Vector Calculus

                as desired.


Conservative vector fields also have a special property called the cross-partial property. This property helps test whether
a given vector field is conservative.

Theorem 6.2

The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector Fields
Let F be a vector field in two or three dimensions such that the component functions of F have continuous first-order
partial derivatives on the domain of F.

If                               is a conservative vector field in  then               If

                                              is a conservative vector field in  then

Proof

Since F is conservative, there is a function     such that           Therefore, by the definition of the gradient,
                                              But,
and            By Clairaut's theorem,                           and         and thus



Clairaut's theorem gives a fast proof of the cross-partial property of conservative vector fields in   just as it did for
vector fields in 

The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector Fields shows that most vector fields are not conservative. The cross-
partial property is difficult to satisfy in general, so most vector fields won't have equal cross-partials.

EXAMPLE 6.12

Showing a Vector Field Is Not Conservative    is not conservative.
Show that rotational vector field

     Solution

Let                              If F is conservative, then the cross-partials would be equal--that is, would equal

     Therefore, to show that F is not conservative, check that       Since                 and         the vector field is not

conservative.

     6.11 Show that the vector field                            is not conservative.

EXAMPLE 6.13

Showing a Vector Field Is Not Conservative

Is vector field                        conservative?

     Solution

Let                              and                  If F is conservative, then all three cross-partial equations will be

satisfied--that is, if F is conservative, then would equal           would equal and would equal Note that

                                 so the first two necessary equalities hold. However,           and    so

Therefore, is not conservative.

     6.12 Is vector field                     conservative?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.1 · Vector Fields 591

We conclude this section with a word of warning: The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector Fields says that if F is
conservative, then F has the cross-partial property. The theorem does not say that, if F has the cross-partial property,
then F is conservative (the converse of an implication is not logically equivalent to the original implication). In other
words, The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector Fields can only help determine that a field is not conservative; it

does not let you conclude that a vector field is conservative. For example, consider vector field

This field has the cross-partial property, so it is natural to try to use The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector
Fields to conclude this vector field is conservative. However, this is a misapplication of the theorem. We learn later how to
conclude that F is conservative.

        SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES

1. The domain of vector field
                      is a set of points

             in a plane, and the
    range of F is a set of what in
    the plane?

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false.

2. Vector field                 is  3. Vector field  is               4. Vector field                is

     a gradient field for both

                      and                constant in direction and            neither a radial field nor a
                                         magnitude on a unit circle.          rotation.

For the following exercises, describe each vector field by drawing some of its vectors.

5. [T]                              6. [T]                            7. [T]

8. [T]                              9. [T]                            10. [T]

11. [T]                             12. [T]                           13. [T]

14. [T]

For the following exercises, find the gradient vector field of each function

15.                                 16.                               17.

18.                                 19.                               20.

21. What is vector field

     with a value at      that is

     of unit length and points

     toward

For the following exercises, write formulas for the vector fields with the given properties.

22. All vectors are parallel to     23. All vectors point toward the  24. All vectors are of unit
      the x-axis and all vectors          origin and have constant          length and are
      on a vertical line have the         length.                           perpendicular to the
      same magnitude.                                                       position vector at that
                                                                            point.
592 6 · Vector Calculus

25. Give a formula                        26. Is vector field
                                                a gradient field?
     for the vector field in a plane

     that has the properties that

             at          and that at

     any other point          F is

     tangent to circle

                         and

     points in the clockwise

     direction with magnitude

27. Find a formula for vector
      field

     given the fact that for all

     points              F points toward

     the origin and

For the following exercises, assume that an electric field in the xy-plane caused by an infinite line of charge along the

x-axis is a gradient field with potential function                             where  is a constant and is a

reference distance at which the potential is assumed to be zero.

28. Find the components of                29. Show that the electric field
      the electric field in the x-              at a point in the xy-plane is
      and y-directions, where                   directed outward from the
                                                origin and has magnitude

A flow line (or streamline) of a vector field is a curve such that                    If represents the velocity field of

a moving particle, then the flow lines are paths taken by the particle. Therefore, flow lines are tangent to the vector field.

For the following exercises, show that the given curve is a flow line of the given velocity vector field

30.                                                                31.

For the following exercises, let                    and                        Match F, G, and H with their graphs.

32.                                       33.                                  34.

     For the following exercises, let               and                        Match the vector fields with their graphs in

a.
b.
c.
d.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.2 · Line Integrals 593

35.                                    36.                              37.

38.

6.2 Line Integrals

Learning Objectives

      6.2.1 Calculate a scalar line integral along a curve.
      6.2.2 Calculate a vector line integral along an oriented curve in space.
      6.2.3 Use a line integral to compute the work done in moving an object along a curve in a vector field.
      6.2.4 Describe the flux and circulation of a vector field.

We are familiar with single-variable integrals of the form              where the domain of integration is an interval

     Such an interval can be thought of as a curve in the xy-plane, since the interval defines a line segment with

endpoints  and        --in other words, a line segment located on the x-axis. Suppose we want to integrate over any

curve in the plane, not just over a line segment on the x-axis. Such a task requires a new kind of integral, called a line

integral.

Line integrals have many applications to engineering and physics. They also allow us to make several useful
generalizations of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. And, they are closely connected to the properties of vector
fields, as we shall see.

Scalar Line Integrals

A line integral gives us the ability to integrate multivariable functions and vector fields over arbitrary curves in a plane
or in space. There are two types of line integrals: scalar line integrals and vector line integrals. Scalar line integrals are
integrals of a scalar function over a curve in a plane or in space. Vector line integrals are integrals of a vector field over a
curve in a plane or in space. Let's look at scalar line integrals first.

A scalar line integral is defined just as a single-variable integral is defined, except that for a scalar line integral, the
integrand is a function of more than one variable and the domain of integration is a curve in a plane or in space, as
opposed to a curve on the x-axis.

For a scalar line integral, we let C be a smooth curve in a plane or in space and let be a function with a domain that

includes C. We chop the curve into small pieces. For each piece, we choose point P in that piece and evaluate at P. (We

can do this because all the points in the curve are in the domain of ) We multiply          by the arc length of the piece

     add the product  over all the pieces, and then let the arc length of the pieces shrink to zero by taking a limit.

The result is the scalar line integral of the function over the curve.

For a formal description of a scalar line integral, let be a smooth curve in space given by the parameterization

                                  Let              be a function with a domain that includes curve To define the line

integral of the function over we begin as most definitions of an integral begin: we chop the curve into small pieces.

Partition the parameter interval    into n subintervals                 of equal width for  where              and

(Figure 6.12). Let be a value in the ith interval           Denote the endpoints of                by

Points Pi divide curve into pieces                 with lengths                      respectively. Let denote the
594 6 · Vector Calculus

endpoint of              for     Now, we evaluate the function at point for                               Note that is in piece

and therefore is in the domain of Multiply             by the length of which gives the area of the "sheet" with

base and height                  This is analogous to using rectangles to approximate area in a single-variable integral. Now,

we form the sum                  Note the similarity of this sum versus a Riemann sum; in fact, this definition is a

generalization of a Riemann sum to arbitrary curves in space. Just as with Riemann sums and integrals of form
                   we define an integral by letting the width of the pieces of the curve shrink to zero by taking a limit. The

result is the scalar line integral of along s

Figure 6.12 Curve C has been divided into n pieces, and a point inside each piece has been chosen.

You may have noticed a difference between this definition of a scalar line integral and a single-variable integral. In this

definition, the arc lengths                   aren't necessarily the same; in the definition of a single-variable integral, the

curve in the x-axis is partitioned into pieces of equal length. This difference does not have any effect in the limit. As we

shrink the arc lengths to zero, their values become close enough that any small difference becomes irrelevant.

Definition

Let be a function with a domain that includes the smooth curve that is parameterized by
                                                   The scalar line integral of along is

                                                                                                                                                            (6.5)
                                                                                    

if this limit exists and are defined as in the previous paragraphs). If C is a planar curve, then C can be

represented by the parametric equations                                             and  If C is smooth and  is a function of

two variables, then the scalar line integral of along C is defined similarly as

                                                                                  
if this limit exists.

If is a continuous function on a smooth curve C, then                               always exists. Since  is defined as a limit of

Riemann sums, the continuity of is enough to guarantee the existence of the limit, just as the integral

exists if g is continuous over

Before looking at how to compute a line integral, we need to examine the geometry captured by these integrals.

Suppose that                  for all points  on a smooth planar curve Imagine taking curve and projecting it "up"

to the surface defined by        thereby creating a new curve that lies in the graph of                      (Figure 6.13). Now we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             6.2 · Line Integrals 595

drop a "sheet" from down to the xy-plane. The area of this sheet is          If       for some points in

then the value of           is the area above the xy-plane less the area below the xy-plane. (Note the similarity with

integrals of the form

                            Figure 6.13 The area of the blue sheet is

From this geometry, we can see that line integral           does not depend on the parameterization of C. As

long as the curve is traversed exactly once by the parameterization, the area of the sheet formed by the function and the
curve is the same. This same kind of geometric argument can be extended to show that the line integral of a three-
variable function over a curve in space does not depend on the parameterization of the curve.

EXAMPLE 6.14

Finding the Value of a Line Integral

Find the value of integral  where     is the upper half of the unit circle.

     Solution               Figure 6.14 shows the graph of             curve C, and the sheet formed by them. Notice
The integrand is

that this sheet has the same area as a rectangle with width and length 2. Therefore,

Figure 6.14 The sheet that is formed by the upper half of the unit circle in a plane and the graph of

To see that                 using the definition of line integral, we let be a parameterization of C. Then,
596 6 · Vector Calculus

       for any number in the domain of r. Therefore,

                                                           
                                                                 
                                                                   

     6.13 Find the value of                       where is the curve parameterized by

Note that in a scalar line integral, the integration is done with respect to arc length s, which can make a scalar line

integral difficult to calculate. To make the calculations easier, we can translate     to an integral with a variable of

integration that is t.

Let                              for    be a parameterization of Since we are assuming that is smooth,

                                 is continuous for all in  In particular,              and  exist for all in

According to the arc length formula, we have

If width                 is small, then function                                       is almost constant over the
interval          Therefore,                                                                                                   (6.6)

and we have

See Figure 6.15.

Figure 6.15 If we zoom in on the curve enough by making    very small, then the corresponding piece of the curve is
approximately linear.

Note that

                                      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.2 · Line Integrals 597

In other words, as the widths of intervals  shrink to zero, the sum                      converges to the

integral                    Therefore, we have the following theorem.

Theorem 6.3

Evaluating a Scalar Line Integral                                          with parameterization
Let be a continuous function with a domain that includes the smooth curve
Then

                                                                                                            (6.7)

Although we have labeled Equation 6.6 as an equation, it is more accurately considered an approximation because we

can show that the left-hand side of Equation 6.6 approaches the right-hand side as   In other words, letting the

widths of the pieces shrink to zero makes the right-hand sum arbitrarily close to the left-hand sum. Since

we obtain the following theorem, which we use to compute scalar line integrals.                             (6.8)
  Theorem 6.4
  Scalar Line Integral Calculation
  Let be a continuous function with a domain that includes the smooth curve C with parameterization
                                                     Then

  Similarly,

if C is a planar curve and is a function of two variables.

Note that a consequence of this theorem is the equation                In other words, the change in arc length can be
viewed as a change in the t domain, scaled by the magnitude of vector

EXAMPLE 6.15

Evaluating a Line Integral                  where is part of the helix parameterized by
Find the value of integral

Solution

To compute a scalar line integral, we start by converting the variable of integration from arc length s to t. Then, we can

use Equation 6.8 to compute the integral with respect to t. Note that                                and

Therefore,
598 6 · Vector Calculus

Notice that Equation 6.8 translated the original difficult line integral into a manageable single-variable integral. Since
we have

6.14 Evaluate                           where C is the curve with parameterization

EXAMPLE 6.16

Independence of Parameterization

Find the value of integral              where is part of the helix parameterized by

                                                         Notice that this function and curve are the same as in the previous example; the
only difference is that the curve has been reparameterized so that time runs twice as fast.

     Solution
As with the previous example, we use Equation 6.8 to compute the integral with respect to t. Note that

                                                               and

so we have

Notice that this agrees with the answer in the previous example. Changing the parameterization did not change the
value of the line integral. Scalar line integrals are independent of parameterization, as long as the curve is traversed
exactly once by the parameterization.

6.15 Evaluate line integral                         where is the line with parameterization
                                        Reparameterize C with parameterization
            recalculate line integral
            the value of the integral.                  and notice that the change of parameterization had no effect on

Now that we can evaluate line integrals, we can use them to calculate arc length. If  then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         6.2 · Line Integrals 599

                                    
                                         
                                         

Therefore,    is the arc length of

EXAMPLE 6.17

Calculating Arc Length                                                                                   Find the
A wire has a shape that can be modeled with the parameterization
length of the wire.

Solution

The length of the wire is given by  where C is the curve with parameterization r. Therefore,

       6.16 Find the length of a wire with parameterization

Vector Line Integrals

The second type of line integrals are vector line integrals, in which we integrate along a curve through a vector field. For
example, let

be a continuous vector field in  that represents a force on a particle, and let C be a smooth curve in   contained in

the domain of How would we compute the work done by in moving a particle along C?

To answer this question, first note that a particle could travel in two directions along a curve: a forward direction and a
backward direction. The work done by the vector field depends on the direction in which the particle is moving.
Therefore, we must specify a direction along curve C; such a specified direction is called an orientation of a curve. The
specified direction is the positive direction along C; the opposite direction is the negative direction along C. When C has
been given an orientation, C is called an oriented curve (Figure 6.16). The work done on the particle depends on the
direction along the curve in which the particle is moving.

A closed curve is one for which there exists a parameterization   such that                   and the curve is

traversed exactly once. In other words, the parameterization is one-to-one on the domain
600 6 · Vector Calculus

                         Figure 6.16 (a) An oriented curve between two points. (b) A closed oriented curve.

Let be a parameterization of C for  such that the curve is traversed exactly once by the particle and the

particle moves in the positive direction along C. Divide the parameter interval            into n subintervals

                         of equal width. Denote the endpoints of                           by  Points Pi divide C into n

pieces. Denote the length of the piece from Pi-1 to Pi by         For each i, choose a value in the subinterval

Then, the endpoint of              is a point in the piece of C between  and Pi (Figure 6.17). If is small, then as the

particle moves from                to along C, it moves approximately in the direction of      the unit tangent vector at the

endpoint of              Let denote the endpoint of        Then, the work done by the force vector field in moving the

particle from            to Pi is                    so the total work done along C is

Figure 6.17 Curve C is divided into n pieces, and a point inside each piece is chosen. The dot product of any tangent
vector in the ith piece with the corresponding vector F is approximated by

Letting the arc length of the pieces of C get arbitrarily small by taking a limit as        gives us the work done by the

field in moving the particle along C. Therefore, the work done by F in moving the particle in the positive direction along C
is defined as

which gives us the concept of a vector line integral.
  Definition
  The vector line integral of vector field F along oriented smooth curve C is

                                                                             
  if that limit exists.

With scalar line integrals, neither the orientation nor the parameterization of the curve matters. As long as the curve is
traversed exactly once by the parameterization, the value of the line integral is unchanged. With vector line integrals, the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6.2 · Line Integrals 601

orientation of the curve does matter. If we think of the line integral as computing work, then this makes sense: if you
hike up a mountain, then the gravitational force of Earth does negative work on you. If you walk down the mountain by
the exact same path, then Earth's gravitational force does positive work on you. In other words, reversing the path
changes the work value from negative to positive in this case. Note that if C is an oriented curve, then we let -C represent
the same curve but with opposite orientation.

As with scalar line integrals, it is easier to compute a vector line integral if we express it in terms of the parameterization

function r and the variable t. To translate the integral         in terms of t, note that unit tangent vector T along C is

given by          (assuming               Since                  as we saw when discussing scalar line integrals, we
have

Thus, we have the following formula for computing vector line integrals:

Because of Equation 6.9, we often use the notation        for the line integral                  (6.9)
                                                                                          and
If                          then dr denotes vector differential

    EXAMPLE 6.18

Evaluating a Vector Line Integral

Find the value of integral         where  is the semicircle parameterized by

     Solution
We can use Equation 6.9 to convert the variable of integration from s to t. We then have

Therefore,

See Figure 6.18.
602 6 · Vector Calculus

          Figure 6.18 This figure shows curve                                       in vector field

EXAMPLE 6.19

Reversing Orientation

Find the value of integral       where is the semicircle parameterized by                                  and

Solution

Notice that this is the same problem as Example 6.18, except the orientation of the curve has been traversed. In this

example, the parameterization starts at        and ends at                          By Equation 6.9,

Notice that this is the negative of the answer in Example 6.18. It makes sense that this answer is negative because the
orientation of the curve goes against the "flow" of the vector field.

Let C be an oriented curve and let -C denote the same curve but with the orientation reversed. Then, the previous two
examples illustrate the following fact:

That is, reversing the orientation of a curve changes the sign of a line integral.

6.17 Let                         be a vector field and let C be the curve with parameterization       for  Which

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                6.2 · Line Integrals 603

    is greater:              or

Another standard notation for integral        is                               In this notation, P, Q, and R are functions, and

we think of dr as vector              To justify this convention, recall that
Therefore,

If                     then                   which implies that                     Therefore

                                                                                                (6.10)

    EXAMPLE 6.20

Finding the Value of an Integral of the Form

Find the value of integral                    where C is the curve parameterized by

     Solution
As with our previous examples, to compute this line integral we should perform a change of variables to write everything
in terms of t. In this case, Equation 6.10 allows us to make this change:

    6.18 Find the value of                             where is the curve parameterized by

We have learned how to integrate smooth oriented curves. Now, suppose that C is an oriented curve that is not smooth,

but can be written as the union of finitely many smooth curves. In this case, we say that C is a piecewise smooth curve.

To be precise, curve C is piecewise smooth if C can be written as a union of n smooth curves    such that the

endpoint of is the starting point of    (Figure 6.19). When curves satisfy the condition that the endpoint of is

the starting point of        we write their union as

                             Figure 6.19 The union of  is a piecewise smooth curve.
604 6 · Vector Calculus

The next theorem summarizes several key properties of vector line integrals.

Theorem 6.5

Properties of Vector Line Integrals
Let F and G be continuous vector fields with domains that include the oriented smooth curve C. Then

  i.

ii.                              where k is a constant

iii.

iv. Suppose instead that C is a piecewise smooth curve in the domains of F and G, where

      and                   are smooth curves such that the endpoint of is the starting point of  Then

Notice the similarities between these items and the properties of single-variable integrals. Properties i. and ii. say that
line integrals are linear, which is true of single-variable integrals as well. Property iii. says that reversing the orientation of
a curve changes the sign of the integral. If we think of the integral as computing the work done on a particle traveling
along C, then this makes sense. If the particle moves backward rather than forward, then the value of the work done has

the opposite sign. This is analogous to the equation                          Finally, if

                                 are intervals, then

which is analogous to property iv.

EXAMPLE 6.21

Using Properties to Compute a Vector Line Integral

Find the value of integral          where C is the rectangle (oriented counterclockwise) in a plane with vertices

                                 and where              (Figure 6.20).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.2 · Line Integrals 605

                             Figure 6.20 Rectangle and vector field for Example 6.21.

    Solution

Note that curve C is the union of its four sides, and each side is smooth. Therefore C is piecewise smooth. Let

represent the side from  to  let represent the side from  to   let represent the side from

to  and let represent the side from  to  (Figure 6.20). Then,

We want to compute each of the four integrals on the right-hand side using Equation 6.8. Before doing this, we need a
parameterization of each side of the rectangle. Here are four parameterizations (note that they traverse C
counterclockwise):

Therefore,

Notice that the value of this integral is positive, which should not be surprising. As we move along curve C1 from left to
right, our movement flows in the general direction of the vector field itself. At any point along C1, the tangent vector to
the curve and the corresponding vector in the field form an angle that is less than 90°. Therefore, the tangent vector and
the force vector have a positive dot product all along C1, and the line integral will have positive value.

The calculations for the three other line integrals are done similarly:
606 6 · Vector Calculus

and

Thus, we have

     6.19 Calculate line integral      where F is vector field           and C is a triangle with vertices

                                 and   oriented counterclockwise.

Applications of Line Integrals

Scalar line integrals have many applications. They can be used to calculate the length or mass of a wire, the surface area
of a sheet of a given height, or the electric potential of a charged wire given a linear charge density. Vector line integrals
are extremely useful in physics. They can be used to calculate the work done on a particle as it moves through a force
field, or the flow rate of a fluid across a curve. Here, we calculate the mass of a wire using a scalar line integral and the
work done by a force using a vector line integral.

Suppose that a piece of wire is modeled by curve C in space. The mass per unit length (the linear density) of the wire is a

continuous function              We can calculate the total mass of the wire using the scalar line integral

The reason is that mass is density multiplied by length, and therefore the density of a small piece of the wire can be

approximated by                        for some point       in the piece. Letting the length of the pieces shrink to zero

with a limit yields the line integral

EXAMPLE 6.22

Calculating the Mass of a Wire

Calculate the mass of a spring in the shape of a curve parameterized by  with a density

function given by                      kg/m (Figure 6.21).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.2 · Line Integrals 607

                                                         Figure 6.21 The wire from Example 6.22.  where C is the
     Solution
To calculate the mass of the spring, we must find the value of the scalar line integral
given helix. To calculate this integral, we write it in terms of t using Equation 6.8:

Therefore, the mass is  kg.

6.20 Calculate the mass of a spring in the shape of a helix parameterized by

with a density function given by                                   kg/m.

When we first defined vector line integrals, we used the concept of work to motivate the definition. Therefore, it is not
surprising that calculating the work done by a vector field representing a force is a standard use of vector line integrals.
Recall that if an object moves along curve C in force field F, then the work required to move the object is given by

  EXAMPLE 6.23                                                            along path

Calculating Work
How much work is required to move an object in vector force field

               See Figure 6.22.
608 6 · Vector Calculus                                           To do this, we use Equation 6.9:

            Solution
       Let C denote the given path. We need to find the value of

                                 Figure 6.22 The curve and vector field for Example 6.23.

Flux and Circulation

We close this section by discussing two key concepts related to line integrals: flux across a plane curve and circulation
along a plane curve. Flux is used in applications to calculate fluid flow across a curve, and the concept of circulation is
important for characterizing conservative gradient fields in terms of line integrals. Both these concepts are used heavily
throughout the rest of this chapter. The idea of flux is especially important for Green's theorem, and in higher
dimensions for Stokes' theorem and the divergence theorem.

Let C be a plane curve and let F be a vector field in the plane. Imagine C is a membrane across which fluid flows, but C
does not impede the flow of the fluid. In other words, C is an idealized membrane invisible to the fluid. Suppose F
represents the velocity field of the fluid. How could we quantify the rate at which the fluid is crossing C?

Recall that the line integral of F along C is  --in other words, the line integral is the dot product of the vector

field with the unit tangential vector with respect to arc length. If we replace the unit tangential vector with unit normal

vector and instead compute integral            we determine the flux across C. To be precise, the definition of

integral  is the same as integral              except the T in the Riemann sum is replaced with N. Therefore,

the flux across C is defined as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.2 · Line Integrals 609

                                                        

where and are defined as they were for integral           Therefore, a flux integral is an integral that is

perpendicular to a vector line integral, because N and T are perpendicular vectors.

If F is a velocity field of a fluid and C is a curve that represents a membrane, then the flux of F across C is the quantity of
fluid flowing across C per unit time, or the rate of flow.

More formally, let C be a plane curve parameterized by                               Let                    be the

vector that is normal to C at the endpoint of and points to the right as we traverse C in the positive direction (Figure

6.23). Then,  is the unit normal vector to C at the endpoint of that points to the right as we traverse C.

Definition

The flux of F across C is line integral

       Figure 6.23 The flux of vector field F across curve C is computed by an integral similar to a vector line integral.

We now give a formula for calculating the flux across a curve. This formula is analogous to the formula used to calculate
a vector line integral (see Equation 6.9).

Theorem 6.6

Calculating Flux across a Curve                                                                             Let
Let F be a vector field and let C be a smooth curve with parameterization                                               (6.11)

                                The flux of F across C is

Proof

The proof of Equation 6.11 is similar to the proof of Equation 6.8. Before deriving the formula, note that
610 6 · Vector Calculus

                                               Therefore,

                                            across a unit circle oriented counterclockwise (Figure 6.24).

  EXAMPLE 6.24

Flux across a Curve
Calculate the flux of

                                            Figure 6.24 A unit circle in vector field

     Solution

To compute the flux, we first need a parameterization of the unit circle. We can use the standard parameterization

                                 The normal vector to a unit circle is                 Therefore, the flux is

     6.21 Calculate the flux of                across the line segment from               to               where the curve is
                 oriented from left to right.

Let                              be a two-dimensional vector field. Recall that integral                   is sometimes written as

                         Analogously, flux     is sometimes written in the notation                          because the unit
                                                                                              by 90° results in vector
normal vector N is perpendicular to the unit tangent T. Rotating the vector
                Therefore, the line integral in Example 6.21 can be written as

Now that we have defined flux, we can turn our attention to circulation. The line integral of vector field F along an
oriented closed curve is called the circulation of F along C. Circulation line integrals have their own notation:

The circle on the integral symbol denotes that C is "circular" in that it has no endpoints. Example 6.18 shows a calculation
of circulation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.2 · Line Integrals 611

To see where the term circulation comes from and what it measures, let v represent the velocity field of a fluid and let C

be an oriented closed curve. At a particular point P, the closer the direction of v(P) is to the direction of T(P), the larger

the value of the dot product             The maximum value of                 occurs when the two vectors are pointing in

the exact same direction; the minimum value of            occurs when the two vectors are pointing in opposite

directions. Thus, the value of the circulation  measures the tendency of the fluid to move in the direction of C.

EXAMPLE 6.25

Calculating Circulation

Let            be the vector field from Example 6.16 and let C represent the unit circle oriented counterclockwise.

Calculate the circulation of F along C.

     Solution

We use the standard parameterization of the unit circle:                      Then,

and                          Therefore, the circulation of F along C is

Notice that the circulation is positive. The reason for this is that the orientation of C "flows" with the direction of F. At any
point along the circle, the tangent vector and the vector from F form an angle of less than 90°, and therefore the
corresponding dot product is positive.

In Example 6.25, what if we had oriented the unit circle clockwise? We denote the unit circle oriented clockwise by
Then

Notice that the circulation is negative in this case. The reason for this is that the orientation of the curve flows against
the direction of F.

     6.22 Calculate the circulation of                                   along a unit circle oriented counterclockwise.

EXAMPLE 6.26

Calculating Work

Calculate the work done on a particle that traverses circle C of radius 2 centered at the origin, oriented counterclockwise,

by field                     Assume the particle starts its movement at

     Solution

The work done by F on the particle is the circulation of F along C:           We use the parameterization

                              for C. Then,                               and         Therefore, the

circulation of F along C is
612 6 · Vector Calculus

The force field does zero work on the particle.

Notice that the circulation of F along C is zero. Furthermore, notice that since F is the gradient of  F

is conservative. We prove in a later section that under certain broad conditions, the circulation of a conservative vector
field along a closed curve is zero.

6.23 Calculate the work done by field                              on a particle that traverses the unit circle. Assume the
             particle begins its movement at

SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES

39. True or False? Line integral        40. True or False? Vector             41. True or False?
                                              functions
                         is equal to a                       and

      definite integral if C is a                            define the same
      smooth curve defined on                 oriented curve.

              and if function is
      continuous on some region
      that contains curve C.

42. True or False? A piecewise          43. True or False? If C is given
      smooth curve C consists of              by
      a finite number of smooth
      curves that are joined                  then
      together end to end.

For the following exercises, use a computer algebra system (CAS) to evaluate the line integrals over the indicated path.

44. [T]                                 45. [T]                               46. [T]
      from (0, 1, 0) to (1, 0, 0)                                                   when
                                                             when

47. [T] Evaluate                        48. [T] Evaluate

where C is the right half of            where C is the line

circle                   and is         segment from         to

traversed in the clockwise              (1, 2).

direction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            6.2 · Line Integrals 613

For the following exercises, find the work done.

49. Find the work done by vector              50. Find the work done by a          51. Find the work done by force
      field                                         person weighing 150 lb               field
                                                    walking exactly one
      on a particle moving along a line             revolution up a circular,      on a particle as it moves along
      segment that goes from                        spiral staircase of radius 3
      to                                            ft if the person rises 10 ft.  the helix

                                                                                                                            from

                                                                                   point      to point

52. Find the work done by                53. Find the work done by force           54. Find the mass of a wire in
      vector field                                                                       the shape of a circle of
                                in             in moving an object along                 radius 2 centered at (3, 4)
      moving an object along                   curve                                     with linear mass density
      path C, the straight line
      which joins points (1, 0)                where                                       57. Evaluate
      and (0, 1).
                                                                                                  over the line segment from
For the following exercises, evaluate the line integrals.                                                    to

55. Evaluate        where                56. Evaluate
                                               where is the helix
              and C is the

     part of the graph of

              from                  to

58. Let C be the line segment            59. [T] Use a computer algebra         60. [T] Use a computer algebra
      from point (0, 1, 1) to point            system to evaluate the line            system to evaluate the line
      (2, 2, 3). Evaluate line                                                        integral
      integral                                 integral                               over the path C given by
                                                                                                             where
61. [T] Use a CAS to evaluate            where C is the arc of the
      line integral                                                               63. [T] Use a CAS to evaluate
                            over path C  parabola                  from                                         where C is
      given by
      where                              (-5, -3) to (0, 2).

64. [T] Use a CAS to evaluate            62. Evaluate line integral
                   where C is
                                         where C lies along the x-axis
                                         from

In the following exercises, find the work done by force field F on an object moving along the indicated path.

65.                                      66.

                                              C: counterclockwise

                                              around the triangle with

                                              vertices (0, 0), (1, 0), and (1,

                                              1)
614 6 · Vector Calculus

67.                                                      68. Let F be vector field

                                                         Compute the work of integral       where C is
                                                         the path

69. Compute the work done by          70. Evaluate       where
      force
                                                                       and
     along path
                                      C is the segment of the
                         where        unit circle going
                                      counterclockwise from

                                              to (0, 1).

71. Force                             acts on a 72. Find the work done by vector

     particle that travels from the origin to point (1,  field

     2, 3). Calculate the work done if the particle

     travels:                                            on a particle moving along a line

     a. along the path                                   segment that goes from (1, 4, 2)

                                                         to (0, 5, 1).

          along straight-line segments joining each

          pair of endpoints;

     b. along the straight line joining the initial and

          final points.

     c. Is the work the same along the two paths?

73. How much work is required         74. A vector field is given by                75. Evaluate the line integral of
      to move an object in vector                                                         scalar function along
      field                                 Evaluate the line integral of the             parabolic path
      along the upper part of               field around a circle of unit radius          connecting the origin to
                                            traversed in a clockwise fashion.             point (1, 1).
     ellipse             from
                                      77. Find
     (2, 0) to

76. Find

     along C:            from (0, 0)  along C:           from (0,
     to (1, 3).                       0) to (1, 3).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           6.2 · Line Integrals 615

For the following exercises, use a CAS to evaluate the given line integrals.

78. [T] Evaluate                                    79. [T] Evaluate line integral  80. [T] Evaluate the integral
                                                                                                         where is a
where C is represented by                                  where, is the
                                                                                          triangle with vertices (0, 1,
                                                    arc of curve             from         2), (1, 0, 3), and
                                                            to

81. [T] Evaluate line integral           82. [T] Evaluate line integral             83. [T] Evaluate               where
                               where is                       where is the
                                                                                          and
curve             from (1, 0)                  right half of circle                       C:
toward

84. Evaluate        where                                  85. Find the line integral of

and                                     to (5, 1).         over path C defined by
C is any path from                                                   from point (0, 0, 0) to

                                                           point (2, 4, 8).

86. Find the line integral of
                               where C

      is ellipse

from

For the following exercises, find the flux.

87. Compute the flux of                  88. Let           and let C be             89. Let     and let C be
                         across a line
                                                    curve                           curve
      segment from (0, 0) to (1,
      2).                                           Find the flux across C.         Find the flux across C.

90. Let           and let C: 91. Let                                                92. Find the line integral of

                         Calculate the       Calculate flux F orientated            where C consists of two
      flux across C.                         counterclockwise across
                                             curve C:                               parts: and                     is the
93. A spring is made of a thin
      wire twisted into the shape        94. A thin wire is bent into the           intersection of cylinder
      of a circular helix                      shape of a semicircle of
      Find the mass of two turns               radius a. If the linear mass                           and plane
      of the spring if the wire has            density at point P is directly
      constant mass density.                   proportional to its distance                     from (0, 4, 3) to
                                               from the line through the
                                               endpoints, find the mass of                            is a line
                                               the wire.
                                                                                    segment from                   to

                                                                                    (0, 1, 5).

                                                                                    95. An object moves in force
                                                                                          field

                                                                                          counterclockwise from

                                                                                          point (2, 0) along elliptical

                                                                                          path        to

                                                                                                and back to point

                                                                                          (2, 0) along the x-axis. How

                                                                                          much work is done by the

                                                                                          force field on the object?
616 6 · Vector Calculus

96. Find the work done when an object      97. If an inverse force field F is
      moves in force field                       given by
                                                                            where k
      along the path given by
                                                 is a constant, find the work
                                                 done by F as its point of
                                                 application moves along
                                                 the x-axis from

98. David and Sandra plan to

      evaluate line integral

      along a path in the xy-plane
      from (0, 0) to (1, 1). The force
      field is

David chooses the path that

runs along the x-axis from (0, 0)

to (1, 0) and then runs along the

vertical line            from (1, 0) to

the final point (1, 1). Sandra

chooses the direct path along

the diagonal line                from (0,

0) to (1, 1). Whose line integral is

larger and by how much?

6.3 Conservative Vector Fields

Learning Objectives

      6.3.1 Describe simple and closed curves; define connected and simply connected regions.
      6.3.2 Explain how to find a potential function for a conservative vector field.
      6.3.3 Use the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals to evaluate a line integral in a vector field.
      6.3.4 Explain how to test a vector field to determine whether it is conservative.

In this section, we continue the study of conservative vector fields. We examine the Fundamental Theorem for Line
Integrals, which is a useful generalization of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to line integrals of conservative
vector fields. We also show how to test whether a given vector field is conservative, and determine how to build a
potential function for a vector field known to be conservative.

Curves and Regions

Before continuing our study of conservative vector fields, we need some geometric definitions. The theorems in the
subsequent sections all rely on integrating over certain kinds of curves and regions, so we develop the definitions of
those curves and regions here.

We first define two special kinds of curves: closed curves and simple curves. As we have learned, a closed curve is one
that begins and ends at the same point. A simple curve is one that does not cross itself. A curve that is both closed and
simple is a simple closed curve (Figure 6.25).

Definition

Curve C is a closed curve if there is a parameterization  of C such that the parameterization traverses

the curve exactly once and                 Curve C is a simple curve if C does not cross itself. That is, C is simple if there

exists a parameterization                  of C such that r is one-to-one over       It is possible for

meaning that the simple curve is also closed.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 617

               Figure 6.25 Types of curves that are simple or not simple and closed or not closed.

EXAMPLE 6.27

Determining Whether a Curve Is Simple and Closed  a simple closed curve?
Is the curve with parameterization

     Solution            therefore, the curve is closed. The curve is not simple, however. To see this, note that
Note that      and therefore the curve crosses itself at the origin (Figure 6.26).

               Figure 6.26 A curve that is closed but not simple.

6.24 Is the curve given by parameterization                        a simple closed curve?

Many of the theorems in this chapter relate an integral over a region to an integral over the boundary of the region,
where the region's boundary is a simple closed curve or a union of simple closed curves. To develop these theorems, we
need two geometric definitions for regions: that of a connected region and that of a simply connected region. A
connected region is one in which there is a path in the region that connects any two points that lie within that region. A
simply connected region is a connected region that does not have any holes in it. These two notions, along with the
notion of a simple closed curve, allow us to state several generalizations of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus later in
the chapter. These two definitions are valid for regions in any number of dimensions, but we are only concerned with
regions in two or three dimensions.
618 6 · Vector Calculus

         Definition
        A region D is a connected region if, for any two points and there is a path from to with a trace
        contained entirely inside D. A region D is a simply connected region if D is connected for any simple closed curve C
        that lies inside D, and curve C can be shrunk continuously to a point while staying entirely inside D. In two
         dimensions, a region is simply connected if it is connected and has no holes.
      All simply connected regions are connected, but not all connected regions are simply connected (Figure 6.27).

      Figure 6.27 Not all connected regions are simply connected. (a) Simply connected regions have no holes. (b) Connected
      regions that are not simply connected may have holes but you can still find a path in the region between any two points.
      (c) A region that is not connected has some points that cannot be connected by a path in the region.

              6.25 Is the region in the below image connected? Is the region simply connected?

    Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals

      Now that we understand some basic curves and regions, let's generalize the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to line
      integrals. Recall that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus says that if a function has an antiderivative F, then the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 619

integral of from a to b depends only on the values of F at a and at b--that is,

If we think of the gradient as a derivative, then the same theorem holds for vector line integrals. We show how this
works using a motivational example.

EXAMPLE 6.28

Evaluating a Line Integral and the Antiderivatives of the Endpoints

Let                      Calculate      where C is the line segment from (0,0) to (2,2)(Figure 6.28).

     Solution                                 Curve C can be parameterized by                          Then,
We use Equation 6.9 to calculate        which implies that

                         and

Figure 6.28 The value of line integral          depends only on the value of the potential function of F at the endpoints

of the curve.

Notice that    where                            If we think of the gradient as a derivative, then is an "antiderivative" of

F. In the case of single-variable integrals, the integral of derivative  is      where a is the start point of the

interval of integration and b is the endpoint. If vector line integrals work like single-variable integrals, then we would

expect integral F to be                 where is the endpoint of the curve of integration and is the start point.

Notice that this is the case for this example:

and

In other words, the integral of a "derivative" can be calculated by evaluating an "antiderivative" at the endpoints of the
curve and subtracting, just as for single-variable integrals.
620 6 · Vector Calculus

The following theorem says that, under certain conditions, what happened in the previous example holds for any
gradient field. The same theorem holds for vector line integrals, which we call the Fundamental Theorem for Line
Integrals.

Theorem 6.7

The Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals

Let C be a piecewise smooth curve with parameterization  Let                    be a function of two or three variables
                                                                                                                            (6.12)
with first-order partial derivatives that exist and are continuous on C. Then,

Proof

By Equation 6.9,

By the chain rule,
Therefore, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,



We know that if F is a conservative vector field, there are potential functions such that  Therefore

                                        In other words, just as with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,

computing the line integral             where F is conservative, is a two-step process: (1) find a potential function

("antiderivative") for F and (2) compute the value of at the endpoints of C and calculate their difference
                            Keep in mind, however, there is one major difference between the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

and the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals. A function of one variable that is continuous must have an
antiderivative. However, a vector field, even if it is continuous, does not need to have a potential function.

EXAMPLE 6.29

Applying the Fundamental Theorem

Calculate integral               where                   and C is a curve with parameterization

a. without using the Fundamental Theorem of Line Integrals and
b. using the Fundamental Theorem of Line Integrals.

    Solution
a. First, let's calculate the integral without the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals and instead use Equation 6.9:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 621

Integral         requires integration by parts. Let  and  Then
and

Therefore,

Thus,

b. Given that    is a potential function for F, let's use the Fundamental Theorem for Line

Integrals to calculate the integral. Note that

This calculation is much more straightforward than the calculation we did in (a). As long as we have a potential
function, calculating a line integral using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals is much easier than
calculating without the theorem.

Example 6.29 illustrates a nice feature of the Fundamental Theorem of Line Integrals: it allows us to calculate more easily
many vector line integrals. As long as we have a potential function, calculating the line integral is only a matter of
evaluating the potential function at the endpoints and subtracting.

6.26 Given that                                      is a potential function for
622 6 · Vector Calculus                                                calculate integral  where C is the lower half of

                           the unit circle oriented counterclockwise.

The Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals has two important consequences. The first consequence is that if F is

conservative and C is a closed curve, then the circulation of F along C is zero--that is,   To see why this is

true, let be a potential function for F. Since C is a closed curve, the terminal point r(b) of C is the same as the initial

point r(a) of C--that is,        Therefore, by the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals,

Recall that the reason a conservative vector field F is called "conservative" is because such vector fields model forces in
which energy is conserved. We have shown gravity to be an example of such a force. If we think of vector field F in

integral    as a gravitational field, then the equation                follows. If a particle travels along a path that

starts and ends at the same place, then the work done by gravity on the particle is zero.

The second important consequence of the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals is that line integrals of conservative
vector fields are independent of path--meaning, they depend only on the endpoints of the given curve, and do not
depend on the path between the endpoints.

Definition

Let F be a vector field with domain D. The vector field F is independent of path (or path independent) if
                                 for any paths and in D with the same initial and terminal points.

The second consequence is stated formally in the following theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 623

Theorem 6.8

Path Independence of Conservative Fields
If F is a conservative vector field, then F is independent of path.

Proof                                          be two paths in D with the same initial and terminal points (Figure 6.29).
                                                 Since F is conservative, there is a potential function for F. By the
Let D denote the domain of F and let and
Call the initial point and the terminal point
Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals,

Therefore,  and F is independent of path.


                             Figure 6.29 The vector field is conservative, and therefore independent of path.

To visualize what independence of path means, imagine three hikers climbing from base camp to the top of a mountain.
Hiker 1 takes a steep route directly from camp to the top. Hiker 2 takes a winding route that is not steep from camp to
the top. Hiker 3 starts by taking the steep route but halfway to the top decides it is too difficult for him. Therefore he
returns to camp and takes the non-steep path to the top. All three hikers are traveling along paths in a gravitational field.
Since gravity is a force in which energy is conserved, the gravitational field is conservative. By independence of path, the
total amount of work done by gravity on each of the hikers is the same because they all started in the same place and
ended in the same place. The work done by the hikers includes other factors such as friction and muscle movement, so
the total amount of energy each one expended is not the same, but the net energy expended against gravity is the same
for all three hikers.

We have shown that if F is conservative, then F is independent of path. It turns out that if the domain of F is open and
connected, then the converse is also true. That is, if F is independent of path and the domain of F is open and connected,
then F is conservative. Therefore, the set of conservative vector fields on open and connected domains is precisely the
set of vector fields independent of path.

  Theorem 6.9

  The Path Independence Test for Conservative Fields
  If F is a continuous vector field that is independent of path and the domain D of F is open and connected, then F is
  conservative.
624 6 · Vector Calculus

Proof

We prove the theorem for vector fields in  The proof for vector fields in  is similar. To show that             is

conservative, we must find a potential function for F. To that end, let X be a fixed point in D. For any point  in D,

let C be a path from X to        Define      by                              (Note that this definition of makes sense only

because F is independent of path. If F was not independent of path, then it might be possible to find another path

from X to    such that                       and in such a case              would not be a function.) We want to show

that has the property

Since domain D is open, it is possible to find a disk centered at            such that the disk is contained entirely inside D. Let

with                     be a point in that disk. Let C be a path from X to  that consists of two pieces: and The first

piece, is any path from X to     that stays inside D; is the horizontal line segment from            to         (Figure

6.30). Then

The first integral does not depend on x, so

If we parameterize by                             then

By the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus (part 1),

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 625

Figure 6.30 Here, is any path from X to                  that stays inside D, and is the horizontal line segment from  to

A similar argument using a vertical line segment rather than a horizontal line segment shows that

Therefore     and F is conservative.


We have spent a lot of time discussing and proving Path Independence of Conservative Fields and The Path
Independence Test for Conservative Fields, but we can summarize them simply: a vector field F on an open and
connected domain is conservative if and only if it is independent of path. This is important to know because conservative
vector fields are extremely important in applications, and these theorems give us a different way of viewing what it
means to be conservative using path independence.

EXAMPLE 6.30

Showing That a Vector Field Is Not Conservative                   is not conservative.
Use path independence to show that vector field

     Solution
We can indicate that F is not conservative by showing that F is not path independent. We do so by giving two different

paths, and that both start at         and end at         and yet

Let be the curve with parameterization                   and let be the curve with parameterization
                                    (Figure 6.31). Then

and
626 6 · Vector Calculus

Since                            the value of a line integral of F depends on the path between two given points. Therefore, F

is not independent of path, and F is not conservative.

                                 Figure 6.31 Curves and are both oriented from left to right.

6.27 Show that                   is not path independent by considering the line segment from                    to

                         and the piece of the graph of         that goes from    to

Conservative Vector Fields and Potential Functions

As we have learned, the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals says that if F is conservative, then calculating

has two steps: first, find a potential function for F and, second, calculate         where is the endpoint of C

and is the starting point. To use this theorem for a conservative field F, we must be able to find a potential function

for F. Therefore, we must answer the following question: Given a conservative vector field F, how do we find a function

such that                Before giving a general method for finding a potential function, let's motivate the method with an

example.

EXAMPLE 6.31

Finding a Potential Function                                   thereby showing that F is conservative.
Find a potential function for                                  and therefore

     Solution            is a potential function for F. Then,
Suppose that

Integrating the equation         with respect to x yields the equation

Notice that since we are integrating a two-variable function with respect to x, we must add a constant of integration that

is a constant with respect to x, but may still be a function of y. The equation                can be confirmed by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 627

taking the partial derivative with respect to x:

Since is a potential function for F,

and therefore

This implies that               so                  Therefore, any function of the form                             is a

potential function. Taking, in particular,        gives the potential function

To verify that is a potential function, note that

6.28 Find a potential function for

The logic of the previous example extends to finding the potential function for any conservative vector field in    Thus,

we have the following problem-solving strategy for finding potential functions:

Problem-Solving Strategy

Problem-Solving Stragegy: Finding a Potential Function for a Conservative Vector Field

1. Integrate P with respect to x. This results in a function of the form                 where        is unknown.

2. Take the partial derivative of                   with respect to y, which results in the function

3. Use the equation                                 to find

4. Integrate       to find

5. Any function of the form                                  where C is a constant, is a potential function for F.

We can adapt this strategy to find potential functions for vector fields in  as shown in the next example.

EXAMPLE 6.32

Finding a Potential Function in                                           thereby showing that is conservative.

Find a potential function for

     Solution                                       and therefore               Integrating this equation with respect to x
Suppose that is a potential function. Then,
yields the equation                               for some function g. Notice that, in this case, the constant of integration
with respect to x is a function of y and z.

Since is a potential function,

Therefore,

Integrating this function with respect to y yields

for some function    of z alone. (Notice that, because we know that g is a function of only y and z, we do not need to
write                             Therefore,
628 6 · Vector Calculus

To find , we now must only find h. Since is a potential function,

This implies that                so                      Letting  gives the potential function

To verify that is a potential function, note that

6.29 Find a potential function for

We can apply the process of finding a potential function to a gravitational force. Recall that, if an object has unit mass

and is located at the origin, then the gravitational force in  that the object exerts on another object of unit mass at the

point       is given by vector field

where G is the universal gravitational constant. In the next example, we build a potential function for F, thus confirming
what we already know: that gravity is conservative.

  EXAMPLE 6.33

Finding a Potential Function
Find a potential function for

     Solution            is a potential function. Then,  and therefore
Suppose that

To integrate this function with respect to x, we can use u-substitution. If  then               so

for some function        Therefore,

Since is a potential function for F,

Since                                 also equals
Therefore,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 629

which implies that       Thus, we can take to be any constant; in particular, we can let                   The function

is a potential function for the gravitational field F. To confirm that is a potential function, note that

      6.30 Find a potential function for the three-dimensional gravitational force

Testing a Vector Field

Until now, we have worked with vector fields that we know are conservative, but if we are not told that a vector field is

conservative, we need to be able to test whether it is conservative. Recall that, if F is conservative, then F has the cross-

partial property (see The Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Vector Fields). That is, if               is conservative,

then                and                So, if F has the cross-partial property, then is F conservative? If the domain of F

is open and simply connected, then the answer is yes.

Theorem 6.10

The Cross-Partial Test for Conservative Fields

If            is a vector field on an open, simply connected region D and                     and

throughout D, then F is conservative.

Although a proof of this theorem is beyond the scope of the text, we can discover its power with some examples. Later,
we see why it is necessary for the region to be simply connected.

Combining this theorem with the cross-partial property, we can determine whether a given vector field is conservative:

Theorem 6.11

Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields

Let                 be a vector field on an open, simply connected region D. Then                          and

throughout D if and only if F is conservative.

The version of this theorem in  is also true. If       is a vector field on an open, simply connected domain in
 then F is conservative if and only if
630 6 · Vector Calculus

EXAMPLE 6.34

Determining Whether a Vector Field Is Conservative             is conservative.
Determine whether vector field

     Solution

Note that the domain of F is all of  and  is simply connected. Therefore, we can use Cross-Partial Property of

Conservative Fields to determine whether F is conservative. Let

Since                    and     the vector field is not conservative.

EXAMPLE 6.35

Determining Whether a Vector Field Is Conservative

Determine vector field                                is conservative.

     Solution                                                  Thus, the domain of F is part of a plane above the x-axis, and

Note that the domain of F is the part of  in which

this domain is simply connected (there are no holes in this region and this region is connected). Therefore, we can use
Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields to determine whether F is conservative. Let

Then                     and thus F is conservative.

      6.31 Determine whether                                            is conservative.

When using Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields, it is important to remember that a theorem is a tool, and like
any tool, it can be applied only under the right conditions. In the case of Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields,
the theorem can be applied only if the domain of the vector field is simply connected.

To see what can go wrong when misapplying the theorem, consider the vector field:

This vector field satisfies the cross-partial property, since

and

Since F satisfies the cross-partial property, we might be tempted to conclude that F is conservative. However, F is not
conservative. To see this, let

be a parameterization of the upper half of a unit circle oriented counterclockwise (denote this and let

be a parameterization of the lower half of a unit circle oriented clockwise (denote this  Notice that and have
the same starting point and endpoint. Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 631

and

Therefore,

Thus, and have the same starting point and endpoint, but    Therefore, F is not

independent of path and F is not conservative.

To summarize: F satisfies the cross-partial property and yet F is not conservative. What went wrong? Does this contradict

Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields? The issue is that the domain of F is all of  except for the origin. In other

words, the domain of F has a hole at the origin, and therefore the domain is not simply connected. Since the domain is
not simply connected, Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields does not apply to F.

We close this section by looking at an example of the usefulness of the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals. Now
that we can test whether a vector field is conservative, we can always decide whether the Fundamental Theorem for Line

Integrals can be used to calculate a vector line integral. If we are asked to calculate an integral of the form

then our first question should be: Is F conservative? If the answer is yes, then we should find a potential function and use
the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals to calculate the integral. If the answer is no, then the Fundamental
Theorem for Line Integrals can't help us and we have to use other methods, such as using Equation 6.9.

EXAMPLE 6.36

Using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals

Calculate line integral        where                        and C is any smooth curve that

goes from the origin to

     Solution
Before trying to compute the integral, we need to determine whether F is conservative and whether the domain of F is

simply connected. The domain of F is all of  which is connected and has no holes. Therefore, the domain of F is

simply connected. Let

so that                  Since the domain of F is simply connected, we can check the cross partials to determine whether

F is conservative. Note that

Therefore, F is conservative.

To evaluate   using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals, we need to find a potential function for F. Let

be a potential function for F. Then,         and therefore  Integrating this equation with respect to

x gives                               for some function h. Differentiating this equation with respect to y gives

                         which implies that             Therefore, h is a function of z only, and

                               To find h, note that                                                Therefore,     and

we can take              A potential function for F is
632 6 · Vector Calculus

       Now that we have a potential function, we can use the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals to evaluate the integral.
       By the theorem,

     Analysis
Notice that if we hadn't recognized that F is conservative, we would have had to parameterize C and use Equation 6.9.
Since curve C is unknown, using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals is much simpler.

     6.32 Calculate integral             where                                           and C is a semicircle with starting

           point          and endpoint

    EXAMPLE 6.37

Work Done on a Particle

Let                              be a force field. Suppose that a particle begins its motion at the origin and ends its

movement at any point in a plane that is not on the x-axis or the y-axis. Furthermore, the particle's motion can be

modeled with a smooth parameterization. Show that F does positive work on the particle.

     Solution
We show that F does positive work on the particle by showing that F is conservative and then by using the Fundamental
Theorem for Line Integrals.

To show that F is conservative, suppose          were a potential function for F. Then,                            and
                                                                                             Deriving both sides with
therefore            and               Equation    implies that

respect to y yields                    Therefore,            and we can take

If                   then note that                and therefore is a potential function for F.

Let    be the point at which the particle stops is motion, and let C denote the curve that models the particle's motion.

The work done by F on the particle is            By the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals,

Since      and       by assumption,              Therefore,      and F does positive work on the particle.

     Analysis
Notice that this problem would be much more difficult without using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals. To
apply the tools we have learned, we would need to give a curve parameterization and use Equation 6.9. Since the path of
motion C can be as exotic as we wish (as long as it is smooth), it can be very difficult to parameterize the motion of the
particle.

     6.33 Let                            and suppose that a particle moves from point            to  along any

           smooth curve. Is the work done by F on the particle positive, negative, or zero?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 633

      SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES

99. True or False? If vector field  100. True or False? Function
      F is conservative on the
      open and connected                    where
      region D, then line                   parameterizes the
      integrals of F are path               straight-line segment
      independent on D,                     from
      regardless of the shape of
      D.

101. True or False? Vector field                                102. True or False? Vector field

      is conservative.                                          is conservative.

103. Verify the Fundamental Theorem         104. [T] Find          where

      of Line Integrals for         by

      computing the integral using a              and C is a portion of curve     from
      parameterization and, separately,                   to
      by finding a potential function for
      the case when

      and C is a portion of the positively

      oriented circle               from

      (5, 0) to (3, 4).

105. [T] Evaluate line integral             where
        C is the path given by                             and

                                                  for

For the following exercises, determine whether the vector field is conservative and, if it is, find the potential function.

106.                                107.

108.                                        109.

110.                                                               111.
634 6 · Vector Calculus

For the following exercises, evaluate the line integrals using the Fundamental Theorem of Line Integrals.

112.                     where C 113.                      where

      is any path from (0, 0) to        C is the line segment from
      (2, 4)                            (0, 0) to (4, 4)

114. [T]                                                                  115. Find the conservative
        where C is any smooth curve from (1, 1) to                                vector field for the
                                                                                  potential function

For the following exercises, determine whether the vector field is conservative and, if so, find a potential function.

116.                                    117.

118.                                    119.

120.                                    121.

122.                                    123.

124.                                    125.

For the following exercises, evaluate the integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Line Integrals.

126. Evaluate                    where  127. [T] Evaluate                     128. [T] Evaluate

                                                    where                             where
                                                                                      and C is any path in a
      and C is any path that starts at              and C is a straight line          plane from (1, 2) to (3, 2).
                   and ends at
                                                    from   to

129. Evaluate
        where

      and C has initial point (1,
      2, 3) and terminal point
      (3, 5, 1).

For the following exercises, let                           and                                          and let C1 be the curve

consisting of the circle of radius 2, centered at the origin and oriented counterclockwise, and C2 be the curve consisting

of a line segment from (0, 0) to (1, 1) followed by a line segment from (1, 1) to (3, 1).

                                                           130. Calculate the line integral
                                                                   of F over C1.

131. Calculate the line integral        132. Calculate the line integral  133. Calculate the line integral
        of G over C1.                           of F over C2.                     of G over C2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.3 · Conservative Vector Fields 635

134. [T] Let                                         135. [T] Find line integral  of vector field

      Calculate        where C is a path             along curve C parameterized by
      from           to

For the following exercises, show that the following vector fields are conservative by using a computer. Calculate
             for the given curve.

136.                                       137.                        C is

      C is the curve consisting of line              parameterized by

      segments from            to  to

138. [T]                                             139. The mass of Earth is
        C is curve                                           approximately
                                                             and that of the Sun is
140. [T] Let                                                 330,000 times as much.
        Evaluate the integral                                The gravitational constant
                                                             is
                                                             The distance of Earth
                                                             from the Sun is about
                                                                                   Compute,
                                                             approximately, the work
                                                             necessary to increase the
                                                             distance of Earth from the
                                                             Sun by

                                                     141. [T] Let                  be given by

                                         where C is                                   Use a
                                                     computer to compute the integral

        the curve                                                  where

142. [T] Use a computer algebra            143. Find the circulation and flux of field
        system to find the mass of a wire                             around and across the closed
        that lies along curve
                                                   semicircular path that consists of
        if the density is                          semicircular arch

                                                   followed by line segment
636 6 · Vector Calculus

144. Compute                          145. Complete the proof of
        where                                 The Path Independence
                                              Test for Conservative
                                              Fields by showing that

6.4 Green's Theorem

Learning Objectives

      6.4.1 Apply the circulation form of Green's theorem.
      6.4.2 Apply the flux form of Green's theorem.
      6.4.3 Calculate circulation and flux on more general regions.

In this section, we examine Green's theorem, which is an extension of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to two
dimensions. Green's theorem has two forms: a circulation form and a flux form, both of which require region D in the
double integral to be simply connected. However, we will extend Green's theorem to regions that are not simply
connected.

Put simply, Green's theorem relates a line integral around a simply closed plane curve C and a double integral over the
region enclosed by C. The theorem is useful because it allows us to translate difficult line integrals into more simple
double integrals, or difficult double integrals into more simple line integrals.

Extending the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

Recall that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus says that

As a geometric statement, this equation says that the integral over the region below the graph of  and above the

line segment             depends only on the value of F at the endpoints a and b of that segment. Since the numbers a and b

are the boundary of the line segment  the theorem says we can calculate integral                   based on

information about the boundary of line segment  (Figure 6.32). The same idea is true of the Fundamental Theorem
for Line Integrals:

When we have a potential function (an "antiderivative"), we can calculate the line integral based solely on information
about the boundary of curve C.

Figure 6.32 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus says that the integral over line segment           depends only on the
values of the antiderivative at the endpoints of

Green's theorem takes this idea and extends it to calculating double integrals. Green's theorem says that we can
calculate a double integral over region D based solely on information about the boundary of D. Green's theorem also
says we can calculate a line integral over a simple closed curve C based solely on information about the region that C
encloses. In particular, Green's theorem connects a double integral over region D to a line integral around the boundary
of D.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     6.4 · Green's Theorem 637

Circulation Form of Green's Theorem

The first form of Green's theorem that we examine is the circulation form. This form of the theorem relates the vector
line integral over a simple, closed plane curve C to a double integral over the region enclosed by C. Therefore, the
circulation of a vector field along a simple closed curve can be transformed into a double integral and vice versa.

Theorem 6.12

Green's Theorem, Circulation Form

Let D be an open, simply connected region with a boundary curve C that is a piecewise smooth, simple closed curve

oriented counterclockwise (Figure 6.33). Let   be a vector field with component functions that have

continuous partial derivatives on D. Then,

                                                                                                     (6.13)

Figure 6.33 The circulation form of Green's theorem relates a line integral over curve C to a double integral over region
D.

Notice that Green's theorem can be used only for a two-dimensional vector field F. If F is a three-dimensional field, then
Green's theorem does not apply. Since

this version of Green's theorem is sometimes referred to as the tangential form of Green's theorem.

The proof of Green's theorem is rather technical, and beyond the scope of this text. Here we examine a proof of the

theorem in the special case that D is a rectangle. For now, notice that we can quickly confirm that the theorem is true for

the special case in which          is conservative. In this case,

because the circulation is zero in conservative vector fields. By Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields, F satisfies

the cross-partial condition, so    Therefore,

which confirms Green's theorem in the case of conservative vector fields.

Proof

Let's now prove that the circulation form of Green's theorem is true when the region D is a rectangle. Let D be the

rectangle     oriented counterclockwise. Then, the boundary C of D consists of four piecewise smooth pieces

           and (Figure 6.34). We parameterize each side of D as follows:
638 6 · Vector Calculus

                         Figure 6.34 Rectangle D is oriented counterclockwise.

Then,

By the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,
Therefore,

But,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.4 · Green's Theorem 639

Therefore,                            and we have proved Green's theorem in the case of a rectangle.

To prove Green's theorem over a general region D, we can decompose D into many tiny rectangles and use the proof
that the theorem works over rectangles. The details are technical, however, and beyond the scope of this text.



  EXAMPLE 6.38

Applying Green's Theorem over a Rectangle
Calculate the line integral

where C is a rectangle with vertices       and    oriented counterclockwise.

     Solution                              Then,  and  Therefore,
Let

Let D be the rectangular region enclosed by C (Figure 6.35). By Green's theorem,
640 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.35 The line integral over the boundary of the rectangle can be transformed into a double integral over the
rectangle.

     Analysis
If we were to evaluate this line integral without using Green's theorem, we would need to parameterize each side of the
rectangle, break the line integral into four separate line integrals, and use the methods from Line Integrals to evaluate
each integral. Furthermore, since the vector field here is not conservative, we cannot apply the Fundamental Theorem
for Line Integrals. Green's theorem makes the calculation much simpler.

  EXAMPLE 6.39

Applying Green's Theorem to Calculate Work
Calculate the work done on a particle by force field

as the particle traverses circle  exactly once in the counterclockwise direction, starting and ending at point

     Solution
Let C denote the circle and let D be the disk enclosed by C. The work done on the particle is

As with Example 6.38, this integral can be calculated using tools we have learned, but it is easier to use the double
integral given by Green's theorem (Figure 6.36).

Let                                                   Then,  and  Therefore,

By Green's theorem,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               6.4 · Green's Theorem 641

Figure 6.36 The line integral over the boundary circle can be transformed into a double integral over the disk enclosed
by the circle.

       6.34 Use Green's theorem to calculate line integral

where C is a right triangle with vertices                 and  oriented counterclockwise.

In the preceding two examples, the double integral in Green's theorem was easier to calculate than the line integral, so
we used the theorem to calculate the line integral. In the next example, the double integral is more difficult to calculate
than the line integral, so we use Green's theorem to translate a double integral into a line integral.

EXAMPLE 6.40

Applying Green's Theorem over an Ellipse  (Figure 6.37).
Calculate the area enclosed by ellipse
642 6 · Vector Calculus

                                       Figure 6.37 Ellipse            is denoted by C.

     Solution
Let C denote the ellipse and let D be the region enclosed by C. Recall that ellipse C can be parameterized by

Calculating the area of D is equivalent to computing double integral  To calculate this integral without Green's

theorem, we would need to divide D into two regions: the region above the x-axis and the region below. The area of the
ellipse is

These two integrals are not straightforward to calculate (although when we know the value of the first integral, we know
the value of the second by symmetry). Instead of trying to calculate them, we use Green's theorem to transform
into a line integral around the boundary C.
Consider vector field

Then,    and                     and therefore              Notice that F was chosen to have the property that
over D.
         Since this is the case, Green's theorem transforms the line integral of F over C into the double integral of 1

By Green's theorem,

Therefore, the area of the ellipse is

In Example 6.40, we used vector field                          to find the area of any ellipse. The logic of the

previous example can be extended to derive a formula for the area of any region D. Let D be any region with a boundary

that is a simple closed curve C oriented counterclockwise. If                           then                    Therefore,

by the same logic as in Example 6.40,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.4 · Green's Theorem 643

                                                                                                                   (6.14)

It's worth noting that if   is any vector field with                  then the logic of the previous paragraph works.

So. Equation 6.14 is not the only equation that uses a vector field's mixed partials to get the area of a region.

6.35 Find the area of the region enclosed by the curve with parameterization

Flux Form of Green's Theorem

The circulation form of Green's theorem relates a double integral over region D to line integral  where C is the

boundary of D. The flux form of Green's theorem relates a double integral over region D to the flux across boundary C.
The flux of a fluid across a curve can be difficult to calculate using the flux line integral. This form of Green's theorem
allows us to translate a difficult flux integral into a double integral that is often easier to calculate.

Theorem 6.13

Green's Theorem, Flux Form

Let D be an open, simply connected region with a boundary curve C that is a piecewise smooth, simple closed curve

that is oriented counterclockwise (Figure 6.38). Let  be a vector field with component functions that have

continuous partial derivatives on an open region containing D. Then,

                                                                                                                   (6.15)

       Figure 6.38 The flux form of Green's theorem relates a double integral over region D to the flux across curve C.

Because this form of Green's theorem contains unit normal vector N, it is sometimes referred to as the normal form of
Green's theorem.
644 6 · Vector Calculus                              Let  and               By the circulation form of Green's theorem,

      Proof

       Recall that

                                                                                    Calculate the flux across C.

  EXAMPLE 6.41

Applying Green's Theorem for Flux across a Circle
Let C be a circle of radius r centered at the origin (Figure 6.39) and let

                                 Figure 6.39 Curve C is a circle of radius r centered at the origin.

Solution

Let D be the disk enclosed by C. The flux across C is          We could evaluate this integral using tools we have

learned, but Green's theorem makes the calculation much more simple. Let                   and        so that

          Note that              and therefore                 By Green's theorem,

Since                    is the area of the circle,       Therefore, the flux across C is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 6.4 · Green's Theorem 645

EXAMPLE 6.42

Applying Green's Theorem for Flux across a Triangle

Let S be the triangle with vertices           and     oriented clockwise (Figure 6.40). Calculate the flux of

                                                      across S.

              Figure 6.40 Curve S is a triangle with vertices    and         oriented clockwise.

     Solution
To calculate the flux without Green's theorem, we would need to break the flux integral into three line integrals, one
integral for each side of the triangle. Using Green's theorem to translate the flux line integral into a single double
integral is much more simple.

Let D be the region enclosed by S. Note that          and        therefore,  Green's theorem

applies only to simple closed curves oriented counterclockwise, but we can still apply the theorem because

              and is oriented counterclockwise. By Green's theorem, the flux is

Notice that the top edge of the triangle is the line             Therefore, in the iterated double integral, the y-values

run from  to  and we have
646 6 · Vector Calculus

6.36 Calculate the flux of                         across a unit circle oriented counterclockwise.

  EXAMPLE 6.43

Applying Green's Theorem for Water Flow across a Rectangle
Water flows from a spring located at the origin. The velocity of the water is modeled by vector field

                                      m/sec. Find the amount of water per second that flows across the rectangle with vertices
                                                      oriented counterclockwise (Figure 6.41).

Figure 6.41 Water flows across the rectangle with vertices                                      oriented
counterclockwise.

     Solution
Let C represent the given rectangle and let D be the rectangular region enclosed by C. To find the amount of water

flowing across C, we calculate flux           Let           and                          so that          Then,

and                      By Green's theorem,

Therefore, the water flux is 80 m2/sec.

Recall that if vector field F is conservative, then F does no work around closed curves--that is, the circulation of F around

a closed curve is zero. In fact, if the domain of F is simply connected, then F is conservative if and only if the circulation of

F around any closed curve is zero. If we replace "circulation of F" with "flux of F," then we get a definition of a source-free

vector field. The following statements are all equivalent ways of defining a source-free field            on a simply

connected domain (note the similarities with properties of conservative vector fields):

1. The flux                       across any closed curve C is zero.
2. If and                are curves in the domain of F with the same starting points and endpoints, then

                                              In other words, flux is independent of path.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.4 · Green's Theorem 647

3. There is a stream function          for F. A stream function for              is a function g such that     and

              Geometrically,           is tangential to the level curve of g at  Since the gradient of g is

       perpendicular to the level curve of g at  stream function g has the property                            for any

       point  in the domain of g. (Stream functions play the same role for source-free fields that potential functions

       play for conservative fields.)

4.

EXAMPLE 6.44

Finding a Stream Function                        is source free, and find a stream function for F.
Verify that rotation vector field

     Solution                          which is simply connected. Therefore, to show that F is source free, we can show

Note that the domain of F is all of 

any of items 1 through 4 from the previous list to be true. In this example, we show that item 4 is true. Let

and           Then                     and therefore                 Thus, F is source free.

To find a stream function for F, proceed in the same manner as finding a potential function for a conservative field. Let g

be a stream function for F. Then       which implies that

Since         we have                  Therefore,

Letting       gives stream function

To confirm that g is a stream function for F, note that         and
                                                           is perpendicular to conservative radial vector field
Notice that source-free rotation vector field
                 (Figure 6.42).

Figure 6.42 (a) In this image, we see the three-level curves of g and vector field F. Note that the F vectors on a given level

curve are tangent to the level curve. (b) In this image, we see the three-level curves of g and vector field The gradient

vectors are perpendicular to the corresponding level curve. Therefore,                        for any point in the domain

of g.

       6.37 Find a stream function for vector field

Vector fields that are both conservative and source free are important vector fields. One important feature of
conservative and source-free vector fields on a simply connected domain is that any potential function of such a field
648 6 · Vector Calculus

satisfies Laplace's equation                 Laplace's equation is foundational in the field of partial differential equations

because it models such phenomena as gravitational and magnetic potentials in space, and the velocity potential of an

ideal fluid. A function that satisfies Laplace's equation is called a harmonic function. Therefore any potential function of a

conservative and source-free vector field is harmonic.

To see that any potential function of a conservative and source-free vector field on a simply connected domain is

harmonic, let be such a potential function of vector field              Then,       and                because

Therefore,               and          Since F is source free,                       and we have that is harmonic.

EXAMPLE 6.45

Satisfying Laplace's Equation

For vector field                             verify that the field is both conservative and source free, find a potential

function for F, and verify that the potential function is harmonic.

     Solution

Let                      and                 Notice that the domain of F is all of two-space, which is simply connected.

Therefore, we can check the cross-partials of F to determine whether F is conservative. Note that                          so

F is conservative. Since              and                               and the field is source free.

To find a potential function for F, let be a potential function. Then,         so            Integrating this equation

with respect to x gives                           Since                 differentiating with respect to y gives

                                 Therefore, we can take        and                  is a potential function for

To verify that is a harmonic function, note that                               and

                                 Therefore,               and satisfies Laplace's equation.

     6.38 Is the function                    harmonic?

Green's Theorem on General Regions

Green's theorem, as stated, applies only to regions that are simply connected--that is, Green's theorem as stated so far
cannot handle regions with holes. Here, we extend Green's theorem so that it does work on regions with finitely many
holes (Figure 6.43).

Figure 6.43 Green's theorem, as stated, does not apply to a nonsimply connected region with three holes like this one.

Before discussing extensions of Green's theorem, we need to go over some terminology regarding the boundary of a
region. Let D be a region and let C be a component of the boundary of D. We say that C is positively oriented if, as we
walk along C in the direction of orientation, region D is always on our left. Therefore, the counterclockwise orientation of
the boundary of a disk is a positive orientation, for example. Curve C is negatively oriented if, as we walk along C in the
direction of orientation, region D is always on our right. The clockwise orientation of the boundary of a disk is a negative
orientation, for example.

Let D be a region with finitely many holes (so that D has finitely many boundary curves), and denote the boundary of D

by (Figure 6.44). To extend Green's theorem so it can handle D, we divide region D into two regions, and (with

respective boundaries            and  in such a way that                and neither nor has any holes (Figure

6.44).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.4 · Green's Theorem 649

Figure 6.44 (a) Region D with an oriented boundary has three holes. (b) Region D split into two simply connected regions
has no holes.

Assume the boundary of D is oriented as in the figure, with the inner holes given a negative orientation and the outer
boundary given a positive orientation. The boundary of each simply connected region and is positively oriented.
If F is a vector field defined on D, then Green's theorem says that

Therefore, Green's theorem still works on a region with holes.

To see how this works in practice, consider annulus D in Figure 6.45 and suppose that  is a vector field defined

on this annulus. Region D has a hole, so it is not simply connected. Orient the outer circle of the annulus

counterclockwise and the inner circle clockwise (Figure 6.45) so that, when we divide the region into and we are

able to keep the region on our left as we walk along a path that traverses the boundary. Let be the upper half of the

annulus and be the lower half. Neither of these regions has holes, so we have divided D into two simply connected

regions.

We label each piece of these new boundaries as for some i, as in Figure 6.45. If we begin at P and travel along the

oriented boundary, the first segment is then  and Now we have traversed and returned to P. Next, we

start at P again and traverse Since the first piece of the boundary is the same as in but oriented in the

opposite direction, the first piece of is  Next, we have then   and finally

Figure 6.45 Breaking the annulus into two separate regions gives us two simply connected regions. The line integrals
over the common boundaries cancel out.
650 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.45 shows a path that traverses the boundary of D. Notice that this path traverses the boundary of region
returns to the starting point, and then traverses the boundary of region Furthermore, as we walk along the path, the
region is always on our left. Notice that this traversal of the paths covers the entire boundary of region D. If we had
only traversed one portion of the boundary of D, then we cannot apply Green's theorem to D.

The boundary of the upper half of the annulus, therefore, is    and the boundary of the lower half of the

annulus is                       Then, Green's theorem implies

Therefore, we arrive at the equation found in Green's theorem--namely,

The same logic implies that the flux form of Green's theorem can also be extended to a region with finitely many holes:

  EXAMPLE 6.46
Using Green's Theorem on a Region with Holes
Calculate integral

where D is the annulus given by the polar inequalities
     Solution

Although D is not simply connected, we can use the extended form of Green's theorem to calculate the integral. Since
the integration occurs over an annulus, we convert to polar coordinates:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          6.4 · Green's Theorem 651

EXAMPLE 6.47

Using the Extended Form of Green's Theorem

Let                          and let C be any simple closed curve in a plane oriented counterclockwise. What

are the possible values of

     Solution

We use the extended form of Green's theorem to show that  is either 0 or --that is, no matter how crazy

curve C is, the line integral of F along C can have only one of two possible values. We consider two cases: the case when
C encompasses the origin and the case when C does not encompass the origin.

Case 1: C Does Not Encompass the Origin

In this case, the region enclosed by C is simply connected because the only hole in the domain of F is at the origin. We

showed in our discussion of cross-partials that F satisfies the cross-partial condition. If we restrict the domain of F just to
C and the region it encloses, then F with this restricted domain is now defined on a simply connected domain. Since F

satisfies the cross-partial property on its restricted domain, the field F is conservative on this simply connected region

and hence the circulation    is zero.

Case 2: C Does Encompass the Origin

In this case, the region enclosed by C is not simply connected because this region contains a hole at the origin. Let be

a circle of radius a centered at the origin so that is entirely inside the region enclosed by C (Figure 6.46). Give a

clockwise orientation.

               Figure 6.46 Choose circle centered at the origin that is contained entirely inside C.

Let D be the region between  and C, and C is orientated counterclockwise. By the extended version of Green's
theorem,

and therefore

Since is a specific curve, we can evaluate  Let
652 6 · Vector Calculus

       be a parameterization of Then,

Therefore,

6.39 Calculate integral                where D is the annulus given by the polar inequalities
             and

STUDENT PROJECT
Measuring Area from a Boundary: The Planimeter

  Figure 6.47 This magnetic resonance image of a patient's brain shows a tumor, which is highlighted in red. (credit:
  modification of work by Christaras A, Wikimedia Commons)
  Imagine you are a doctor who has just received a magnetic resonance image of your patient's brain. The brain has a
  tumor (Figure 6.47). How large is the tumor? To be precise, what is the area of the red region? The red cross-section of
  the tumor has an irregular shape, and therefore it is unlikely that you would be able to find a set of equations or
  inequalities for the region and then be able to calculate its area by conventional means. You could approximate the
  area by chopping the region into tiny squares (a Riemann sum approach), but this method always gives an answer
  with some error.
  Instead of trying to measure the area of the region directly, we can use a device called a rolling planimeter to
  calculate the area of the region exactly, simply by measuring its boundary. In this project you investigate how a
  planimeter works, and you use Green's theorem to show the device calculates area correctly.
  A rolling planimeter is a device that measures the area of a planar region by tracing out the boundary of that region
  (Figure 6.48). To measure the area of a region, we simply run the tracer of the planimeter around the boundary of the
  region. The planimeter measures the number of turns through which the wheel rotates as we trace the boundary; the
  area of the shape is proportional to this number of wheel turns. We can derive the precise proportionality equation
  using Green's theorem. As the tracer moves around the boundary of the region, the tracer arm rotates and the roller
  moves back and forth (but does not rotate).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       6.4 · Green's Theorem 653

Figure 6.48 (a) A rolling planimeter. The pivot allows the tracer arm to rotate. The roller itself does not rotate; it only
moves back and forth. (b) An interior view of a rolling planimeter. Notice that the wheel cannot turn if the planimeter
is moving back and forth with the tracer arm perpendicular to the roller.

Let C denote the boundary of region D, the area to be calculated. As the tracer traverses curve C, assume the roller

moves along the y-axis (since the roller does not rotate, one can assume it moves along a straight line). Use the

coordinates  to represent points on boundary C, and coordinates  to represent the position of the pivot. As

the planimeter traces C, the pivot moves along the y-axis while the tracer arm rotates on the pivot.

MEDIA

Watch a short animation (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_planimeter) of a planimeter in action.

Begin the analysis by considering the motion of the tracer as it moves from point  counterclockwise to point

             that is close to     (Figure 6.49). The pivot also moves, from point  to nearby point

             How much does the wheel turn as a result of this motion? To answer this question, break the motion

into two parts. First, roll the pivot along the y-axis from  to  without rotating the tracer arm. The

tracer arm then ends up at point  while maintaining a constant angle with the x-axis. Second, rotate the

tracer arm by an angle without moving the roller. Now the tracer is at point       Let be the distance

from the pivot to the wheel and let L be the distance from the pivot to the tracer (the length of the tracer arm).

                                   Figure 6.49 Mathematical analysis of the motion of the planimeter.
1. Explain why the total distance through which the wheel rolls the small motion just described is

2. Show that
654 6 · Vector Calculus

3. Use step 2 to show that the total rolling distance of the wheel as the tracer traverses curve C is
     Total wheel roll

      Now that you have an equation for the total rolling distance of the wheel, connect this equation to Green's

      theorem to calculate area D enclosed by C.

4. Show that

5. Assume the orientation of the planimeter is as shown in Figure 6.49. Explain why            and use this inequality

      to show there is a unique value of Y for each point

6. Use step 5 to show that

7. Use Green's theorem to show that

8. Use step 7 to show that the total wheel roll is
     Total wheel roll

      It took a bit of work, but this equation says that the variable of integration Y in step 3 can be replaced with y.

9. Use Green's theorem to show that the area of D is       The logic is similar to the logic used to show that the

       area of

10. Conclude that the area of D equals the length of the tracer arm multiplied by the total rolling distance of the
       wheel.
       You now know how a planimeter works and you have used Green's theorem to justify that it works. To calculate
       the area of a planar region D, use a planimeter to trace the boundary of the region. The area of the region is the
       length of the tracer arm multiplied by the distance the wheel rolled.

        SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, evaluate the line integrals by applying Green's theorem.

146.                                  147.                             148.

      where C is the path from                where C is the boundary          where C is defined by
                                              of the region lying                                                     oriented in
      (0, 0) to (1, 1) along the              between the graphs of
                                                                               the counterclockwise direction
      graph of           and from                     and
                                              oriented in the
      (1, 1) to (0, 0) along the              counterclockwise
                                              direction
      graph of           oriented in

      the counterclockwise

      direction

149.                                              150.                                   151.                          where

      where C is the boundary of the region               where C is the boundary              C consists of line segment
                                                          of the region lying
      lying between the graphs of     and                 between the graphs of                C1 from          to (1, 0),

      oriented in the                                                       and                followed by the
                                                                            oriented in
      counterclockwise direction                          the counterclockwise                 semicircular arc C2 from
                                                          direction
                                                                                               (1, 0) back to (-1, 0)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.4 · Green's Theorem 655

For the following exercises, use Green's theorem.

152. Let C be the curve               153. Evaluate line integral             154. Find the counterclockwise
        consisting of line
        segments from (0, 0) to (1,           where C is the boundary of the  circulation of field
        1) to (0, 1) and back to (0,          region between circles
        0). Find the value of                                                                       around and
                                                                and
                                              and is a positively oriented    over the boundary of the region
                                              curve.
                                                                              enclosed by curves              and

                                                                              in the first quadrant and

                                                                              oriented in the

                                                                              counterclockwise direction.

155. Evaluate                         156. Evaluate  where C 157. Calculate

        where C is the positively     includes the two circles of radius 2    where C is a circle of
        oriented circle of radius 2   and radius 1 centered at the origin,    radius 2 centered at the
        centered at the origin.       both with positive orientation.         origin and oriented in the
                                                                              counterclockwise
                                                                              direction.
656 6 · Vector Calculus

158. Calculate integral                            159. Evaluate integral

along triangle C with vertices (0, 0), (1, 0) and  where C is the curve that
(1, 1), oriented counterclockwise, using           follows parabola
Green's theorem.
                                                   then the line from (2, 4) to (2,
                                                   0), and finally the line from (2,
                                                   0) to (0, 0).

160. Evaluate line integral

        where C is oriented in a counterclockwise
        path around the region bounded by

                                              and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        6.4 · Green's Theorem 657

For the following exercises, use Green's theorem to find the area.

161. Find the area between            162. Find the area of the region enclosed by parametric equation

ellipse  and

circle

163. Find the area of the             164. Find the area of a pentagon   165. Use Green's theorem to
        region bounded by                     with vertices                      evaluate
        hypocycloid
                                              and                                  where is the
        The curve is                                                               perimeter of square
        parameterized by              167. Use Green's theorem to
                                              find the area of one loop                                oriented
166. Use Green's theorem to                   of a four-leaf rose                  counterclockwise.
        prove the area of a disk                               (Hint:
        with radius is                                                   168. Use Green's theorem to find the
                                                                                 area under one arch of the
                                                                                 cycloid given by parametric
                                                                                 plane

169. Use Green's theorem to find the area of  170. [T] Veryfiy Green's                 171. Evaluate
        the region enclosed by curve                  theorem by using a
                                                      computer algebra system                  where C is the boundary
                                                      to evaluate the integral                 of the unit square

                                                                                where          traversed
                                                                                               counterclockwise. Use
                                                      C is the circle given by
                                                                        and is                                        for this
                                                                                               exercise.
                                                      oriented in the
                                                      counterclockwise
                                                      direction.

172. Evaluate                         173. Evaluate

        where C is any simple closed          where C is any piecewise,
        curve with an interior that           smooth simple closed
        does not contain point                curve enclosing the
                                              origin, traversed
                  traversed                   counterclockwise.
        counterclockwise.
658 6 · Vector Calculus

For the following exercises, use Green's theorem to calculate the work done by force F on a particle that is moving
counterclockwise around closed path C.

174.                                  175.

                                              C : boundary of a triangle with vertices
                                              (0, 0), (5, 0), and (0, 5)

176. Evaluate                                 177. A particle starts at point
                                                                 moves along the
        where C is a unit circle oriented in
        the counterclockwise direction.               x-axis to (2, 0), and then
                                                      travels along semicircle

                                                                         to the starting
                                                      point. Use Green's theorem
                                                      to find the work done on this
                                                      particle by force field

178. David and Sandra are skating on a              179. Use Green's theorem to find the
        frictionless pond in the wind. David                work done by force field
        skates on the inside, going along a circle
        of radius 2 in a counterclockwise                   when an object moves once
        direction. Sandra skates once around a              counterclockwise around
        circle of radius 3, also in the                     ellipse
        counterclockwise direction. Suppose the
        force of the wind at point
                is

      Use Green's theorem to determine who
      does more work.

180. Use Green's theorem to                   181. Evaluate line integral               182. Use Green's theorem to
        evaluate line integral                                                 where C          evaluate line integral
                                                                                                             if
      where C is ellipse                            is the boundary of a
                                                    triangle with vertices                      where C is a triangle with
                                                                                                vertices (1, 0), (0, 1), and
      oriented counterclockwise.                    with the counterclockwise                   (-1, 0) traversed
                                                    orientation.                                counterclockwise.

183. Use Green's theorem to           184. Use Green's theorem to
        evaluate line integral                evaluate line integral

        where C is a triangle with                                        where
        vertices (0, 0), (1, 0), and
        (1, 3) oriented clockwise.            C is a circle
                                              oriented
                                              counterclockwise.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             6.4 · Green's Theorem 659

185. Use Green's theorem to evaluate line                   186. Use Green's theorem to evaluate line
        integral                                                    integral

                                                            where C is ellipse                       and is

where C is circle                          oriented in      oriented in the counterclockwise
                                                            direction.
the counterclockwise direction.

187. Let C be a triangular                 188. Use Green's theorem to              189. Use Green's theorem to
        closed curve from (0, 0) to                evaluate line integral                   evaluate line integral
        (1, 0) to (1, 1) and finally
        back to (0, 0). Let                                             where C is          where C is any smooth
                                      Use                                                   simple closed curve joining
        Green's theorem to                         circle                                   the origin to itself oriented in
                                                   oriented in the clockwise                the counterclockwise
        evaluate                                   direction.                               direction.

190. Use Green's theorem to evaluate line integral          191. Use Green's theorem to
                                                                    evaluate

where C is the positively oriented circle

                                                                       where C is a triangle with
                                                                       vertices (0, 0), (1, 0), and
                                                                       (1, 2) with positive
                                                                       orientation.

192. Use Green's theorem to                193. Let                                                  194. Use Green's theorem to
        evaluate line integral                     Find the counterclockwise circulation                     evaluate line integral

where C is ellipse                                          where C is a curve                       where C is a triangular
                                                                                                     closed curve that connects
oriented in the                                    consisting of the line segment                    the points (0, 0), (2, 2), and
counterclockwise                                                                                     (0, 2) counterclockwise.
direction.                                         joining                          half circle

                                                                       the line segment
                                                   joining (1, 0) and (2, 0), and half circle

195. Let C be the boundary of square               196. Use Green's theorem to evaluate
                                        traversed
                                                        line integral               where
        counterclockwise. Use Green's
        theorem to find

                                                        and C is a triangle bounded by
                                                                                           oriented

                                                        counterclockwise.
660 6 · Vector Calculus

197. Use Green's Theorem to          198. Use Green's theorem in a              199. Calculate the outward flux
        evaluate integral                    plane to evaluate line
                      where                  integral                           of             over a

        and C is a unit circle               where C is a closed curve          square with corners
        oriented in the                      of a region bounded by
        counterclockwise                                                                    where the unit
        direction.                                                    oriented
                                             in the counterclockwise            normal is outward
                                             direction.
                                                                                pointing and oriented in

                                                                                the counterclockwise

                                                                                direction.

200. [T] Let C be circle             oriented in the  201. Find the flux of field
                                                                                 across
counterclockwise direction. Evaluate                                              oriented in

using a computer algebra system.                              the counterclockwise
                                                              direction.

202. Let                             203. [T] Let C be unit circle                  traversed once
                                             counterclockwise. Evaluate

and let C be a triangle

bounded by                      and

          oriented in the                       by using a computer algebra system.

counterclockwise direction.

Find the outward flux of F

through C.

204. [T] Find the outward flux of vector field        across
        the boundary of annulus

        using a computer algebra system.

205. Consider region R bounded by parabolas
                                   Let C be the

        boundary of R oriented
        counterclockwise. Use Green's theorem
        to evaluate

6.5 Divergence and Curl

Learning Objectives

      6.5.1 Determine divergence from the formula for a given vector field.
      6.5.2 Determine curl from the formula for a given vector field.
      6.5.3 Use the properties of curl and divergence to determine whether a vector field is conservative.

In this section, we examine two important operations on a vector field: divergence and curl. They are important to the
field of calculus for several reasons, including the use of curl and divergence to develop some higher-dimensional
versions of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. In addition, curl and divergence appear in mathematical descriptions
of fluid mechanics, electromagnetism, and elasticity theory, which are important concepts in physics and engineering.
We can also apply curl and divergence to other concepts we already explored. For example, under certain conditions, a
vector field is conservative if and only if its curl is zero.

In addition to defining curl and divergence, we look at some physical interpretations of them, and show their
relationship to conservative and source-free vector fields.

Divergence

Divergence is an operation on a vector field that tells us how the field behaves toward or away from a point. Locally, the

divergence of a vector field F in  or  at a particular point P is a measure of the "outflowing-ness" of the vector field

at P. If F represents the velocity of a fluid, then the divergence of F at P measures the net rate of change with respect to
time of the amount of fluid flowing away from P (the tendency of the fluid to flow "out of" P). In particular, if the amount

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.5 · Divergence and Curl 661

of fluid flowing into P is the same as the amount flowing out, then the divergence at P is zero.

    Definition

    If          is a vector field in  and  and all exist, then the divergence of F is defined by

                                                                                                                       (6.16)

Note the divergence of a vector field is not a vector field, but a scalar function. In terms of the gradient operator
                           divergence can be written symbolically as the dot product

Note this is merely helpful notation, because the dot product of a vector of operators and a vector of functions is not
meaningfully defined given our current definition of dot product.

If              is a vector field in  and and both exist, then the divergence of F is defined similarly as

To illustrate this point, consider the two vector fields in Figure 6.50. At any particular point, the amount flowing in is the
same as the amount flowing out, so at every point the "outflowing-ness" of the field is zero. Therefore, we expect the
divergence of both fields to be zero, and this is indeed the case, as
662 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.50 (a) Vector field               has zero divergence. (b) Vector field  also has zero divergence.

By contrast, consider radial vector field  in Figure 6.51. At any given point, more fluid is flowing in

than is flowing out, and therefore the "outgoingness" of the field is negative. We expect the divergence of this field to be

negative, and this is indeed the case, as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                6.5 · Divergence and Curl 663

                                                Figure 6.51 This vector field has negative divergence.

To get a global sense of what divergence is telling us, suppose that a vector field in  represents the velocity of a fluid.

Imagine taking an elastic circle (a circle with a shape that can be changed by the vector field) and dropping it into a fluid.
If the circle maintains its exact area as it flows through the fluid, then the divergence is zero. This would occur for both
vector fields in Figure 6.50. On the other hand, if the circle's shape is distorted so that its area shrinks or expands, then
the divergence is not zero. Imagine dropping such an elastic circle into the radial vector field in Figure 6.51 so that the
center of the circle lands at point (3, 3). The circle would flow toward the origin, and as it did so the front of the circle
would travel more slowly than the back, causing the circle to "scrunch" and lose area. This is how you can see a negative
divergence.

    EXAMPLE 6.48

Calculating Divergence at a Point

If                            then find the divergence of F at

     Solution
The divergence of F is

Therefore, the divergence at       is    If F represents the velocity of a fluid, then more fluid is flowing

out than flowing in at point

       6.40 Find        for

One application for divergence occurs in physics, when working with magnetic fields. A magnetic field is a vector field

that models the influence of electric currents and magnetic materials. Physicists use divergence in Gauss's law for

magnetism, which states that if B is a magnetic field, then     in other words, the divergence of a magnetic field is

zero.

    EXAMPLE 6.49

Determining Whether a Field Is Magnetic

Is it possible for                     to be a magnetic field?
664 6 · Vector Calculus

            Solution
       If F were magnetic, then its divergence would be zero. The divergence of F is

       and therefore F cannot model a magnetic field (Figure 6.52).

    Figure 6.52 The divergence of vector field             is one, so it cannot model a magnetic field.

Another application for divergence is detecting whether a field is source free. Recall that a source-free field is a vector
field that has a stream function; equivalently, a source-free field is a field with a flux that is zero along any closed curve.
The next two theorems say that, under certain conditions, source-free vector fields are precisely the vector fields with
zero divergence.

Theorem 6.14

Divergence of a Source-Free Vector Field

If            is a source-free continuous vector field with differentiable component functions, then

Proof

Since F is source free, there is a function     with  and  Therefore,                                 and

              by Clairaut's theorem.



The converse of Divergence of a Source-Free Vector Field is true on simply connected regions, but the proof is too

technical to include here. Thus, we have the following theorem, which can test whether a vector field in  is source

free.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               6.5 · Divergence and Curl 665

Theorem 6.15

Divergence Test for Source-Free Vector Fields

Let           be a continuous vector field with differentiable component functions with a domain that is simply

connected. Then,           if and only if F is source free.

EXAMPLE 6.50

Determining Whether a Field Is Source Free

Is field                     source free?

     Solution              which is simply connected. Furthermore, F is continuous with differentiable component

Note the domain of F is 

functions. Therefore, we can use Divergence Test for Source-Free Vector Fields to analyze F. The divergence of F is

Therefore, F is source free by Divergence Test for Source-Free Vector Fields.

     6.41 Let                be a rotational field where a and b are positive constants. Is F source free?

Recall that the flux form of Green's theorem says that

where C is a simple closed curve and D is the region enclosed by C. Since                      Green's theorem is
sometimes written as

Therefore, Green's theorem can be written in terms of divergence. If we think of divergence as a derivative of sorts, then

Green's theorem says the "derivative" of F on a region can be translated into a line integral of F along the boundary of

the region. This is analogous to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, in which the derivative of a function on a line

segment       can be translated into a statement about on the boundary of      Using divergence, we can see that

Green's theorem is a higher-dimensional analog of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

We can use all of what we have learned in the application of divergence. Let v be a vector field modeling the velocity of a

fluid. Since the divergence of v at point P measures the "outflowing-ness" of the fluid at P,  implies that more

fluid is flowing out of P than flowing in. Similarly,        implies the more fluid is flowing in to P than is flowing out,

and            implies the same amount of fluid is flowing in as flowing out.

EXAMPLE 6.51

Determining Flow of a Fluid  models the flow of a fluid. Is more fluid flowing into point      than flowing out?
Suppose

     Solution                                           than is flowing out, we calculate the divergence of v at
To determine whether more fluid is flowing into

To find the divergence at    substitute the point into the divergence:         Since the divergence of v at

is negative, more fluid is flowing in than flowing out (Figure 6.53).
666 6 · Vector Calculus

                         Figure 6.53 Vector field  has negative divergence at

6.42 For vector field                              find all points P such that the amount of fluid flowing in to P

equals the amount of fluid flowing out of P.

Curl

The second operation on a vector field that we examine is the curl, which measures the extent of rotation of the field
about a point. Suppose that F represents the velocity field of a fluid. Then, the curl of F at point P is a vector that
measures the tendency of particles near P to rotate about the axis that points in the direction of this vector. The
magnitude of the curl vector at P measures how quickly the particles rotate around this axis. In other words, the curl at a
point is a measure of the vector field's "spin" at that point. Visually, imagine placing a paddlewheel into a fluid at P, with
the axis of the paddlewheel aligned with the curl vector (Figure 6.54). The curl measures the tendency of the
paddlewheel to rotate.

          Figure 6.54 To visualize curl at a point, imagine placing a small paddlewheel into the vector field at a point.
Consider the vector fields in Figure 6.50. In part (a), the vector field is constant and there is no spin at any point.
Therefore, we expect the curl of the field to be zero, and this is indeed the case. Part (b) shows a rotational field, so the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.5 · Divergence and Curl 667

field has spin. In particular, if you place a paddlewheel into a field at any point so that the axis of the wheel is
perpendicular to a plane, the wheel rotates counterclockwise. Therefore, we expect the curl of the field to be nonzero,
and this is indeed the case (the curl is

To see what curl is measuring globally, imagine dropping a leaf into the fluid. As the leaf moves along with the fluid flow,
the curl measures the tendency of the leaf to rotate. If the curl is zero, then the leaf doesn't rotate as it moves through
the fluid.

    Definition

    If          is a vector field in  and                                               all exist, then the curl of F is
    defined by

                                                                                                    (6.17)

    Note that the curl of a vector field is a vector field, in contrast to divergence.

The definition of curl can be difficult to remember. To help with remembering, we use the notation  to stand for a
"determinant" that gives the curl formula:

The determinant of this matrix is

Thus, this matrix is a way to help remember the formula for curl. Keep in mind, though, that the word determinant is
used very loosely. A determinant is not really defined on a matrix with entries that are three vectors, three operators,
and three functions.

If              is a vector field in  then the curl of F, by definition, is

  EXAMPLE 6.52

Finding the Curl of a Three-Dimensional Vector Field
Find the curl of

     Solution
The curl is

    6.43 Find the curl of                             at point
668 6 · Vector Calculus

         EXAMPLE 6.53
       Finding the Curl of a Two-Dimensional Vector Field
       Find the curl of

            Solution
       Notice that this vector field consists of vectors that are all parallel. In fact, each vector in the field is parallel to the x-axis.
       This fact might lead us to the conclusion that the field has no spin and that the curl is zero. To test this theory, note that

       Therefore, this vector field does have spin. To see why, imagine placing a paddlewheel at any point in the first quadrant
       (Figure 6.55). The larger magnitudes of the vectors at the top of the wheel cause the wheel to rotate. The wheel rotates
       in the clockwise (negative) direction, causing the coefficient of the curl to be negative.

              Figure 6.55 Vector field                       consists of vectors that are all parallel.

Note that if  is a vector field in a plane, then                   Therefore, the

circulation form of Green's theorem is sometimes written as

where C is a simple closed curve and D is the region enclosed by C. Therefore, the circulation form of Green's theorem

can be written in terms of the curl. If we think of curl as a derivative of sorts, then Green's theorem says that the

"derivative" of F on a region can be translated into a line integral of F along the boundary of the region. This is analogous

to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, in which the derivative of a function on line segment            can be translated

into a statement about on the boundary of  Using curl, we can see the circulation form of Green's theorem is a

higher-dimensional analog of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

We can now use what we have learned about curl to show that gravitational fields have no "spin." Suppose there is an
object at the origin with mass at the origin and an object with mass Recall that the gravitational force that object
1 exerts on object 2 is given by field

Access for free at openstax.org
  EXAMPLE 6.54                                                                                        6.5 · Divergence and Curl 669

Determining the Spin of a Gravitational Field                                                                      and
Show that a gravitational field has no spin.

     Solution
To show that F has no spin, we calculate its curl. Let

                                        Then,

Since the curl of the gravitational field is zero, the field has no spin.

     6.44 Field                            models the flow of a fluid. Show that if you drop a leaf into this fluid, as

     the leaf moves over time, the leaf does not rotate.

Using Divergence and Curl

Now that we understand the basic concepts of divergence and curl, we can discuss their properties and establish
relationships between them and conservative vector fields.

If F is a vector field in  then the curl of F is also a vector field in  Therefore, we can take the divergence of a curl.

The next theorem says that the result is always zero. This result is useful because it gives us a way to show that some

vector fields are not the curl of any other field. To give this result a physical interpretation, recall that divergence of a

velocity field v at point P measures the tendency of the corresponding fluid to flow out of P. Since             the

net rate of flow in vector field curl(v) at any point is zero. Taking the curl of vector field F eliminates whatever divergence

was present in F.

Theorem 6.16

Divergence of the Curl

Let                 be a vector field in   such that the component functions all have continuous second-order partial

derivatives. Then,

Proof

By the definitions of divergence and curl, and by Clairaut's theorem,


670 6 · Vector Calculus

EXAMPLE 6.55

Showing That a Vector Field Is Not the Curl of Another

Show that                                       is not the curl of another vector field. That is, show that there is no other vector

G with

     Solution                                   and the second-order partials of F are all continuous. Therefore, we can apply the

Notice that the domain of F is all of 

previous theorem to F.

The divergence of F is                 If F were the curl of vector field G, then                       But, the divergence

of F is not zero, and therefore F is not the curl of any other vector field.

     6.45 Is it possible for                            to be the curl of a vector field?

With the next two theorems, we show that if F is a conservative vector field then its curl is zero, and if the domain of F is
simply connected then the converse is also true. This gives us another way to test whether a vector field is conservative.

Theorem 6.17

Curl of a Conservative Vector Field

If                       is conservative, then

Proof

Since conservative vector fields satisfy the cross-partials property, all the cross-partials of F are equal. Therefore,



The same theorem is true for vector fields in a plane.

Since a conservative vector field is the gradient of a scalar function, the previous theorem says that                   for

any scalar function In terms of our curl notation,      This equation makes sense because the cross

product of a vector with itself is always the zero vector. Sometimes equation         is simplified as

Theorem 6.18

Curl Test for a Conservative Field

Let                      be a vector field in space on a simply connected domain. If  then F is conservative.

Proof

Since                    we have that           and     Therefore, F satisfies the cross-partials property on a

simply connected domain, and Cross-Partial Property of Conservative Fields implies that F is conservative.



The same theorem is also true in a plane. Therefore, if F is a vector field in a plane or in space and the domain is simply
connected, then F is conservative if and only if

EXAMPLE 6.56

Testing Whether a Vector Field Is Conservative          is conservative.
Use the curl to determine whether

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6.5 · Divergence and Curl 671

     Solution                          which is simply connected (Figure 6.56). Therefore, we can test whether F is

Note that the domain of F is all of 

conservative by calculating its curl.

                          Figure 6.56 The curl of vector field                    is zero.

The curl of F is

Thus, F is conservative.

We have seen that the curl of a gradient is zero. What is the divergence of a gradient? If is a function of two variables,

then                                   We abbreviate this "double dot product" as This operator is called the Laplace

operator, and in this notation Laplace's equation becomes       Therefore, a harmonic function is a function that

becomes zero after taking the divergence of a gradient.

Similarly, if is a function of three variables then

Using this notation we get Laplace's equation for harmonic functions of three variables:

Harmonic functions arise in many applications. For example, the potential function of an electrostatic field in a region of
space that has no static charge is harmonic.

EXAMPLE 6.57

Analyzing a Function                   to be the potential function of an electrostatic field that is located in a region of 
Is it possible for
free of static charge?

Solution

If were such a potential function, then would be harmonic. Note that         and            and so

Therefore, is not harmonic and cannot represent an electrostatic potential.

      6.46 Is it possible for function                          to be the potential function of an electrostatic field located

                in a region of  free of static charge?
672 6 · Vector Calculus

        SECTION 6.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false.

206. If the coordinate                207.                            208. All vector fields of the form
                                                                              are conservative.
      functions of

           have

      continuous second partial
      derivatives, then

                        equals zero.

209. If                  then F is    210. If F is a constant vector  211. If F is a constant vector
                                              field then                      field then
      conservative.

For the following exercises, find the curl of F.

212.                                                    213.

214.                                              215.

216.                                  217.

218.                                              219.                          220.

221.
        for constants a, b, c

For the following exercises, find the divergence of F.

222.                                              223.

224.                                  225.

226.                                                    227.

228.                                  229.                            230.

                                            for constants a, b, c

231.

For the following exercises, determine whether each of the given scalar functions is harmonic.

232.                                  233.                                      234. If

                                                                                and

                                                                                find

235. If                               236. Find           given that
        and                                             where

        find
237. Find the divergence of F for vector field

238. Find the divergence of F for vector field

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  6.5 · Divergence and Curl 673

For the following exercises, use       and                                 241. Find the
239. Find the                      240. Find the

242. Let                    where

        F is defined on

                  

        Find

For the following exercises, use a computer algebra system to find the curl of the given vector fields.

243. [T]                                                 244. [T]

For the following exercises, find the divergence of F at the given point.

245.                        at     246.                                    247.
                                                                                   at
                                         at

248.                               249.
        at (1, 2, 1)                       at (0, 0, 3)

For the following exercises, find the curl of F at the given point.

250.                        at     251.                                    252.
                                                                                   at (3, 2, 0)
                                         at

253.                               254.
        at (1, 2, 1)                       at (0, 0, 3)

255. Let

      For what value of a is F conservative?

256. Given vector field                       on domain

          

      is F conservative?

257. Given vector field                       on domain              258. Find the work done by
                                                                             force field
                                                                                                              in
                                                                             moving an object from
        is F conservative?                                                   P(0, 1) to Q(2, 0). Is the
                                                                             force field conservative?

259. Compute divergence                       260. Compute curl
674 6 · Vector Calculus

For the following exercises, consider a rigid body that is rotating about the x-axis counterclockwise with constant angular

velocity                 If P is a point in the body located at     the velocity at P is given by vector field

                                                      261. Express F in terms of i, j,
                                                              and k vectors.

262. Find                             263. Find

In the following exercises, suppose that         and

264. Does                necessarily  265. Does       necessarily

have zero divergence?                     have zero divergence?

In the following exercises, suppose a solid object in  has a temperature distribution given by  The heat flow

vector field in the object is         where      is a property of the material. The heat flow vector points in the

direction opposite to that of the gradient, which is the direction of greatest temperature decrease. The divergence of the

heat flow vector is

266. Compute the heat flow            267. Compute the divergence.  268. [T] Consider rotational velocity field
        vector field.
                                                                                                If a paddlewheel

                                                                    is placed in plane          with

                                                                    its axis normal to this plane, using a

                                                                    computer algebra system, calculate

                                                                    how fast the paddlewheel spins in

                                                                    revolutions per unit time.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.6 · Surface Integrals 675

6.6 Surface Integrals

Learning Objectives

      6.6.1 Find the parametric representations of a cylinder, a cone, and a sphere.
      6.6.2 Describe the surface integral of a scalar-valued function over a parametric surface.
      6.6.3 Use a surface integral to calculate the area of a given surface.
      6.6.4 Explain the meaning of an oriented surface, giving an example.
      6.6.5 Describe the surface integral of a vector field.
      6.6.6 Use surface integrals to solve applied problems.

We have seen that a line integral is an integral over a path in a plane or in space. However, if we wish to integrate over a
surface (a two-dimensional object) rather than a path (a one-dimensional object) in space, then we need a new kind of
integral that can handle integration over objects in higher dimensions. We can extend the concept of a line integral to a
surface integral to allow us to perform this integration.

Surface integrals are important for the same reasons that line integrals are important. They have many applications to
physics and engineering, and they allow us to develop higher dimensional versions of the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus. In particular, surface integrals allow us to generalize Green's theorem to higher dimensions, and they appear in
some important theorems we discuss in later sections.

Parametric Surfaces

A surface integral is similar to a line integral, except the integration is done over a surface rather than a path. In this
sense, surface integrals expand on our study of line integrals. Just as with line integrals, there are two kinds of surface
integrals: a surface integral of a scalar-valued function and a surface integral of a vector field.

However, before we can integrate over a surface, we need to consider the surface itself. Recall that to calculate a scalar
or vector line integral over curve C, we first need to parameterize C. In a similar way, to calculate a surface integral over
surface S, we need to parameterize S. That is, we need a working concept of a parameterized surface (or a parametric
surface), in the same way that we already have a concept of a parameterized curve.

A parameterized surface is given by a description of the form

Notice that this parameterization involves two parameters, u and v, because a surface is two-dimensional, and therefore
two variables are needed to trace out the surface. The parameters u and v vary over a region called the parameter
domain, or parameter space--the set of points in the uv-plane that can be substituted into r. Each choice of u and v in
the parameter domain gives a point on the surface, just as each choice of a parameter t gives a point on a parameterized
curve. The entire surface is created by making all possible choices of u and v over the parameter domain.

  Definition

Given a parameterization of surface                                           the parameter domain of the

parameterization is the set of points in the uv-plane that can be substituted into r.

EXAMPLE 6.58

Parameterizing a Cylinder
Describe surface S parameterized by

                                                                                       

     Solution                                                                                                 we can

To get an idea of the shape of the surface, we first plot some points. Since the parameter domain is all of 

choose any value for u and v and plot the corresponding point. If             then       so point (1, 0, 0) is

on S. Similarly, points              and                           are on S.

Although plotting points may give us an idea of the shape of the surface, we usually need quite a few points to see the
shape. Since it is time-consuming to plot dozens or hundreds of points, we use another strategy. To visualize S, we
676 6 · Vector Calculus

visualize two families of curves that lie on S. In the first family of curves we hold u constant; in the second family of
curves we hold v constant. This allows us to build a "skeleton" of the surface, thereby getting an idea of its shape.

First, suppose that u is a constant K. Then the curve traced out by the parameterization is         which gives a

vertical line that goes through point                  in the xy-plane.

Now suppose that v is a constant K. Then the curve traced out by the parameterization is            which gives a

circle in plane          with radius 1 and center (0, 0, K).

If u is held constant, then we get vertical lines; if v is held constant, then we get circles of radius 1 centered around the
vertical line that goes through the origin. Therefore the surface traced out by the parameterization is cylinder

                  (Figure 6.57).

Figure 6.57 (a) Lines                  for                    (b) Circles                    for                           (c)

The lines and circles together. As u and v vary, they describe a cylinder.

Notice that if           and           then                   so points from S do indeed lie on the cylinder. Conversely, each
                                                                        for some k, and therefore each point on the cylinder is
point on the cylinder is contained in some circle

contained in the parameterized surface (Figure 6.58).

Figure 6.58 Cylinder                   has parameterization                                                         

Analysis

Notice that if we change the parameter domain, we could get a different surface. For example, if we restricted the

domain to                        then the surface would be a half-cylinder of height 6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                6.6 · Surface Integrals 677

6.47 Describe the surface with parameterization                                                   

It follows from Example 6.58 that we can parameterize all cylinders of the form                          If S is a cylinder given by

equation      then a parameterization of S is                                                 

                                                                                   

We can also find different types of surfaces given their parameterization, or we can find a parameterization when we are
given a surface.

EXAMPLE 6.59

Describing a Surface
Describe surface S parameterized by

                                                                                 

Solution

Notice that if u is held constant, then the resulting curve is a circle of radius u in plane  Therefore, as u increases,

the radius of the resulting circle increases. If v is held constant, then the resulting curve is a vertical parabola. Therefore,

we expect the surface to be an elliptic paraboloid. To confirm this, notice that

Therefore, the surface is elliptic paraboloid  (Figure 6.59).

Figure 6.59 (a) Circles arise from holding u constant; the vertical parabolas arise from holding v constant. (b) An elliptic
paraboloid results from all choices of u and v in the parameter domain.

6.48 Describe the surface parameterized by                                                    
678 6 · Vector Calculus

EXAMPLE 6.60

Finding a Parameterization                          lying on or above the plane
Give a parameterization of the cone

    Solution

The horizontal cross-section of the cone at height  is circle                    Therefore, a point on the cone at height u

has coordinates                  for angle v. Hence, a parameterization of the cone is

Since we are not interested in the entire cone, only the portion on or above plane      the parameter domain is given

by                               (Figure 6.60).

    Figure 6.60 Cone                 has parameterization                                        

    6.49 Give a parameterization for the portion of cone             lying in the first octant.

We have discussed parameterizations of various surfaces, but two important types of surfaces need a separate
discussion: spheres and graphs of two-variable functions. To parameterize a sphere, it is easiest to use spherical
coordinates. The sphere of radius centered at the origin is given by the parameterization

The idea of this parameterization is that as sweeps downward from the positive z-axis, a circle of radius           is

traced out by letting run from 0 to To see this, let be fixed. Then

This results in the desired circle (Figure 6.61).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     6.6 · Surface Integrals 679

Figure 6.61 The sphere of radius has parameterization

Finally, to parameterize the graph of a two-variable function, we first let         be a function of two variables. The

simplest parameterization of the graph of is                   where x and y vary over the domain of (Figure

6.62). For example, the graph of                 can be parameterized by                    where the parameters x

and y vary over the domain of If we only care about a piece of the graph of --say, the piece of the graph over

rectangle         --then we can restrict the parameter domain to give this piece of the surface:

Similarly, if S is a surface given by equation   or equation                 then a parameterization of S is
                                 or
                                                 respectively. For example, the graph of paraboloid                can
be parameterized by
domain of y because x and z are squared.                        Notice that we do not need to vary over the entire

           Figure 6.62 The simplest parameterization of the graph of a function is

Let's now generalize the notions of smoothness and regularity to a parametric surface. Recall that curve

parameterization                  is regular if  for all t in  For a curve, this condition ensures that the image

of r really is a curve, and not just a point. For example, consider curve parameterization                    The

image of this parameterization is simply point   which is not a curve. Notice also that     The fact that the
680 6 · Vector Calculus

derivative is zero indicates we are not actually looking at a curve.

Analogously, we would like a notion of regularity for surfaces so that a surface parameterization really does trace out a
surface. To motivate the definition of regularity of a surface parameterization, consider parameterization

Although this parameterization appears to be the parameterization of a surface, notice that the image is actually a line

(Figure 6.63). How could we avoid parameterizations such as this? Parameterizations that do not give an actual surface?

Notice that                       and  and the corresponding cross product is zero. The analog of the

condition                is that       is not zero for point  in the parameter domain, which is a regular

parameterization.

             Figure 6.63 The image of parameterization                                           is a line.
                                                                                          is not zero for point
Definition

Parameterization                       is a regular parameterization if
        in the parameter domain.

If parameterization r is regular, then the image of r is a two-dimensional object, as a surface should be. Throughout this

chapter, parameterizations                                    are assumed to be regular.

Recall that curve parameterization     is smooth if           is continuous and           for all t in     Informally,

a curve parameterization is smooth if the resulting curve has no sharp corners. The definition of a smooth surface

parameterization is similar. Informally, a surface parameterization is smooth if the resulting surface has no sharp

corners.

Definition

A surface parameterization                                    is smooth if vector         is not zero for any choice of
u and v in the parameter domain.

A surface may also be piecewise smooth if it has smooth faces but also has locations where the directional derivatives do
not exist.

  EXAMPLE 6.61

Identifying Smooth and Nonsmooth Surfaces
Which of the figures in Figure 6.64 is smooth?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               6.6 · Surface Integrals 681

                                Figure 6.64 (a) This surface is smooth. (b) This surface is piecewise smooth.
     Solution
The surface in Figure 6.64(a) can be parameterized by

(we can use technology to verify). Notice that vectors

exist for any choice of u and v in the parameter domain, and

The k component of this vector is zero only if  or     If  or  then the only choices for u that make the

j component zero are  or  But, these choices of u do not make the i component zero. Therefore,                   is

not zero for any choice of u and v in the parameter domain, and the parameterization is smooth. Notice that the

corresponding surface has no sharp corners.

In the pyramid in Figure 6.64(b), the sharpness of the corners ensures that directional derivatives do not exist at those
locations. Therefore, the pyramid has no smooth parameterization. However, the pyramid consists of five smooth faces,
and thus this surface is piecewise smooth.

6.50 Is the surface parameterization                           smooth?

Surface Area of a Parametric Surface

Our goal is to define a surface integral, and as a first step we have examined how to parameterize a surface. The second
step is to define the surface area of a parametric surface. The notation needed to develop this definition is used
throughout the rest of this chapter.

Let S be a surface with parameterization                       over some parameter domain D. We assume

here and throughout that the surface parameterization          is continuously

differentiable--meaning, each component function has continuous partial derivatives. Assume for the sake of simplicity

that D is a rectangle (although the following material can be extended to handle nonrectangular parameter domains).

Divide rectangle D into subrectangles with horizontal width and vertical length Suppose that i ranges from 1
682 6 · Vector Calculus

to m and j ranges from 1 to n so that D is subdivided into mn rectangles. This division of D into subrectangles gives a
corresponding division of surface S into pieces Choose point in each piece Point corresponds to point

          in the parameter domain.

Note that we can form a grid with lines that are parallel to the u-axis and the v-axis in the uv-plane. These grid lines

correspond to a set of grid curves on surface S that is parameterized by        Without loss of generality, we assume

that is located at the corner of two grid curves, as in Figure 6.65. If we think of r as a mapping from the uv-plane to

 the grid curves are the image of the grid lines under r. To be precise, consider the grid lines that go through point

     One line is given by              the other is given by                    In the first grid line, the horizontal

component is held constant, yielding a vertical line through  In the second grid line, the vertical component is

held constant, yielding a horizontal line through       The corresponding grid curves are  and                          and

these curves intersect at point

                         Figure 6.65 Grid lines on a parameter domain correspond to grid curves on a surface.

Now consider the vectors that are tangent to these grid curves. For grid curve  the tangent vector at is

For grid curve           the tangent vector at is

If vector                        exists and is not zero, then the tangent plane at exists (Figure 6.66). If piece is

small enough, then the tangent plane at point is a good approximation of piece

                         Figure 6.66 If the cross product of vectors and exists, then there is a tangent plane.

The tangent plane at contains vectors              and        and therefore the parallelogram spanned by

and        is in the tangent plane. Since the original rectangle in the uv-plane corresponding to has width and

length the parallelogram that we use to approximate is the parallelogram spanned by                              and

           In other words, we scale the tangent vectors by the constants and to match the scale of the original

division of rectangles in the parameter domain. Therefore, the area of the parallelogram used to approximate the area of

is

Varying point over all pieces and the previous approximation leads to the following definition of surface area of a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6.6 · Surface Integrals 683

parametric surface (Figure 6.67).

            Figure 6.67 The parallelogram spanned by and approximates the piece of surface

Definition

Let                                with parameter domain D be a smooth parameterization of surface S.

Furthermore, assume that S is traced out only once as            varies over D. The surface area of S is

                                                                                                                (6.18)

where         and                  and all partial derivatives are continuous.

EXAMPLE 6.62

Calculating Surface Area
Calculate the lateral surface area (the area of the "side," not including the base) of the right circular cone with height h
and radius r.

     Solution
Before calculating the surface area of this cone using Equation 6.18, we need a parameterization. We assume this cone is

in  with its vertex at the origin (Figure 6.68). To obtain a parameterization, let be the angle that is swept out by

starting at the positive z-axis and ending at the cone, and let  For a height value v with                the radius of

the circle formed by intersecting the cone with plane  is        Therefore, a parameterization of this cone is

The idea behind this parameterization is that for a fixed v value, the circle swept out by letting u vary is the circle at
height v and radius kv. As v increases, the parameterization sweeps out a "stack" of circles, resulting in the desired cone.
684 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.68 The right circular cone with radius r = kh and height h has parameterization

With a parameterization in hand, we can calculate the surface area of the cone using Equation 6.18. The tangent vectors

are                              and               Therefore,

The magnitude of this vector is
By Equation 6.18, the surface area of the cone is

Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.6 · Surface Integrals 685

Therefore, the lateral surface area of the cone is

Analysis

The surface area of a right circular cone with radius r and height h is usually given as                     The reason for
this is that the circular base is included as part of the cone, and therefore the area of the base  is added to the lateral

surface area             that we found.

      6.51 Find the surface area of the surface with parameterization

EXAMPLE 6.63

Calculating Surface Area

Show that the surface area of the sphere                is

     Solution
The sphere has parameterization

The tangent vectors are

Therefore,

Now,

Notice that   on the parameter domain because               and this justifies equation             The

surface area of the sphere is

We have derived the familiar formula for the surface area of a sphere using surface integrals.

      6.52 Show that the surface area of cylinder                      is  Notice that this cylinder does not
                   include the top and bottom circles.

In addition to parameterizing surfaces given by equations or standard geometric shapes such as cones and spheres, we
can also parameterize surfaces of revolution. Therefore, we can calculate the surface area of a surface of revolution by
686 6 · Vector Calculus

using the same techniques. Let          be a positive single-variable function on the domain  and let S be

the surface obtained by rotating about the x-axis (Figure 6.69). Let be the angle of rotation. Then, S can be

parameterized with parameters x and by

Figure 6.69 We can parameterize a surface of revolution by       about the x-axis (Figure 6.70).

  EXAMPLE 6.64

Calculating Surface Area
Find the area of the surface of revolution obtained by rotating

                 Figure 6.70 A surface integral can be used to calculate the surface area of this solid of revolution.

     Solution
This surface has parameterization

The tangent vectors are                                          Therefore,

and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        6.6 · Surface Integrals 687

The area of the surface of revolution is

6.53 Use Equation 6.18 to find the area of the surface of revolution obtained by rotating curve
                                         about the x-axis.

Surface Integral of a Scalar-Valued Function

Now that we can parameterize surfaces and we can calculate their surface areas, we are able to define surface integrals.
First, let's look at the surface integral of a scalar-valued function. Informally, the surface integral of a scalar-valued
function is an analog of a scalar line integral in one higher dimension. The domain of integration of a scalar line integral
is a parameterized curve (a one-dimensional object); the domain of integration of a scalar surface integral is a
parameterized surface (a two-dimensional object). Therefore, the definition of a surface integral follows the definition of
a line integral quite closely. For scalar line integrals, we chopped the domain curve into tiny pieces, chose a point in each
piece, computed the function at that point, and took a limit of the corresponding Riemann sum. For scalar surface
integrals, we chop the domain region (no longer a curve) into tiny pieces and proceed in the same fashion.

Let S be a piecewise smooth surface with parameterization                               with parameter domain D

and let  be a function with a domain that contains S. For now, assume the parameter domain D is a rectangle,

but we can extend the basic logic of how we proceed to any parameter domain (the choice of a rectangle is simply to

make the notation more manageable). Divide rectangle D into subrectangles with horizontal width and vertical

length Suppose that i ranges from 1 to m and j ranges from 1 to n so that D is subdivided into mn rectangles. This

division of D into subrectangles gives a corresponding division of S into pieces Choose point in each piece

evaluate at , and multiply by area        to form the Riemann sum

To define a surface integral of a scalar-valued function, we let the areas of the pieces of S shrink to zero by taking a limit.
  Definition
  The surface integral of a scalar-valued function of over a piecewise smooth surface S is

                                                                                     

Again, notice the similarities between this definition and the definition of a scalar line integral. In the definition of a line
integral we chop a curve into pieces, evaluate a function at a point in each piece, and let the length of the pieces shrink
to zero by taking the limit of the corresponding Riemann sum. In the definition of a surface integral, we chop a surface
into pieces, evaluate a function at a point in each piece, and let the area of the pieces shrink to zero by taking the limit of
the corresponding Riemann sum. Thus, a surface integral is similar to a line integral but in one higher dimension.

The definition of a scalar line integral can be extended to parameter domains that are not rectangles by using the same
logic used earlier. The basic idea is to chop the parameter domain into small pieces, choose a sample point in each piece,
and so on. The exact shape of each piece in the sample domain becomes irrelevant as the areas of the pieces shrink to
zero.

Scalar surface integrals are difficult to compute from the definition, just as scalar line integrals are. To develop a method

that makes surface integrals easier to compute, we approximate surface areas  with small pieces of a tangent

plane, just as we did in the previous subsection. Recall the definition of vectors and
688 6 · Vector Calculus

From the material we have already studied, we know that

Therefore,

                                 

This approximation becomes arbitrarily close to                                   as we increase the number of pieces by
                                                                         

letting m and n go to infinity. Therefore, we have the following equation to calculate scalar surface integrals:

                                                                                                                  (6.19)

Equation 6.19 allows us to calculate a surface integral by transforming it into a double integral. This equation for surface
integrals is analogous to Equation 6.20 for line integrals:

In this case, vector             is perpendicular to the surface, whereas vector  is tangent to the curve.

EXAMPLE 6.65

Calculating a Surface Integral   where is the surface with parameterization                 for                   and
Calculate surface integral

     Solution
Notice that this parameter domain D is a triangle, and therefore the parameter domain is not rectangular. This is not an
issue though, because Equation 6.19 does not place any restrictions on the shape of the parameter domain.

To use Equation 6.19 to calculate the surface integral, we first find vector and Note that                  and

            Therefore,

and
By Equation 6.19,

Access for free at openstax.org
EXAMPLE 6.66                                                                                    6.6 · Surface Integrals 689

Calculating the Surface Integral of a Cylinder                       (Figure 6.71).

Calculate surface integral  where S is cylinder

                            Figure 6.71 Integrating function         over a cylinder.

     Solution
To calculate the surface integral, we first need a parameterization of the cylinder. Following Example 6.58, a
parameterization is

The tangent vectors are                               and     Then,

and                         By Equation 6.19,

     6.54 Calculate         where S is the surface with parameterization

EXAMPLE 6.67

Calculating the Surface Integral of a Piece of a Sphere

Calculate surface integral  where                             and S is the surface that consists of the piece of sphere

                         that lies on or above plane       and the disk that is enclosed by intersection plane  and the
given sphere (Figure 6.72).
690 6 · Vector Calculus

                                 Figure 6.72 Calculating a surface integral over surface S.

     Solution                                                                                   and its spherical top
Notice that S is not smooth but is piecewise smooth; S can be written as the union of its base                              and

and both and are smooth. Therefore, to calculate                    we write this integral as

we calculate integrals           and

First, we calculate              To calculate this integral we need a parameterization of This surface is a disk in plane

        centered at              To parameterize this disk, we need to know its radius. Since the disk is formed where plane
        intersects sphere
                                           we can substitute        into equation

Therefore, the radius of the disk is and a parameterization of is

                                               The tangent vectors are                          and

                                 and thus

The magnitude of this vector is u. Therefore,

Now we calculate             To calculate this integral, we need a parameterization of  The parameterization of full
sphere                     is

Since we are only taking the piece of the sphere on or above plane  we have to restrict the domain of To see

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.6 · Surface Integrals 691

how far this angle sweeps, notice that the angle can be located in a right triangle, as shown in Figure 6.73 (the

comes from the fact that the base of S is a disk with radius  Therefore, the tangent of is which implies that

is We now have a parameterization of

                         Figure 6.73 The maximum value of has a tangent value of

The tangent vectors are

and thus

The magnitude of this vector is
Therefore,

Since

     Analysis
In this example we broke a surface integral over a piecewise surface into the addition of surface integrals over smooth
subsurfaces. There were only two smooth subsurfaces in this example, but this technique extends to finitely many
smooth subsurfaces.

6.55 Calculate surface integral       where S is cylinder                         including the circular
692 6 · Vector Calculus

               top and bottom.

Scalar surface integrals have several real-world applications. Recall that scalar line integrals can be used to compute the
mass of a wire given its density function. In a similar fashion, we can use scalar surface integrals to compute the mass of
a sheet given its density function. If a thin sheet of metal has the shape of surface S and the density of the sheet at point

is                       then mass m of the sheet is

EXAMPLE 6.68

Calculating the Mass of a Sheet                                       that lies above rectangle       and  If the
A flat sheet of metal has the shape of surface        what is the mass of the sheet?
density of the sheet is given by

     Solution                                                                                              To compute this
Let S be the surface that describes the sheet. Then, the mass of the sheet is given by                            a

surface integral, we first need a parameterization of S. Since S is given by the function
parameterization of S is

The tangent vectors are               and             Therefore,                                 and       By

Equation 6.5,

6.56 A piece of metal has a shape that is modeled by paraboloid                                       and the density of the

               metal is given by                      Find the mass of the piece of metal.

Orientation of a Surface

Recall that when we defined a scalar line integral, we did not need to worry about an orientation of the curve of
integration. The same was true for scalar surface integrals: we did not need to worry about an "orientation" of the
surface of integration.

On the other hand, when we defined vector line integrals, the curve of integration needed an orientation. That is, we
needed the notion of an oriented curve to define a vector line integral without ambiguity. Similarly, when we define a
surface integral of a vector field, we need the notion of an oriented surface. An oriented surface is given an "upward" or
"downward" orientation or, in the case of surfaces such as a sphere or cylinder, an "outward" or "inward" orientation.

Let S be a smooth surface. For any point              on S, we can identify two unit normal vectors and If it is possible

to choose a unit normal vector N at every point       on S so that N varies continuously over S, then S is "orientable."

Such a choice of unit normal vector at each point gives the orientation of a surface S. If you think of the normal field as

describing water flow, then the side of the surface that water flows toward is the "negative" side and the side of the

surface at which the water flows away is the "positive" side. Informally, a choice of orientation gives S an "outer" side and

an "inner" side (or an "upward" side and a "downward" side), just as a choice of orientation of a curve gives the curve

"forward" and "backward" directions.

Closed surfaces such as spheres are orientable: if we choose the outward normal vector at each point on the surface of
the sphere, then the unit normal vectors vary continuously. This is called the positive orientation of the closed surface
(Figure 6.74). We also could choose the inward normal vector at each point to give an "inward" orientation, which is the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6.6 · Surface Integrals 693

negative orientation of the surface.

                    Figure 6.74 An oriented sphere with positive orientation.

A portion of the graph of any smooth function        is also orientable. If we choose the unit normal vector that

points "above" the surface at each point, then the unit normal vectors vary continuously over the surface. We could also

choose the unit normal vector that points "below" the surface at each point. To get such an orientation, we parameterize

the graph of in the standard way:                           where x and y vary over the domain of Then,

               and                    and therefore the cross product  (which is normal to the surface at any point

on the surface) is                  Since the z component of this vector is one, the corresponding unit normal vector

points "upward," and the upward side of the surface is chosen to be the "positive" side.

Let S be a smooth orientable surface with parameterization             For each point     on the surface, vectors and
                                                                                                 and is therefore normal
lie in the tangent plane at that point. Vector       is normal to the tangent plane at

to S at that point. Therefore, the choice of unit normal vector

gives an orientation of surface S.              and                    To get an orientation of the surface, we compute the

  EXAMPLE 6.69

Choosing an Orientation
Give an orientation of cylinder

     Solution
This surface has parameterization

The tangent vectors are
unit normal vector

In this case,                         and therefore
694 6 · Vector Calculus

       An orientation of the cylinder is

       Notice that all vectors are parallel to the xy-plane, which should be the case with vectors that are normal to the cylinder.
       Furthermore, all the vectors point outward, and therefore this is an outward orientation of the cylinder (Figure 6.75).

    Figure 6.75 If all the vectors normal to a cylinder point outward, then this is an outward orientation of the cylinder.

       6.57 Give the "upward" orientation of the graph of

Since every curve has a "forward" and "backward" direction (or, in the case of a closed curve, a clockwise and
counterclockwise direction), it is possible to give an orientation to any curve. Hence, it is possible to think of every curve
as an oriented curve. This is not the case with surfaces, however. Some surfaces cannot be oriented; such surfaces are
called nonorientable. Essentially, a surface can be oriented if the surface has an "inner" side and an "outer" side, or an
"upward" side and a "downward" side. Some surfaces are twisted in such a fashion that there is no well-defined notion of
an "inner" or "outer" side.

The classic example of a nonorientable surface is the Möbius strip. To create a Möbius strip, take a rectangular strip of
paper, give the piece of paper a half-twist, and the glue the ends together (Figure 6.76). Because of the half-twist in the
strip, the surface has no "outer" side or "inner" side. If you imagine placing a normal vector at a point on the strip and
having the vector travel all the way around the band, then (because of the half-twist) the vector points in the opposite
direction when it gets back to its original position. Therefore, the strip really only has one side.

                                 Figure 6.76 The construction of a Möbius strip.

Since some surfaces are nonorientable, it is not possible to define a vector surface integral on all piecewise smooth
surfaces. This is in contrast to vector line integrals, which can be defined on any piecewise smooth curve.

Surface Integral of a Vector Field

With the idea of orientable surfaces in place, we are now ready to define a surface integral of a vector field. The

definition is analogous to the definition of the flux of a vector field along a plane curve. Recall that if F is a two-

dimensional vector field and C is a plane curve, then the definition of the flux of F along C involved chopping C into small

pieces, choosing a point inside each piece, and calculating  at the point (where N is the unit normal vector at the

point). The definition of a surface integral of a vector field proceeds in the same fashion, except now we chop surface S

into small pieces, choose a point in the small (two-dimensional) piece, and calculate  at the point.

To place this definition in a real-world setting, let S be an oriented surface with unit normal vector N. Let v be a velocity

field of a fluid flowing through S, and suppose the fluid has density  Imagine the fluid flows through S, but S is

completely permeable so that it does not impede the fluid flow (Figure 6.77). The mass flux of the fluid is the rate of

mass flow per unit area. The mass flux is measured in mass per unit time per unit area. How could we calculate the mass

flux of the fluid across S?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.6 · Surface Integrals 695

                   Figure 6.77 Fluid flows across a completely permeable surface S.

The rate of flow, measured in mass per unit time per unit area, is To calculate the mass flux across S, chop S into

small pieces If is small enough, then it can be approximated by a tangent plane at some point P in

Therefore, the unit normal vector at P can be used to approximate                   across the entire piece because the

normal vector to a plane does not change as we move across the plane. The component of the vector at P in the

direction of N is  at P. Since is small, the dot product                            changes very little as we vary across and

therefore          can be taken as approximately constant across To approximate the mass of fluid per unit time

flowing across (and not just locally at point P), we need to multiply               by the area of Therefore, the

mass of fluid per unit time flowing across in the direction of N can be approximated by  where N,

and v are all evaluated at P (Figure 6.78). This is analogous to the flux of two-dimensional vector field F across plane

curve C, in which we approximated flux across a small piece of C with the expression     To approximate the

mass flux across S, form the sum  As pieces get smaller, the sum                                    gets

arbitrarily close to the mass flux. Therefore, the mass flux is

                                                                                    be an arbitrary vector field F leads to the following

This is a surface integral of a vector field. Letting the vector field
definition.
696 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.78 The mass of fluid per unit time flowing across in the direction of N can be approximated by

  Definition

  Let F be a continuous vector field with a domain that contains oriented surface S with unit normal vector N. The
  surface integral of F over S is

                                                                                                                                                               (6.20)

Notice the parallel between this definition and the definition of vector line integral  A surface integral of a

vector field is defined in a similar way to a flux line integral across a curve, except the domain of integration is a surface

(a two-dimensional object) rather than a curve (a one-dimensional object). Integral     is called the flux of F

across S, just as integral  is the flux of F across curve C. A surface integral over a vector field is also called a
flux integral.

Just as with vector line integrals, surface integral  is easier to compute after surface S has been

parameterized. Let          be a parameterization of S with parameter domain D. Then, the unit normal vector is given by

and, from Equation 6.20, we have

Therefore, to compute a surface integral over a vector field we can use the equation                 (6.21)

Access for free at openstax.org
  EXAMPLE 6.70                                 where                                                                                     6.6 · Surface Integrals 697
Calculating a Surface Integral             and
Calculate the surface integral                                        and S is the surface with parameterization
                                                                Therefore,
     Solution
The tangent vectors are

By Equation 6.21,

Therefore, the flux of F across S is 340.

     6.58 Calculate surface integral                     where  and S is the portion of the unit sphere in the

                 first octant with outward orientation.

EXAMPLE 6.71

Calculating Mass Flow Rate

Let                         represent a velocity field (with units of meters per second) of a fluid with constant density 80

kg/m3. Let S be hemisphere                   with        such that S is oriented outward. Find the mass flow rate of the

fluid across S.

     Solution
A parameterization of the surface is

As in Example 6.64, the tangent vectors are

and their cross product is

Notice that each component of the cross product is positive, and therefore this vector gives the outward orientation.
698 6 · Vector Calculus                                                          for the sphere.

       Therefore we use the orientation
       By Equation 6.20,

Therefore, the mass flow rate is

6.59 Let                                 m/sec represent a velocity field of a fluid with constant density 100 kg/m3.

       Let S be the half-cylinder                                                oriented outward. Calculate the

       mass flux of the fluid across S.

In Example 6.70, we computed the mass flux, which is the rate of mass flow per unit area. If we want to find the flow rate

(measured in volume per time) instead, we can use flux integral                  which leaves out the density. Since the

flow rate of a fluid is measured in volume per unit time, flow rate does not take mass into account. Therefore, we have
the following characterization of the flow rate of a fluid with velocity v across a surface S:

To compute the flow rate of the fluid in Example 6.68, we simply remove the density constant, which gives a flow rate of

Both mass flux and flow rate are important in physics and engineering. Mass flux measures how much mass is flowing
across a surface; flow rate measures how much volume of fluid is flowing across a surface.

In addition to modeling fluid flow, surface integrals can be used to model heat flow. Suppose that the temperature at

point  in an object is                   Then the heat flow is a vector field proportional to the negative temperature

gradient in the object. To be precise, the heat flow is defined as vector field  where the constant k is the

thermal conductivity of the substance from which the object is made (this constant is determined experimentally). The

rate of heat flow across surface S in the object is given by the flux integral

  EXAMPLE 6.72                                                   The temperature at point         in a region

Calculating Heat Flow
A cast-iron solid cylinder is given by inequalities

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.6 · Surface Integrals 699

containing the cylinder is                    Given that the thermal conductivity of cast iron is 55, find the heat

flow across the boundary of the solid if this boundary is oriented outward.

     Solution                                                                                                  Notice
Let S denote the boundary of the object. To find the heat flow, we need to calculate flux integral

that S is not a smooth surface but is piecewise smooth, since S is the union of three smooth surfaces (the circular top
and bottom, and the cylindrical side). Therefore, we calculate three separate integrals, one for each smooth piece of S.
Before calculating any integrals, note that the gradient of the temperature is

First we consider the circular bottom of the object, which we denote We can see that                is a circle of radius 1

centered at point           sitting in plane  This surface has parameterization

                                              Therefore,

and

Since the surface is oriented outward and is the bottom of the object, it makes sense that this vector points
downward. By Equation 6.21, the heat flow across is

Now let's consider the circular top of the object, which we denote We see that   is a circle of radius 1 centered at

point  sitting in plane     This surface has parameterization

                                              Therefore,

and

Since the surface is oriented outward and is the top of the object, we instead take vector                     By

Equation 6.21, the heat flow across is

Last, let's consider the cylindrical side of the object. This surface has parameterization          By Equation
                                                                     By Example 6.66, we know that

6.21,
700 6 · Vector Calculus

Therefore, the rate of heat flow across S is                                  The temperature at a point in a region
                                                                   Find the heat flow across the boundary of the solid if
       6.60 A cast-iron solid ball is given by inequality
                    containing the ball is
                    this boundary is oriented outward.

SECTION 6.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether the statements are true or false.

269. If surface S is given by                             270. If surface S is given by

then                                                       then

271. Surface                                               272. Given the standard
                                                                   parameterization of a
        is the same as surface                                     sphere, normal vectors
                                                     for                      are outward
                                                                   normal vectors.

For the following exercises, find parametric descriptions for the following surfaces.

273. Plane                       274. Paraboloid                   275. Plane
                                         for

276. The frustum of cone         277. The portion of cylinder      278. A cone with base radius r
                                         in the first octant, for          and height h, where r and
                                                                           h are positive constants

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       6.6 · Surface Integrals 701

For the following exercises, use a computer algebra system to approximate the area of the following surfaces using a
parametric description of the surface.

279. [T] Half cylinder                           280. [T] Plane
                                                         above square

For the following exercises, let S be the hemisphere                     with            and evaluate each surface integral.
                                                                          283.
281.                                       282.

For the following exercises, evaluate                 for vector field F, where N is an upward pointing normal vector to

surface S.

284.                                       285.                   and S  286.                          and S is
        and S is that part of plane                is hemisphere                 the portion of plane   that
                                     that                                        lies inside cylinder
        lies above unit square

For the following exercises, approximate the mass of the lamina that has the shape of given surface S. Round to four
decimal places.

287. [T] S is surface                                             288. [T] S is surface

289. [T] S is surface                            290. Evaluate
                                                         where S is the surface of cube
                                                         Assume an outward pointing normal.
702 6 · Vector Calculus

291. Evaluate surface integral         292. Evaluate  where               is the
                     where                                                      for
                                       surface defined parametrically by

and S is the portion of

plane                            that

lies over unit square R:

293. [T] Evaluate                      where S is the 294. [T] Evaluate                       where is
        surface defined by                                            the surface defined by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.6 · Surface Integrals 703

295. Evaluate                   296. Evaluate                     297. [T] Evaluate              where S is

                   where                                                  the portion of cone                 that
                                                                          lies between planes      and
S is the surface of                   where S is the portion of
hemisphere
                                      plane            that lies
                           and
above the plane                       inside cylinder

298. [T] Evaluate               where S 2is99. [T] Evaluate              where S is the part of

the portion of cylinder         that         the graph of         in the first octant

lies in the first octant between planes      between the xz-plane and plane

                   and

300. Evaluate      if S is the part of plane           301. Find the mass of a lamina

              that lies over the triangular region in        of density      in
the xy-plane with vertices (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0), and
(0, 2, 0).                                                   the shape of hemisphere
704 6 · Vector Calculus

302. Compute                       where 303. Compute

                                             and N is an  where
      outward normal vector S, where S is
      the union of two squares                            and N is an upward pointing
                                                          normal vector, where S is the
                                                    and   triangular region of the plane

                                                                              in the first
                                                          octant.

304. Compute                       where                  305. Compute                      where

      and N is an outward normal vector S,                and N is an outward normal
      where S is the surface of sphere                    vector S, where S is the surface
                                                          of the five faces of the unit cube

                                                          missing

For the following exercises, express the surface integral as an iterated double integral by using a projection on S on the
yz-plane.

306.                     S is the  307.                            S is

      first-octant portion of             the portion of the graph
      plane
                                          of              bounded by

                                          the coordinate planes and

                                          plane

For the following exercises, express the surface integral as an iterated double integral by using a projection on S on the
xz-plane

308.                     S is the  309.                            S is  310. Evaluate surface integral

      first-octant portion of             the portion of the graph                             where S is the
      plane
                                          of              bounded by             first-octant part of plane
                                                                                                      where is
                                          the coordinate planes and
                                                                                 a positive constant.
                                          plane

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    6.6 · Surface Integrals 705

311. Evaluate surface integral     312. Evaluate surface integral        313. Evaluate surface integral
        where S is hemisphere                           where S is
                                                                                                   where S is
                                           surface
                                                                                 the part of plane
                                                                                                         that lies

                                                                                 above rectangle

314. Evaluate surface integral     315. Evaluate surface integral
                       where S is                        where S is the

      plane               that             part of plane
                                           that lies inside cylinder
      lies in the first octant.

For the following exercises, use geometric reasoning to evaluate the given surface integrals.

316.                               317.                      where S 318.          where S is

      where S is surface                 is surface                        disc                on plane

                                         oriented with unit normal               oriented with unit
                                         vectors pointing outward
                                                                           normal vectors pointing

                                                                           upward

319. A lamina has the shape of a portion of sphere           320. A lamina has the shape of a portion of sphere
                                   that lies within cone                                        that lies within cone

                             Let S be the spherical shell                                         Let S be the spherical shell
        centered at the origin with radius a, and let C be           centered at the origin with radius a, and let C be
        the right circular cone with a vertex at the origin          the right circular cone with a vertex at the origin
        and an axis of symmetry that coincides with the              and an axis of symmetry that coincides with the
        z-axis. Determine the mass of the lamina if                  z-axis. Suppose the angle between the sides of
                                                                     the cone and the z-axis is

                                                                     Determine the mass of that portion of the shape
                                                                     enclosed in the intersection of S and C. Assume
706 6 · Vector Calculus

321. A paper cup has the

      shape of an inverted right

      circular cone of height 6

      in. and radius of top 3 in.

      If the cup is full of water

      weighing                   find

      the total force exerted by

      the water on the inside

      surface of the cup.

For the following exercises, the heat flow vector field for conducting objects i                                       is the

temperature in the object and          is a constant that depends on the material. Find the outward flux of F across the

following surfaces S for the given temperature distributions and assume

322.                             S     323.
                                               S is sphere
      consists of the faces of

      cube

For the following exercises, consider the radial fields                                            where p is a real number. Let S consist of

spheres A and B centered at the origin with radii           The total outward flux across S consists of the outward flux

across the outer sphere B less the flux into S across inner sphere A.

                                                                324. Find the total flux across S  325. Show that for  the
                                                                          with
                                                                                                   flux across S is
6.7 Stokes' Theorem
                                                                                                   independent of a and b.
Learning Objectives

      6.7.1 Explain the meaning of Stokes' theorem.
      6.7.2 Use Stokes' theorem to evaluate a line integral.
      6.7.3 Use Stokes' theorem to calculate a surface integral.
      6.7.4 Use Stokes' theorem to calculate a curl.

In this section, we study Stokes' theorem, a higher-dimensional generalization of Green's theorem. This theorem, like the
Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals and Green's theorem, is a generalization of the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus to higher dimensions. Stokes' theorem relates a vector surface integral over surface S in space to a line integral
around the boundary of S. Therefore, just as the theorems before it, Stokes' theorem can be used to reduce an integral
over a geometric object S to an integral over the boundary of S.

In addition to allowing us to translate between line integrals and surface integrals, Stokes' theorem connects the
concepts of curl and circulation. Furthermore, the theorem has applications in fluid mechanics and electromagnetism.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 707

We use Stokes' theorem to derive Faraday's law, an important result involving electric fields.

Stokes' Theorem

Stokes' theorem says we can calculate the flux of curl F across surface S by knowing information only about the values
of F along the boundary of S. Conversely, we can calculate the line integral of vector field F along the boundary of
surface S by translating to a double integral of the curl of F over S.
Let S be an oriented smooth surface with unit normal vector N. Furthermore, suppose the boundary of S is a simple
closed curve C. The orientation of S induces the positive orientation of C if, as you walk in the positive direction around C
with your head pointing in the direction of N, the surface is always on your left. With this definition in place, we can state
Stokes' theorem.

  Theorem 6.19

  Stokes' Theorem
  Let S be a piecewise smooth oriented surface with a boundary that is a simple closed curve C with positive orientation
  (Figure 6.79). If F is a vector field with component functions that have continuous partial derivatives on an open
  region containing S, then

Figure 6.79 Stokes' theorem relates the flux integral over the surface to a line integral around the boundary of the
surface. Note that the orientation of the curve is positive.

Suppose surface S is a flat region in the xy-plane with upward orientation. Then the unit normal vector is k and surface

integral  is actually the double integral  In this special case, Stokes' theorem gives

                                          However, this is the circulation form of Green's theorem, which shows us that Green's

theorem is a special case of Stokes' theorem. Green's theorem can only handle surfaces in a plane, but Stokes' theorem
can handle surfaces in a plane or in space.

The complete proof of Stokes' theorem is beyond the scope of this text. We look at an intuitive explanation for the truth
of the theorem and then see proof of the theorem in the special case that surface S is a portion of a graph of a function,
and S, the boundary of S, and F are all fairly tame.

Proof

First, we look at an informal proof of the theorem. This proof is not rigorous, but it is meant to give a general feeling for
708 6 · Vector Calculus

why the theorem is true. Let S be a surface and let D be a small piece of the surface so that D does not share any points

with the boundary of S. We choose D to be small enough so that it can be approximated by an oriented square E. Let D

inherit its orientation from S, and give E the same orientation. This square has four sides; denote them  and

for the left, right, up, and down sides, respectively. On the square, we can use the flux form of Green's theorem:

To approximate the flux over the entire surface, we add the values of the flux on the small squares approximating small

pieces of the surface (Figure 6.80). By Green's theorem, the flux across each approximating square is a line integral over

its boundary. Let F be an approximating square with an orientation inherited from S and with a right side (so F is to

the left of E). Let denote the right side of ; then,  In other words, the right side of is the same curve as

the left side of E, just oriented in the opposite direction. Therefore,

As we add up all the fluxes over all the squares approximating surface S, line integrals  and             cancel

each other out. The same goes for the line integrals over the other three sides of E. These three line integrals cancel out
with the line integral of the lower side of the square above E, the line integral over the left side of the square to the right
of E, and the line integral over the upper side of the square below E (Figure 6.81). After all this cancelation occurs over all
the approximating squares, the only line integrals that survive are the line integrals over sides approximating the
boundary of S. Therefore, the sum of all the fluxes (which, by Green's theorem, is the sum of all the line integrals around
the boundaries of approximating squares) can be approximated by a line integral over the boundary of S. In the limit, as
the areas of the approximating squares go to zero, this approximation gets arbitrarily close to the flux.

Figure 6.80 Chop the surface into small pieces. The pieces should be small enough that they can be approximated by a
square.

Figure 6.81 (a) The line integral along cancels out the line integral along because       (b) The line integral

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 709

along any of the sides of E cancels out with the line integral along a side of an adjacent approximating square.

Let's now look at a rigorous proof of the theorem in the special case that S is the graph of function             where x

and y vary over a bounded, simply connected region D of finite area (Figure 6.82). Furthermore, assume that has

continuous second-order partial derivatives. Let C denote the boundary of S and let C denote the boundary of D. Then, D

is the "shadow" of S in the plane and C is the "shadow" of C. Suppose that S is oriented upward. The counterclockwise

orientation of C is positive, as is the counterclockwise orientation of Let                            be a vector field with

component functions that have continuous partial derivatives.

Figure 6.82 D is the "shadow," or projection, of S in the plane and is the projection of C.

We take the standard parameterization of                       The tangent vectors are                            and

and therefore,                                      By Equation 6.19,

where the partial derivatives are all evaluated at             making the integrand depend on x and y only. Suppose

                        is a parameterization of Then, a parameterization of C is

                        Armed with these parameterizations, the Chain rule, and Green's theorem, and

keeping in mind that P, Q, and R are all functions of x and y, we can evaluate line integral

By Clairaut's theorem,  Therefore, four of the terms disappear from this double integral, and we are left
with

which equals
710 6 · Vector Calculus



We have shown that Stokes' theorem is true in the case of a function with a domain that is a simply connected region of
finite area. We can quickly confirm this theorem for another important case: when vector field F is conservative. If F is

conservative, the curl of F is zero, so        Since the boundary of S is a closed curve,           is also zero.

  EXAMPLE 6.73                                                               and surface S, where S is the paraboloid
                                                                     .
Verifying Stokes' Theorem for a Specific Case
Verify that Stokes' theorem is true for vector field

                       . Assume the surface is outward oriented and

                         Figure 6.83 Verifying Stokes' theorem for a hemisphere in a vector field.

  Solution

As a surface integral, you have                                      and

By Equation 6.19,

As a line integral, you can parameterize C by                             . By Equation 6.19,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 711

                                                                                              (6.22)

Therefore, we have verified Stokes' theorem for this example.

6.61 Verify that Stokes' theorem is true for vector field                           and surface S, where S is the
            upwardly oriented portion of the graph of          over a triangle in the xy-plane with vertices
                     and

Applying Stokes' Theorem

Stokes' theorem translates between the flux integral of surface S to a line integral around the boundary of S. Therefore,
the theorem allows us to compute surface integrals or line integrals that would ordinarily be quite difficult by translating
the line integral into a surface integral or vice versa. We now study some examples of each kind of translation.

EXAMPLE 6.74

Calculating a Surface Integral  where S is the surface, oriented outward, in Figure 6.84 and
Calculate surface integral

                                Figure 6.84 A complicated surface in a vector field.
712 6 · Vector Calculus

Solution

Note that to calculate        without using Stokes' theorem, we would need to use Equation 6.19. Use of this

equation requires a parameterization of S. Surface S is complicated enough that it would be extremely difficult to find a
parameterization. Therefore, the methods we have learned in previous sections are not useful for this problem. Instead,
we use Stokes' theorem, noting that the boundary C of the surface is merely a single circle with radius 1.

The curl of F is         By Stokes' theorem,

where C has parameterization                              By Equation 6.9,

An amazing consequence of Stokes' theorem is that if S is any other smooth surface with boundary C and the same

orientation as S, then                                    because Stokes' theorem says the surface integral depends on the

line integral around the boundary only.

In Example 6.74, we calculated a surface integral simply by using information about the boundary of the surface. In
general, let and be smooth surfaces with the same boundary C and the same orientation. By Stokes' theorem,

                                                                                                            (6.23)

Therefore, if            is difficult to calculate but    is easy to calculate, Stokes' theorem allows us to

calculate the easier surface integral. In Example 6.74, we could have calculated            by calculating

                         where is the disk enclosed by boundary curve C (a much more simple surface with which to work).

Equation 6.23 shows that flux integrals of curl vector fields are surface independent in the same way that line integrals
of gradient fields are path independent. Recall that if F is a two-dimensional conservative vector field defined on a simply

connected domain, is a potential function for F, and C is a curve in the domain of F, then  depends only on the

endpoints of C. Therefore if C is any other curve with the same starting point and endpoint as C (that is, C has the same

orientation as C), then                       In other words, the value of the integral depends on the boundary of the

path only; it does not really depend on the path itself.

Analogously, suppose that S and S are surfaces with the same boundary and same orientation, and suppose that G is a
three-dimensional vector field that can be written as the curl of another vector field F (so that F is like a "potential field"
of G). By Equation 6.23,

Therefore, the flux integral of G does not depend on the surface, only on the boundary of the surface. Flux integrals of
vector fields that can be written as the curl of a vector field are surface independent in the same way that line integrals

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 713

of vector fields that can be written as the gradient of a scalar function are path independent.

6.62 Use Stokes' theorem to calculate surface integral                     where                 and S is the surface

              as shown in the following figure. The boundary curve, C, is oriented clockwise when looking along the
              positive y-axis.

EXAMPLE 6.75

Calculating a Line Integral

Calculate the line integral            where                   and C is the boundary of the parallelogram with

vertices                               and

     Solution
To calculate the line integral directly, we need to parameterize each side of the parallelogram separately, calculate four
separate line integrals, and add the result. This is not overly complicated, but it is time-consuming.

By contrast, let's calculate the line integral using Stokes' theorem. Let S denote the surface of the parallelogram. Note

that S is the portion of the graph of         for  varying over the rectangular region with vertices

              and  in the xy-plane. Therefore, a parameterization of S is                             The

curl of F is       and Stokes' theorem and Equation 6.19 give

6.63 Use Stokes' theorem to calculate line integral            where              and C is oriented clockwise
             and is the boundary of a triangle with vertices                 and

Interpretation of Curl

In addition to translating between line integrals and flux integrals, Stokes' theorem can be used to justify the physical
interpretation of curl that we have learned. Here we investigate the relationship between curl and circulation, and we
use Stokes' theorem to state Faraday's law--an important law in electricity and magnetism that relates the curl of an
electric field to the rate of change of a magnetic field.
714 6 · Vector Calculus

Recall that if C is a closed curve and F is a vector field defined on C, then the circulation of F around C is line integral
              If F represents the velocity field of a fluid in space, then the circulation measures the tendency of the fluid to

move in the direction of C.

Let F be a continuous vector field and let be a small disk of radius r with center (Figure 6.85). If is small

enough, then                     for all points P in because the curl is continuous. Let be the boundary

circle of By Stokes' theorem,

The quantity                     Figure 6.85 Disk is a small disk in a continuous vector field.
                                        is constant, and therefore

Thus

and the approximation gets arbitrarily close as the radius shrinks to zero. Therefore Stokes' theorem implies that

This equation relates the curl of a vector field to the circulation. Since the area of the disk is  this equation says we

can view the curl (in the limit) as the circulation per unit area. Recall that if F is the velocity field of a fluid, then circulation

                         is a measure of the tendency of the fluid to move around The reason for this is that                     is

a component of F in the direction of T, and the closer the direction of F is to T, the larger the value of  (remember

that if a and b are vectors and b is fixed, then the dot product  is maximal when a points in the same direction as b).

Therefore, if F is the velocity field of a fluid, then  is a measure of how the fluid rotates about axis N. The effect

of the curl is largest about the axis that points in the direction of N, because in this case       is as large as possible.

To see this effect in a more concrete fashion, imagine placing a tiny paddlewheel at point (Figure 6.86). The
paddlewheel achieves its maximum speed when the axis of the wheel points in the direction of curlF. This justifies the
interpretation of the curl we have learned: curl is a measure of the rotation in the vector field about the axis that points
in the direction of the normal vector N, and Stokes' theorem justifies this interpretation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 715

       Figure 6.86 To visualize curl at a point, imagine placing a tiny paddlewheel at that point in the vector field.

Now that we have learned about Stokes' theorem, we can discuss applications in the area of electromagnetism. In
particular, we examine how we can use Stokes' theorem to translate between two equivalent forms of Faraday's law.
Before stating the two forms of Faraday's law, we need some background terminology.

Let C be a closed curve that models a thin wire. In the context of electric fields, the wire may be moving over time, so we

write to represent the wire. At a given time t, curve may be different from original curve C because of the

movement of the wire, but we assume that  is a closed curve for all times t. Let  be a surface with       as its

boundary, and orient  so that      has positive orientation. Suppose that         is in a magnetic field  that can also

change over time. In other words, B has the form

where P, Q, and R can all vary continuously over time. We can produce current along the wire by changing field (this

is a consequence of Ampere's law). Flux           creates electric field that does work. The integral

form of Faraday's law states that

In other words, the work done by E is the line integral around the boundary, which is also equal to the rate of change of
the flux with respect to time. The differential form of Faraday's law states that

Using Stokes' theorem, we can show that the differential form of Faraday's law is a consequence of the integral form. By
Stokes' theorem, we can convert the line integral in the integral form into surface integral

Since                 then as long as the integration of the surface does not vary with time we also have

Therefore,                                                                        In general, the equation
To derive the differential form of Faraday's law, we would like to conclude that
716 6 · Vector Calculus

is not enough to conclude that            The integral symbols do not simply "cancel out," leaving equality of the

integrands. To see why the integral symbol does not just cancel out in general, consider the two single-variable integrals

and                              where

Both of these integrals equal so                                 However,     Analogously, with our equation

                                        we cannot simply conclude that        just because their integrals are

equal. However, in our context, equation                                      is true for any region, however small (this

is in contrast to the single-variable integrals just discussed). If F and G are three-dimensional vector fields such that

                         for any surface S, then it is possible to show that  by shrinking the area of S to zero by

taking a limit (the smaller the area of S, the closer the value of            to the value of F at a point inside S). Therefore,

we can let area          shrink to zero by taking a limit and obtain the differential form of Faraday's law:

In the context of electric fields, the curl of the electric field can be interpreted as the negative of the rate of change of the
corresponding magnetic field with respect to time.

EXAMPLE 6.76

Using Faraday's Law
Calculate the curl of electric field E if the corresponding magnetic field is constant field

     Solution                                                                 By Faraday's law, the curl of the electric field is
Since the magnetic field does not change with respect to time,
therefore also zero.

     Analysis
A consequence of Faraday's law is that the curl of the electric field corresponding to a constant magnetic field is always
zero.

6.64 Calculate the curl of electric field E if the corresponding magnetic field is                                            

     Notice that the curl of the electric field does not change over time, although the magnetic field does
     change over time.

SECTION 6.7 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, without using Stokes' theorem, calculate directly both the flux of               over the given

surface and the circulation integral around its boundary, assuming all boundaries have positive orientation.

326.                                    327.                                  328.
        S is the first-octant portion           S is hemisphere                       S is hemisphere
        of plane

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 717

329.                                    330.
        S is upper hemisphere                   S is a triangular region with vertices (3, 0, 0),
                                                (0, 3/2, 0), and (0, 0, 3).
331.
        S is a portion of paraboloid
                                and is
        above the xy-plane.

For the following exercises, use Stokes' theorem to evaluate                     for the vector fields and surface.

332.                       and S is the  333.                                    334.

      surface of the cube                          and C is the intersection of              and C is the intersection of

                                                   paraboloid              and               sphere

        except for the face where                  plane       and using the                 with plane  and
        and using the outward unit
        normal vector.                             outward normal vector.                    using the outward normal

335. Use Stokes' theorem to evaluate                                                         vector

      where C is the curve given by                       336. [T] Use a computer
                                                                  algebraic system (CAS)
                                                                  and Stokes' theorem to
                                                                  approximate line integral

      traversed in the direction of increasing t.

                                                               where C is the
                                                               intersection of plane

                                                                             and surface

                                                               traversed
                                                               counterclockwise viewed
                                                               from the origin.
718 6 · Vector Calculus

337. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes'   338. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes' theorem to
        theorem to approximate           approximate line integral
        line integral

                                                  where C is a triangle with vertices

where C is the intersection                       and                oriented
of the xy-plane and
hemisphere                                        counterclockwise.

        traversed                                 340. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes'
        counterclockwise viewed                           theorem to evaluate
        from the top--that is,
        from the positive z-axis                                                     where
        toward the xy-plane.
                                                          and C is the curve of the
339. Use Stokes' theorem to evaluate                      intersection of plane
                              where
                                                                                  and cylinder
        and S is half of sphere                                              oriented
                                    oriented out          clockwise when viewed from
                                                          above.
        toward the positive x-axis.

341. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes' theorem to evaluate                   where             342. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes'
                                                                                               theorem to evaluate

                                                                                                                    where

and S consists of the top and the four sides but not the bottom of

the cube with vertices                            oriented outward.                             and S is the top part of
                                                                                                                       above plane

                                                                                                         and S is oriented
                                                                                                upward.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 719

343. Use Stokes' theorem to                344. Use Stokes' theorem to                   345. Use Stokes' theorem to evaluate
        evaluate                                   evaluate line integral                                                                where C
                                   where
                                                   where C is a triangle with                    is the curve of intersection of plane
        and S is a triangle with                   vertices (3, 0, 0), (0, 0, 2),                              and ellipsoid
        vertices (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0)              and (0, 6, 0) traversed in                                                oriented
        and (0, 0, 1) with                         the given order.
        counterclockwise                                                                         clockwise from the origin.
        orientation.

346. Use Stokes' theorem to                347. Use Stokes' theorem                      348. Use Stokes' theorem
        evaluate                                                              for                                           for vector
        where
                                                   vector field                                  field

and S is the part of surface                         where S is surface                        where S is that part of the
                         with                                                         C        surface of plane
                                                                                               contained within triangle C with
          oriented                                   is boundary circle                        vertices (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0,
counterclockwise.                                                      and S is                0, 1), traversed counterclockwise
                                                                                               as viewed from above.
                                                     oriented in the positive
                                                     z-direction.

349. A certain closed path C in            350. Use Stokes' theorem and let C be the boundary of surface                                with

plane                                  is            and                           oriented with upward facing normal. Define

known to project onto

unit circle                            in

the xy-plane. Let c be a

constant and let

Use Stokes' theorem to
evaluate

351. Let S be hemisphere                             352. Let
                                 with
                                           oriented
        upward. Let
                                                     and let S be the graph of function

be a vector field. Use Stokes' theorem                                                   with  oriented so
to evaluate
                                                     that the normal vector S has a positive y
                                                     component. Use Stokes' theorem to

                                                     compute integral
720 6 · Vector Calculus

353. Use Stokes' theorem to                  354. Use the surface integral in Stokes' 355. Use Stokes' theorem to compute

evaluate                 where               theorem to calculate the circulation              where
                                             of field F,

and C is a triangle with                     around C, which is the intersection of                             and S is

vertices (0, 0, 0), (2, 0, 0)                cylinder  and hemisphere a part of plane                           inside

and                      oriented                      oriented                      cylinder    and oriented

counterclockwise when                        counterclockwise when viewed from outward.

viewed from above.                           above.

356. Use Stokes' theorem to                  357. Let                                360. Let S be the part of
        evaluate
        where                                        and let C be the
        and S is the part of plane                   intersection of plane
                            in the positive
        octant and oriented upward                                 and cylinder
                                                                        which is
358. [T] Use a CAS and let
                                                     oriented counterclockwise
                                                     when viewed from the top.
                                                     Compute the line integral of
                                                     F over C using Stokes'
                                                     theorem.

                                                         359. Let S be ellipsoid

                                                                                     paraboloid

Use Stokes' theorem to compute the                     oriented outward and let      with        Verify Stokes'
                                                       F be a vector field with
surface integral of curl F over surface                component functions that      theorem for vector field
                                                       have continuous partial
S with inward orientation consisting                   derivatives. Compute

of cube                                      with

the right side missing.

361. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes' theorem to evaluate     362. [T] Use a CAS and Stokes'
        if                                                     theorem to evaluate

        where C is the curve given by                          with S as a portion of paraboloid
                                                                                       cut off by the

                                                               xy-plane oriented
                                                               counterclockwise.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            6.7 · Stokes' Theorem 721

363. [T] Use a CAS to evaluate                            364. Let S be paraboloid
                              where
                                                                                    for
                                                and S is
        the surface parametrically by                     where                     is a

                                                          real number. Let

                                                          For what value(s) of a (if
                                                          any) does

                                                                                     have

                                                          its maximum value?

For the following application exercises, the goal is to evaluate                              where                     and S is

the upper half of ellipsoid

365. Evaluate a surface             366. Evaluate A using a line            367. Take paraboloid                  for
        integral over a more                integral.
        convenient surface to find                                                            and slice it with plane
        the value of A.
                                                                                           Let S be the surface that

                                                                                    remains for       including the

                                                                                    planar surface in the xz-plane. Let C

                                                                                    be the semicircle and line segment

                                                                                    that bounded the cap of S in plane

                                                                                           with counterclockwise

                                                                                    orientation. Let

                                                                                    Evaluate

For the following exercises, let S be the disk enclosed by curve

                                    for                   where                 is a fixed angle.

368. What is the length of C in     369. What is the circulation of         370. For what value of is the
        terms of                            C of vector field                       circulation a maximum?
                                                                   as a
                                            function of
722 6 · Vector Calculus

371. Circle C in plane                  372. Velocity field                      373. Evaluate integral
                            has radius                                      for

        4 and center (2, 3, 3).                 represents a horizontal
                                                flow in the y-direction.
      Evaluate           for                    Compute the curl of v in a       where
                                                clockwise rotation.
                             where C                                             and S is the cap of
      has a counterclockwise
      orientation when viewed                                                    paraboloid
      from above.
                                                                                             above

                                                                                 plane       and n points

                                                                                 in the positive z-direction

                                                                                 on S.

For the following exercises, use Stokes' theorem to find the circulation of the following vector fields around any smooth,
simple closed curve C.

374.                                    375.

6.8 The Divergence Theorem

Learning Objectives

      6.8.1 Explain the meaning of the divergence theorem.
      6.8.2 Use the divergence theorem to calculate the flux of a vector field.
      6.8.3 Apply the divergence theorem to an electrostatic field.

We have examined several versions of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in higher dimensions that relate the
integral around an oriented boundary of a domain to a "derivative" of that entity on the oriented domain. In this section,
we state the divergence theorem, which is the final theorem of this type that we will study. The divergence theorem has
many uses in physics; in particular, the divergence theorem is used in the field of partial differential equations to derive
equations modeling heat flow and conservation of mass. We use the theorem to calculate flux integrals and apply it to
electrostatic fields.

Overview of Theorems

Before examining the divergence theorem, it is helpful to begin with an overview of the versions of the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus we have discussed:

1. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus:

     This theorem relates the integral of derivative over line segment           along the x-axis to a difference of
     evaluated on the boundary.
2. The Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals:

     where is the initial point of C and is the terminal point of C. The Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals
     allows path C to be a path in a plane or in space, not just a line segment on the x-axis. If we think of the gradient as
     a derivative, then this theorem relates an integral of derivative over path C to a difference of evaluated on the
     boundary of C.
3. Green's theorem, circulation form:

      Since                             and curl is a derivative of sorts, Green's theorem relates the integral of derivative curlF

      over planar region D to an integral of F over the boundary of D.

4. Green's theorem, flux form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 723

Since                and divergence is a derivative of sorts, the flux form of Green's theorem relates the integral

of derivative divF over planar region D to an integral of F over the boundary of D.

5. Stokes' theorem:

      If we think of the curl as a derivative of sorts, then Stokes' theorem relates the integral of derivative curlF over
      surface S (not necessarily planar) to an integral of F over the boundary of S.

Stating the Divergence Theorem

The divergence theorem follows the general pattern of these other theorems. If we think of divergence as a derivative of
sorts, then the divergence theorem relates a triple integral of derivative divF over a solid to a flux integral of F over the
boundary of the solid. More specifically, the divergence theorem relates a flux integral of vector field F over a closed
surface S to a triple integral of the divergence of F over the solid enclosed by S.

  Theorem 6.20

  The Divergence Theorem
  Let S be a piecewise, smooth closed surface that encloses solid E in space. Assume that S is oriented outward, and let
  F be a vector field with continuous partial derivatives on an open region containing E (Figure 6.87). Then

                                                                                                                                                               (6.24)

Figure 6.87 The divergence theorem relates a flux integral across a closed surface S to a triple integral over solid E
enclosed by the surface.

Recall that the flux form of Green's theorem states that  Therefore, the divergence theorem is

a version of Green's theorem in one higher dimension.

The proof of the divergence theorem is beyond the scope of this text. However, we look at an informal proof that gives a
general feel for why the theorem is true, but does not prove the theorem with full rigor. This explanation follows the
informal explanation given for why Stokes' theorem is true.

Proof

Let B be a small box with sides parallel to the coordinate planes inside E (Figure 6.88). Let the center of B have

coordinates  and suppose the edge lengths are             and (Figure 6.88(b)). The normal vector out of the top

of the box is k and the normal vector out of the bottom of the box is The dot product of   with k is R

and the dot product with is The area of the top of the box (and the bottom of the box) is
724 6 · Vector Calculus

Figure 6.88 (a) A small box B inside surface E has sides parallel to the coordinate planes. (b) Box B has side lengths

        and (c) If we look at the side view of B, we see that, since      is the center of the box, to get to the top of

the box we must travel a vertical distance of     up from  Similarly, to get to the bottom of the box we must

travel a distance        down from

The flux out of the top of the box can be approximated by                           (Figure 6.88(c)) and the flux out of the

bottom of the box is                            If we denote the difference between these values as   then the net flux

in the vertical direction can be approximated by           However,

Therefore, the net flux in the vertical direction can be approximated by            Similarly, the net flux in the x-direction

can be approximated by              and the net flux in the y-direction can be approximated by        Adding the

fluxes in all three directions gives an approximation of the total flux out of the box:

This approximation becomes arbitrarily close to the value of the total flux as the volume of the box shrinks to zero.

The sum of               over all the small boxes approximating E is approximately              On the other hand, the

sum of                   over all the small boxes approximating E is the sum of the fluxes over all these boxes. Just as in the

informal proof of Stokes' theorem, adding these fluxes over all the boxes results in the cancelation of a lot of the terms.

If an approximating box shares a face with another approximating box, then the flux over one face is the negative of the

flux over the shared face of the adjacent box. These two integrals cancel out. When adding up all the fluxes, the only flux

integrals that survive are the integrals over the faces approximating the boundary of E. As the volumes of the

approximating boxes shrink to zero, this approximation becomes arbitrarily close to the flux over S.



EXAMPLE 6.77

Verifying the Divergence Theorem

Verify the divergence theorem for vector field                            and surface S that consists of cone

                         and the circular top of the cone (see the following figure). Assume this surface is oriented

outward.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 725

Solution

Let E be the solid cone enclosed by S. To verify the theorem for this example, we show that           by

calculating each integral separately.                           and therefore the triple integral is
To compute the triple integral, note that

The volume of a right circular cone is given by  In this case,        Therefore,

To compute the flux integral, first note that S is piecewise smooth; S can be written as a union of smooth surfaces.
Therefore, we break the flux integral into two pieces: one flux integral across the circular top of the cone and one flux
integral across the remaining portion of the cone. Call the circular top and the portion under the top We start by
calculating the flux across the circular top of the cone. Notice that has parameterization

Then, the tangent vectors are                    and                  Therefore, the flux across is

We now calculate the flux over A parameterization of this surface is

The tangent vectors are                    and                        so the cross product is
726 6 · Vector Calculus

Notice that the negative signs on the x and y components induce the inward orientation of the cone. Since the surface is

oriented outward, we use vector                                in the flux integral. The flux across is then

The total flux across S is

and we have verified the divergence theorem for this example.

6.65 Verify the divergence theorem for vector field                                                 and surface S given by the

       cylinder                           plus the circular top and bottom of the cylinder. Assume that S is oriented

       outward.

Recall that the divergence of continuous field F at point P is a measure of the "outflowing-ness" of the field at P. If F

represents the velocity field of a fluid, then the divergence can be thought of as the rate per unit volume of the fluid

flowing out less the rate per unit volume flowing in. The divergence theorem confirms this interpretation. To see this, let

P be a point and let be a ball of small radius r centered at P (Figure 6.89). Let be the boundary sphere of Since

the radius is small and F is continuous,             for all other points Q in the ball. Therefore, the flux across

can be approximated using the divergence theorem:

Since            is a constant,

Therefore, flux             can be approximated by             This approximation gets better as the radius

shrinks to zero, and therefore

This equation says that the divergence at P is the net rate of outward flux of the fluid per unit volume.

                                                 Figure 6.89 Ball of small radius r centered at P.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 727

Using the Divergence Theorem

The divergence theorem translates between the flux integral of closed surface S and a triple integral over the solid
enclosed by S. Therefore, the theorem allows us to compute flux integrals or triple integrals that would ordinarily be
difficult to compute by translating the flux integral into a triple integral and vice versa.

EXAMPLE 6.78

Applying the Divergence Theorem  where S is cylinder                                   including the circular top and
Calculate the surface integral

bottom, and

     Solution
We could calculate this integral without the divergence theorem, but the calculation is not straightforward because we
would have to break the flux integral into three separate integrals: one for the top of the cylinder, one for the bottom,
and one for the side. Furthermore, each integral would require parameterizing the corresponding surface, calculating
tangent vectors and their cross product, and using Equation 6.19.

By contrast, the divergence theorem allows us to calculate the single triple integral  where E is the solid

enclosed by the cylinder. Using the divergence theorem and converting to cylindrical coordinates, we have

     6.66 Use the divergence theorem to calculate flux integral  where S is the boundary of the box given
                                                                                 (see the following figure).
             by                  and

EXAMPLE 6.79

Applying the Divergence Theorem

Let              be the velocity field of a fluid. Let C be the solid cube given by                                    and

let S be the boundary of this cube (see the following figure). Find the flow rate of the fluid across S.
728 6 · Vector Calculus

                                          Figure 6.90 Vector field

     Solution                             Before calculating this flux integral, let's discuss what the value of the
The flow rate of the fluid across S is

integral should be. Based on Figure 6.90, we see that if we place this cube in the fluid (as long as the cube doesn't
encompass the origin), then the rate of fluid entering the cube is the same as the rate of fluid exiting the cube. The field
is rotational in nature and, for a given circle parallel to the xy-plane that has a center on the z-axis, the vectors along that
circle are all the same magnitude. That is how we can see that the flow rate is the same entering and exiting the cube.
The flow into the cube cancels with the flow out of the cube, and therefore the flow rate of the fluid across the cube
should be zero.

To verify this intuition, we need to calculate the flux integral. Calculating the flux integral directly requires breaking the
flux integral into six separate flux integrals, one for each face of the cube. We also need to find tangent vectors, compute
their cross product, and use Equation 6.19. However, using the divergence theorem makes this calculation go much
more quickly:

Therefore the flux is zero, as expected.

6.67 Let                         be the velocity field of a fluid. Let C be the solid cube given by

                                          and let S be the boundary of this cube (see the following figure). Find the

flow rate of the fluid across S.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 729

Example 6.79 illustrates a remarkable consequence of the divergence theorem. Let S be a piecewise, smooth closed
surface and let F be a vector field defined on an open region containing the surface enclosed by S. If F has the form

                                            then the divergence of F is zero. By the divergence theorem, the flux of F across S is also
zero. This makes certain flux integrals incredibly easy to calculate. For example, suppose we wanted to calculate the flux

integral  where S is a cube and

Calculating the flux integral directly would be difficult, if not impossible, using techniques we studied previously. At the
very least, we would have to break the flux integral into six integrals, one for each face of the cube. But, because the
divergence of this field is zero, the divergence theorem immediately shows that the flux integral is zero.

We can now use the divergence theorem to justify the physical interpretation of divergence that we discussed earlier.
Recall that if F is a continuous three-dimensional vector field and P is a point in the domain of F, then the divergence of F
at P is a measure of the "outflowing-ness" of F at P. If F represents the velocity field of a fluid, then the divergence of F at
P is a measure of the net flow rate out of point P (the flow of fluid out of P less the flow of fluid in to P). To see how the
divergence theorem justifies this interpretation, let be a ball of very small radius r with center P, and assume that
is in the domain of F. Furthermore, assume that has a positive, outward orientation. Since the radius of is small
and F is continuous, the divergence of F is approximately constant on That is, if is any point in then

                               Let denote the boundary sphere of We can approximate the flux across using the
divergence theorem as follows:

As we shrink the radius r to zero via a limit, the quantity  gets arbitrarily close to the flux. Therefore,

and we can consider the divergence at P as measuring the net rate of outward flux per unit volume at P. Since
"outflowing-ness" is an informal term for the net rate of outward flux per unit volume, we have justified the physical
interpretation of divergence we discussed earlier, and we have used the divergence theorem to give this justification.
730 6 · Vector Calculus

Application to Electrostatic Fields

The divergence theorem has many applications in physics and engineering. It allows us to write many physical laws in
both an integral form and a differential form (in much the same way that Stokes' theorem allowed us to translate
between an integral and differential form of Faraday's law). Areas of study such as fluid dynamics, electromagnetism,
and quantum mechanics have equations that describe the conservation of mass, momentum, or energy, and the
divergence theorem allows us to give these equations in both integral and differential forms.

One of the most common applications of the divergence theorem is to electrostatic fields. An important result in this
subject is Gauss' law. This law states that if S is a closed surface in electrostatic field E, then the flux of E across S is the
total charge enclosed by S (divided by an electric constant). We now use the divergence theorem to justify the special
case of this law in which the electrostatic field is generated by a stationary point charge at the origin.

If  is a point in space, then the distance from the point to the origin is                        Let denote radial

vector field                     The vector at a given position in space points in the direction of unit radial vector

              and is scaled by the quantity  Therefore, the magnitude of a vector at a given point is inversely

proportional to the square of the vector's distance from the origin. Suppose we have a stationary charge of q Coulombs

at the origin, existing in a vacuum. The charge generates electrostatic field E given by

where the approximation                      farad (F)/m is an electric constant. (The constant is a measure of the

resistance encountered when forming an electric field in a vacuum.) Notice that E is a radial vector field similar to the

gravitational field described in Example 6.6. The difference is that this field points outward whereas the gravitational

field points inward. Because

we say that electrostatic fields obey an inverse-square law. That is, the electrostatic force at a given point is inversely

proportional to the square of the distance from the source of the charge (which in this case is at the origin). Given this

vector field, we show that the flux across closed surface S is zero if the charge is outside of S, and that the flux is    if

the charge is inside of S. In other words, the flux across S is the charge inside the surface divided by constant This is a

special case of Gauss' law, and here we use the divergence theorem to justify this special case.

To show that the flux across S is the charge inside the surface divided by constant   we need two intermediate steps.
First we show that the divergence of is zero and then we show that the flux of       across any smooth surface S is
either zero or We can then justify this special case of Gauss' law.

    EXAMPLE 6.80

The Divergence of Is Zero                    is defined (away from the origin).
Verify that the divergence of is zero where

     Solution                    the quotient rule gives us
Since

Similarly,
Therefore,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 731

Notice that since the divergence of  is zero and E is  scaled by a constant, the divergence of electrostatic field E is
also zero (except at the origin).

Theorem 6.21

Flux across a Smooth Surface                                                  Then,
Let S be a connected, piecewise smooth closed surface and let

In other words, this theorem says that the flux of  across any piecewise smooth closed surface S depends only on
whether the origin is inside of S.

Proof

The logic of this proof follows the logic of Example 6.46, only we use the divergence theorem rather than Green's
theorem.

First, suppose that S does not encompass the origin. In this case, the solid enclosed by S is in the domain of and

since the divergence of is zero, we can immediately apply the divergence theorem and find that  is zero.

Now suppose that S does encompass the origin. We cannot just use the divergence theorem to calculate the flux,
because the field is not defined at the origin. Let be a sphere of radius a inside of S centered at the origin. The
outward normal vector field on the sphere, in spherical coordinates, is

(see Example 6.64). Therefore, on the surface of the sphere, the dot product  (in spherical coordinates) is

The flux of across is

Now, remember that we are interested in the flux across S, not necessarily the flux across To calculate the flux across
S, let E be the solid between surfaces and S. Then, the boundary of E consists of and S. Denote this boundary by

          to indicate that S is oriented outward but now is oriented inward. We would like to apply the divergence
theorem to solid E. Notice that the divergence theorem, as stated, can't handle a solid such as E because E has a hole.
However, the divergence theorem can be extended to handle solids with holes, just as Green's theorem can be extended
to handle regions with holes. This allows us to use the divergence theorem in the following way. By the divergence
theorem,
732 6 · Vector Calculus

Therefore,                                                                                           of a point

and we have our desired result.

Now we return to calculating the flux across a smooth surface in the context of electrostatic field
charge at the origin. Let S be a piecewise smooth closed surface that encompasses the origin. Then

If S does not encompass the origin, then

Therefore, we have justified the claim that we set out to justify: the flux across closed surface S is zero if the charge is

outside of S, and the flux is    if the charge is inside of S.

This analysis works only if there is a single point charge at the origin. In this case, Gauss' law says that the flux of E
across S is the total charge enclosed by S. Gauss' law can be extended to handle multiple charged solids in space, not just
a single point charge at the origin. The logic is similar to the previous analysis, but beyond the scope of this text. In full
generality, Gauss' law states that if S is a piecewise smooth closed surface and Q is the total amount of charge inside of
S, then the flux of E across S is

EXAMPLE 6.81

Using Gauss' law

Suppose we have four stationary point charges in space, all with a charge of 0.002 Coulombs (C). The charges are located

at                                        Let E denote the electrostatic field generated by these point charges. If S is

the sphere of radius 2 oriented outward and centered at the origin, then find

    Solution

According to Gauss' law, the flux of E across S is the total charge inside of S divided by the electric constant. Since S has

radius 2, notice that only two of the charges are inside of S: the charge at   and the charge at     Therefore,

the total charge encompassed by S is 0.004 and, by Gauss' law,

    6.68 Work the previous example for surface S that is a sphere of radius 4 centered at the origin, oriented
                 outward.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 733

          SECTION 6.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use a computer algebraic system (CAS) and the divergence theorem to evaluate surface

integral        for the given choice of F and the boundary surface S. For each closed surface, assume N is the

outward unit normal vector.

376. [T]                         S is 377. [T]
        the surface of cube

                                              S is the surface of hemisphere

                                                                together with

                                              disk              in the xy-plane.

378. [T]                                              379. [T]

is the surface of the unit cube                             S is the surface of the

                                    excluding               solid bounded by the

the face     .                                              parabola

                                                            and the plane         .

380. [T]                            381. [T]

S is the surface of sphere            S is the surface of the solid
                                      bounded by cylinder

                                                        and planes

382. [T]                              383. [T]

S is the surface of the solid                  S is the surface of the solid bounded by

bounded above by sphere                        cylinder               and planes

and below by cone            in

spherical coordinates. (Think of
S as the surface of an "ice cream
cone.")

384. [T] Surface integral        where S is the surface of

the solid bounded by paraboloid                     and plane
         and

385. Use the divergence theorem to calculate surface      386. Use the divergence theorem to
                                                                  calculate surface integral
integral        where
                                                                                    where

and S is the surface of the solid bounded by the                and S is the surface bounded by

sphere                       and below by the plane             cylinder             and planes

          .                                                                and

387. Use the divergence theorem to    388. Use the divergence theorem to calculate surface
        calculate surface integral
                                                integral              when

when                                            and S is the surface of the solid bounded by the

and S is the surface of the box with            paraboloid                      and the plane     .
vertices
734 6 · Vector Calculus

389. [T] Use a CAS and the divergence theorem to

calculate flux                    where

and S is a sphere with center (0, 0, 0) and radius 2.

390. Use the divergence theorem to compute the value of flux  391. Use the divergence
                                                                      theorem to compute flux
integral                 where

                                                                                 integral  where

and S is the surface of the solid bounded by                                                                 and S
                                                                                 consists of the union of
                                                                                 paraboloid

                                                                                 and disk

                                                                                 oriented outward. What is
                                                                                 the flux through just the
                                                                                 paraboloid?

392. Use the divergence            393. Use the divergence theorem to
        theorem to compute flux            calculate surface integral

integral                 where                            for

and S is a part of cone                       where S is the surface inside the

                         beneath              cylinder  between the

top plane                oriented             planes

downward.

394. Consider

Let E be the solid enclosed by

paraboloid                         and

plane                    with normal vectors

pointing outside E. Compute flux

F across the boundary of E using

the divergence theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 735

For the following exercises, use a CAS along with the divergence theorem to compute the net outward flux for the fields
across the given surfaces S.

395. [T]                S is             396. [T]         S is the 397. [T]
        sphere
                                         boundary of the

                                         tetrahedron in the first                        S is sphere
                                         octant formed by plane

398. [T]           S is the

surface of paraboloid

                   for

          plus its base in the

xy-plane.

For the following exercises, use a CAS and the divergence theorem to compute the net outward flux for the vector fields
across the boundary of the given regions D.

399. [T]                           400. [T]                                    401. [T]                    D
                                                                            D
        D is the region between                                                is the region in the first
        spheres of radius 2 and 4          is the region between
        centered at the origin.            spheres of radius 1 and 2           octant between planes
                                           centered at the origin.
                                                                                            and

402. Let                                 Use the    403. Use the divergence theorem to find the
        divergence theorem to calculate                     outward flux of field

where S is the surface of the cube with             through the cube bounded by planes
corners at

oriented outward.

404. Let                           405. Evaluate          where                406. Find the net outward flux of

and let S be hemisphere                                                        and S field

                   together              is the surface consisting of all faces of       across any smooth closed
                                         the tetrahedron bounded by plane                surface in where a, b, and c
with disk               in the                                                           are constants.
                                                             and the coordinate
xy-plane. Use the                        planes, with outward unit normal

divergence theorem.                      vector N.
736 6 · Vector Calculus

407. Use the divergence                        408. Use the divergence theorem to evaluate                409. Let R be the region
        theorem to evaluate                                            where                                      defined by
                                where                                                                                                       Use the
                                                                                                and S is          divergence theorem to
and S is sphere                                        the boundary of the cube defined by
constant                                                                                                          find
                         with

410. Let E be the solid bounded by the xy-plane and paraboloid                   411. Let E be the solid unit cube with
                               so that S is the surface of the paraboloid piece          diagonally opposite corners at the
                                                                                         origin and (1, 1, 1), and faces
        together with the disk in the xy-plane that forms its bottom. If                 parallel to the coordinate planes.
                                                                                         Let S be the surface of E, oriented
find                     using the divergence theorem.                                   with the outward-pointing normal.

                                                                                       Use a CAS to find          using

                                                                                       the divergence theorem if

412. Use the divergence                        413. Find    where                414. Consider radial vector
        theorem to calculate the                                                         field
        flux of
                                               and S is the outwardly                  Compute the surface
        through sphere                         oriented surface obtained               integral, where S is the
                                               by removing cube                        surface of a sphere of
415. Compute the flux of water                                                         radius a centered at the
        through parabolic cylinder             from cube                               origin.
                         from
                                       if the  416. [T] Use a CAS to find the flux of
        velocity vector is                             vector field

                                               across the portion of

                                               hyperboloid

                                               between planes         and

                                                            oriented so the unit

                                               normal vector points away from
                                               the z-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.8 · The Divergence Theorem 737

417. [T] Use a CAS to find the flux of vector field     418. [T] Use a CAS to compute
                                                                                where
      through surface S, where S is given by
                                                                and S is a part of sphere
                       from             oriented so                                      with

      the unit normal vector points downward.

419. Evaluate                where                   420. [T] Use a CAS to calculate the flux of

      and S is the boundary of the solid cylinder       across surface S, where S is the boundary of the
                         and
                                                        solid bounded by hemispheres

                                                        and                and plane

421. Use the divergence theorem 422. [T] Use a CAS and the divergence theorem to

      to evaluate            where            evaluate         where

      and S is the surface                    and S is sphere              orientated
      consisting of three pieces:             outward.

      on the top;                on
                             on the
      the sides; and
      bottom.

423. Use the divergence
        theorem to evaluate

                   where

      and S is the boundary of
      the solid enclosed by
      paraboloid

                              cylinder
                        and plane
                     and S is
      oriented outward.

For the following exercises, Fourier's law of heat transfer states that the heat flow vector F at a point is proportional to

the negative gradient of the temperature; that is,             which means that heat energy flows hot regions to cold

regions. The constant        is called the conductivity, which has metric units of joules per meter per second-kelvin or

watts per meter-kelvin. A temperature function for region D is given. Use the divergence theorem to find net outward

heat flux                               across the boundary S of D, where

424.                                                    425.

426.
        D is the sphere of radius a
        centered at the origin.
738 6 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

circulation the tendency of a fluid to move in the direction of curve C. If C is a closed curve, then the circulation of F

along C is line integral             which we also denote

closed curve a curve for which there exists a parameterization                     such that            and the curve is

traversed exactly once

closed curve a curve that begins and ends at the same point

connected region a region in which any two points can be connected by a path with a trace contained entirely inside

the region

conservative field a vector field for which there exists a scalar function such that

curl the curl of vector field                  denoted        is the "determinant" of the matrix                     and is

given by the expression                                                it measures the tendency of particles at a point to

rotate about the axis that points in the direction of the curl at the point

divergence the divergence of a vector field                   denoted          is                 it measures the

"outflowing-ness" of a vector field

divergence theorem a theorem used to transform a difficult flux integral into an easier triple integral and vice versa
flux the rate of a fluid flowing across a curve in a vector field; the flux of vector field F across plane curve C is line

integral

flux integral another name for a surface integral of a vector field; the preferred term in physics and engineering

Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals the value of line integral                  depends only on the value of at the

endpoints of C:

Gauss' law if S is a piecewise, smooth closed surface in a vacuum and Q is the total stationary charge inside of S, then

the flux of electrostatic field E across S is

gradient field a vector field for which there exists a scalar function such that              in other words, a vector field

that is the gradient of a function; such vector fields are also called conservative

Green's theorem relates the integral over a connected region to an integral over the boundary of the region

grid curves curves on a surface that are parallel to grid lines in a coordinate plane

heat flow a vector field proportional to the negative temperature gradient in an object

independence of path a vector field F has path independence if                                for any curves and in

the domain of F with the same initial points and terminal points

inverse-square law the electrostatic force at a given point is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from

the source of the charge

line integral the integral of a function along a curve in a plane or in space

mass flux the rate of mass flow of a fluid per unit area, measured in mass per unit time per unit area
orientation of a curve the orientation of a curve C is a specified direction of C

orientation of a surface if a surface has an "inner" side and an "outer" side, then an orientation is a choice of the inner

    or the outer side; the surface could also have "upward" and "downward" orientations
parameter domain (parameter space) the region of the uv plane over which the parameters u and v vary for

parameterization

parameterized surface (parametric surface) a surface given by a description of the form
                                                       where the parameters u and v vary over a parameter domain in the uv-plane

piecewise smooth curve an oriented curve that is not smooth, but can be written as the union of finitely many smooth

curves

potential function a scalar function such that

radial field a vector field in which all vectors either point directly toward or directly away from the origin; the

magnitude of any vector depends only on its distance from the origin

regular parameterization parameterization                                          such that        is not zero for point

in the parameter domain

rotational field a vector field in which the vector at point    is tangent to a circle with radius                   in a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                6 · Chapter Review 739

    rotational field, all vectors flow either clockwise or counterclockwise, and the magnitude of a vector depends only on
    its distance from the origin
scalar line integral the scalar line integral of a function along a curve C with respect to arc length is the integral

                it is the integral of a scalar function along a curve in a plane or in space; such an integral is defined in

terms of a Riemann sum, as is a single-variable integral

simple curve a curve that does not cross itself

simply connected region a region that is connected and has the property that any closed curve that lies entirely inside

the region encompasses points that are entirely inside the region

Stokes' theorem relates the flux integral over a surface S to a line integral around the boundary C of the surface S

stream function if      is a source-free vector field, then stream function g is a function such that        and

surface area the area of surface S given by the surface integral

surface independent flux integrals of curl vector fields are surface independent if their evaluation does not depend on

the surface but only on the boundary of the surface

surface integral an integral of a function over a surface

surface integral of a scalar-valued function a surface integral in which the integrand is a scalar function

surface integral of a vector field a surface integral in which the integrand is a vector field

unit vector field a vector field in which the magnitude of every vector is 1

vector field measured in  an assignment of a vector               to each point  of a subset of  in  an

assignment of a vector              to each point          of a subset of 

vector line integral the vector line integral of vector field F along curve C is the integral of the dot product of F with

unit tangent vector T of C with respect to arc length,            such an integral is defined in terms of a Riemann

    sum, similar to a single-variable integral

Key Equations

Vector field in  or

Vector field in  or

Calculating a scalar line integral

Calculating a vector line integral or

Calculating flux

Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals
Circulation of a conservative field over curve C that encloses a simply
connected region
740 6 · Chapter Review

Green's theorem, circulation form                             where C is the boundary of D
Green's theorem, flux form                            where C is the boundary of D
Green's theorem, extended version
Curl
Divergence
Divergence of curl is zero
Curl of a gradient is the zero vector
Scalar surface integral
Flux integral
Stokes' theorem

Divergence theorem

Key Concepts

6.1 Vector Fields

· A vector field assigns a vector      to each point  in a subset D of    to each point

   in a subset D of 

· Vector fields can describe the distribution of vector quantities such as forces or velocities over a region of the plane
    or of space. They are in common use in such areas as physics, engineering, meteorology, oceanography.

· We can sketch a vector field by examining its defining equation to determine relative magnitudes in various
    locations and then drawing enough vectors to determine a pattern.

· A vector field is called conservative if there exists a scalar function such that

6.2 Line Integrals

· Line integrals generalize the notion of a single-variable integral to higher dimensions. The domain of integration in
   a single-variable integral is a line segment along the x-axis, but the domain of integration in a line integral is a curve
    in a plane or in space.

· If C is a curve, then the length of C is

· There are two kinds of line integral: scalar line integrals and vector line integrals. Scalar line integrals can be used to
    calculate the mass of a wire; vector line integrals can be used to calculate the work done on a particle traveling
    through a field.

· Scalar line integrals can be calculated using Equation 6.8; vector line integrals can be calculated using Equation 6.9.
· Two key concepts expressed in terms of line integrals are flux and circulation. Flux measures the rate that a field

    crosses a given line; circulation measures the tendency of a field to move in the same direction as a given closed
    curve.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 741

6.3 Conservative Vector Fields

  · The theorems in this section require curves that are closed, simple, or both, and regions that are connected or
      simply connected.

  · The line integral of a conservative vector field can be calculated using the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals.
      This theorem is a generalization of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in higher dimensions. Using this theorem
      usually makes the calculation of the line integral easier.

  · Conservative fields are independent of path. The line integral of a conservative field depends only on the value of
      the potential function at the endpoints of the domain curve.

  · Given vector field F, we can test whether F is conservative by using the cross-partial property. If F has the cross-
      partial property and the domain is simply connected, then F is conservative (and thus has a potential function). If F
      is conservative, we can find a potential function by using the Problem-Solving Strategy.

  · The circulation of a conservative vector field on a simply connected domain over a closed curve is zero.

6.4 Green's Theorem

  · Green's theorem relates the integral over a connected region to an integral over the boundary of the region. Green's
      theorem is a version of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in one higher dimension.

  · Green's Theorem comes in two forms: a circulation form and a flux form. In the circulation form, the integrand is
               In the flux form, the integrand is

  · Green's theorem can be used to transform a difficult line integral into an easier double integral, or to transform a
      difficult double integral into an easier line integral.

  · A vector field is source free if it has a stream function. The flux of a source-free vector field across a closed curve is
      zero, just as the circulation of a conservative vector field across a closed curve is zero.

6.5 Divergence and Curl

  · The divergence of a vector field is a scalar function. Divergence measures the "outflowing-ness" of a vector field. If v
      is the velocity field of a fluid, then the divergence of v at a point is the outflow of the fluid less the inflow at the
      point.

  · The curl of a vector field is a vector field. The curl of a vector field at point P measures the tendency of particles at P
      to rotate about the axis that points in the direction of the curl at P.

  · A vector field with a simply connected domain is conservative if and only if its curl is zero.

6.6 Surface Integrals

  · Surfaces can be parameterized, just as curves can be parameterized. In general, surfaces must be parameterized
      with two parameters.

  · Surfaces can sometimes be oriented, just as curves can be oriented. Some surfaces, such as a Möbius strip, cannot
      be oriented.

  · A surface integral is like a line integral in one higher dimension. The domain of integration of a surface integral is a
      surface in a plane or space, rather than a curve in a plane or space.

  · The integrand of a surface integral can be a scalar function or a vector field. To calculate a surface integral with an
      integrand that is a function, use Equation 6.19. To calculate a surface integral with an integrand that is a vector field,
      use Equation 6.20.

  · If S is a surface, then the area of S is

6.7 Stokes' Theorem

  · Stokes' theorem relates a flux integral over a surface to a line integral around the boundary of the surface. Stokes'
      theorem is a higher dimensional version of Green's theorem, and therefore is another version of the Fundamental
      Theorem of Calculus in higher dimensions.

  · Stokes' theorem can be used to transform a difficult surface integral into an easier line integral, or a difficult line
      integral into an easier surface integral.

  · Through Stokes' theorem, line integrals can be evaluated using the simplest surface with boundary C.
  · Faraday's law relates the curl of an electric field to the rate of change of the corresponding magnetic field. Stokes'

      theorem can be used to derive Faraday's law.

6.8 The Divergence Theorem

  · The divergence theorem relates a surface integral across closed surface S to a triple integral over the solid enclosed
      by S. The divergence theorem is a higher dimensional version of the flux form of Green's theorem, and is therefore a
742 6 · Chapter Review

    higher dimensional version of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.
· The divergence theorem can be used to transform a difficult flux integral into an easier triple integral and vice versa.
· The divergence theorem can be used to derive Gauss' law, a fundamental law in electrostatics.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

427. Vector field                        428. For vector field                      429. The divergence of a
        conservative.                                                                       vector field is a vector
                                 is                                                         field.

                                               if                        in

                                               open region then

430. If                then is a

      conservative vector field.

Draw the following vector fields.

431.                                     432.

Are the following the vector fields conservative? If so, find the potential function such that

433.                                     434.

435.                                                                         436.

Evaluate the following integrals.

437.                                     438.                   where               439.        where S is surface

      along             from (0,
      0) to (4, 2)

Find the divergence and curl for the following vector fields.

440.                                               441.

Use Green's theorem to evaluate the following integrals.

442.                                     443.

        where C is a square with                 where C is a circle
        vertices (0, 0), (0, 2), (2, 2)          centered at the origin
        and (2, 0) oriented                      with radius 3
        counterclockwise.

Use Stokes' theorem to evaluate

444.                                     445.
        where is the upper half
        of the unit sphere                     where is the upward-facing

                                               paraboloid                    lying

                                               in cylinder

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6 · Chapter Review 743

Use the divergence theorem to evaluate

446.               defined by           447.                            is bounded by paraboloid
        over cube                               where                        and plane

448. Find the amount of work         449. Find the total mass of a      450. Find the total mass of a
        performed by a 50-kg                 thin wire in the shape of
        woman ascending a                    an upper semicircle with   thin sheet in the shape of
        helical staircase with               radius and a density
        radius 2 m and height 100            function of                a hemisphere with radius
        m. The woman completes
        five revolutions during                                         2 for     with a density
        the climb.
                                                                        function

451. Use the divergence theorem
        to compute the value of the
        flux integral over the unit
        sphere with
744 6 · Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                              7 · Introduction 745

7  SECOND-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL
   EQUATIONS

Figure 7.1 A motorcycle suspension system is an example of a damped spring-mass system. The spring absorbs bumps
and keeps the tire in contact with the road. The shock absorber damps the motion so the motorcycle does not continue
to bounce after going over each bump. (credit: nSeika, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Second-Order Linear Equations
  7.2 Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations
  7.3 Applications
  7.4 Series Solutions of Differential Equations

      Introduction

We have already studied the basics of differential equations, including separable first-order equations. In this chapter, we
go a little further and look at second-order equations, which are equations containing second derivatives of the
dependent variable. The solution methods we examine are different from those discussed earlier, and the solutions tend
to involve trigonometric functions as well as exponential functions. Here we concentrate primarily on second-order
equations with constant coefficients.

Such equations have many practical applications. The operation of certain electrical circuits, known as
resistor-inductor-capacitor (RLC) circuits, can be described by second-order differential equations with constant
coefficients. These circuits are found in all kinds of modern electronic devices--from computers to smartphones to
televisions. Such circuits can be used to select a range of frequencies from the entire radio wave spectrum, and are they
commonly used for tuning AM/FM radios. We look at these circuits more closely in Applications.

Spring-mass systems, such as motorcycle shock absorbers, are a second common application of second-order
differential equations. For motocross riders, the suspension systems on their motorcycles are very important. The off-
road courses on which they ride often include jumps, and losing control of the motorcycle when landing could cost them
the race. The movement of the shock absorber depends on the amount of damping in the system. In this chapter, we
model forced and unforced spring-mass systems with varying amounts of damping.
746 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

    7.1 Second-Order Linear Equations

      Learning Objectives

             7.1.1 Recognize homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear differential equations.
             7.1.2 Determine the characteristic equation of a homogeneous linear equation.
             7.1.3 Use the roots of the characteristic equation to find the solution to a homogeneous linear equation.
             7.1.4 Solve initial-value and boundary-value problems involving linear differential equations.

       When working with differential equations, usually the goal is to find a solution. In other words, we want to find a
       function (or functions) that satisfies the differential equation. The technique we use to find these solutions varies,
       depending on the form of the differential equation with which we are working. Second-order differential equations have
       several important characteristics that can help us determine which solution method to use. In this section, we examine
       some of these characteristics and the associated terminology.

     Homogeneous Linear Equations

       Consider the second-order differential equation

Notice that y and its derivatives appear in a relatively simple form. They are multiplied by functions of x, but are not
raised to any powers themselves, nor are they multiplied together. As discussed in Introduction to Differential Equations
(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/4-introduction), first-order equations with similar characteristics
are said to be linear. The same is true of second-order equations. Also note that all the terms in this differential equation
involve either y or one of its derivatives. There are no terms involving only functions of x. Equations like this, in which
every term contains y or one of its derivatives, are called homogeneous.

Not all differential equations are homogeneous. Consider the differential equation

The term on the right side of the equal sign does not contain y or any of its derivatives. Therefore, this differential
equation is nonhomogeneous.

Definition

A second-order differential equation is linear if it can be written in the form

                                                                                                   (7.1)

where                            and are real-valued functions and  is not identically zero. If    --in other
words, if                                                                                                   for
some value of  for every value of x--the equation is said to be a homogeneous linear equation. If

               the equation is said to be a nonhomogeneous linear equation.

MEDIA

Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_Secondord) to study more about second-order linear differential
equations.

In linear differential equations, and its derivatives can be raised only to the first power and they may not be multiplied

by one another. Terms involving or  make the equation nonlinear. Functions of and its derivatives, such as

or are similarly prohibited in linear differential equations.

Note that equations may not always be given in standard form (the form shown in the definition). It can be helpful to
rewrite them in that form to decide whether they are linear, or whether a linear equation is homogeneous.

EXAMPLE 7.1

Classifying Second-Order Equations
Classify each of the following equations as linear or nonlinear. If the equation is linear, determine further whether it is
homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 747

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

     Solution

a. This equation is nonlinear because of the term.

b. This equation is linear. There is no term involving a power or function of and the coefficients are all functions of

     The equation is already written in standard form, and is identically zero, so the equation is homogeneous.

c. This equation is nonlinear. Note that, in this case, x is the dependent variable and t is the independent variable. The

     second term involves the product of and so the equation is nonlinear.

d. This equation is linear. Since      the equation is nonhomogeneous.

e. This equation is nonlinear, because of the  term.

f. This equation is linear. Rewriting it in standard form gives

     With the equation in standard form, we can see that         so the equation is nonhomogeneous.

g. This equation looks like it's linear, but we should rewrite it in standard form to be sure. We get

     This equation is, indeed, linear. With    it is nonhomogeneous.
h. This equation is nonlinear because of the   term.

       MEDIA
      Visit this website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_Secondord2) that discusses second-order differential equations.

       7.1 Classify each of the following equations as linear or nonlinear. If the equation is linear, determine further
                  whether it is homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.
                   a.
                   b.

Later in this section, we will see some techniques for solving specific types of differential equations. Before we get to
that, however, let's get a feel for how solutions to linear differential equations behave. In many cases, solving differential
equations depends on making educated guesses about what the solution might look like. Knowing how various types of
solutions behave will be helpful.

  EXAMPLE 7.2

Verifying a Solution
Consider the linear, homogeneous differential equation

Looking at this equation, notice that the coefficient functions are polynomials, with higher powers of  associated with

higher-order derivatives of Show that          is a solution to this differential equation.

     Solution

Let  Then      and                     Substituting into the differential equation, we see that
748 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

      7.2 Show that              is a solution to the differential equation

Although simply finding any solution to a differential equation is important, mathematicians and engineers often want
to go beyond finding one solution to a differential equation to finding all solutions to a differential equation. In other
words, we want to find a general solution. Just as with first-order differential equations, a general solution (or family of
solutions) gives the entire set of solutions to a differential equation. An important difference between first-order and
second-order equations is that, with second-order equations, we typically need to find two different solutions to the
equation to find the general solution. If we find two solutions, then any linear combination of these solutions is also a
solution. We state this fact as the following theorem.

Theorem 7.1

Superposition Principle

If     and      are solutions to a linear homogeneous differential equation, then the function

where and are constants, is also a solution.

The proof of this superposition principle theorem is left as an exercise.

  EXAMPLE 7.3

Verifying the Superposition Principle
Consider the differential equation

Given that and       are solutions to this differential equation, show that  is a solution.

     Solution
We have

Then

Thus,                is a solution.

      7.3 Consider the differential equation

       Given that                and         are solutions to this differential equation, show that  is a solution.

Unfortunately, to find the general solution to a second-order differential equation, it is not enough to find any two
solutions and then combine them. Consider the differential equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 749

Both        and       are solutions (check this). However,                          is not the general solution. This

expression does not account for all solutions to the differential equation. In particular, it fails to account for the function

      which is also a solution to the differential equation.

It turns out that to find the general solution to a second-order differential equation, we must find two linearly
independent solutions. We define that terminology here.

Definition

A set of functions                         is said to be linearly dependent if there are constants       not all

zero, such that                                             for all x over the interval of interest. A set of functions that is

not linearly dependent is said to be linearly independent.

In this chapter, we usually test sets of only two functions for linear independence, which allows us to simplify this
definition. From a practical perspective, we see that two functions are linearly dependent if either one of them is
identically zero or if they are constant multiples of each other.

First we show that if the functions meet the conditions given previously, then they are linearly dependent. If one of the

functions is identically zero--say,             --then choose  and                  and the condition for linear dependence is

satisfied. If, on the other hand, neither       nor       is identically zero, but  for some constant then

choose           and        and again, the condition is satisfied.

Next, we show that if two functions are linearly dependent, then either one is identically zero or they are constant

multiples of one another. Assume           and       are linearly independent. Then, there are constants, and not

both zero, such that

for all x over the interval of interest. Then,

Now, since we stated that and can't both be zero, assume              Then, there are two cases: either                 or

        If       then

so one of the functions is identically zero. Now suppose       Then,

and we see that the functions are constant multiples of one another.

Theorem 7.2

Linear Dependence of Two Functions

Two functions,         and           are said to be linearly dependent if either one of them is identically zero or if

                 for some constant C and for all x over the interval of interest. Functions that are not linearly

dependent are said to be linearly independent.

  EXAMPLE 7.4

Testing for Linear Dependence
Determine whether the following pairs of functions are linearly dependent or linearly independent.
 a.
750 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

b.
c.
d.

        Solution

a.                     so the functions are linearly dependent.

b. There is no constant C such that                so the functions are linearly independent.

c. There is no constant C such that                so the functions are linearly independent. Don't get confused by

        the fact that the exponents are constant multiples of each other. With two exponential functions, unless the

        exponents are equal, the functions are linearly independent.

d. There is no constant C such that                so the functions are linearly independent.

        7.4 Determine whether the following pairs of functions are linearly dependent or linearly independent:

If we are able to find two linearly independent solutions to a second-order differential equation, then we can combine
them to find the general solution. This result is formally stated in the following theorem.

    Theorem 7.3

    General Solution to a Homogeneous Equation

    If  and            are linearly independent solutions to a second-order, linear, homogeneous differential equation,

    then the general solution is given by

    where and are constants.

When we say a family of functions is the general solution to a differential equation, we mean that (1) every expression of
that form is a solution and (2) every solution to the differential equation can be written in that form, which makes this
theorem extremely powerful. If we can find two linearly independent solutions to a differential equation, we have,
effectively, found all solutions to the differential equation--quite a remarkable statement. The proof of this theorem is
beyond the scope of this text.

    EXAMPLE 7.5

Writing the General Solution

If                and            are solutions to  what is the general solution?

     Solution
Note that and are not constant multiples of one another, so they are linearly independent. Then, the general
solution to the differential equation is

        7.5 If                   and         are solutions to         what is the general solution?

Second-Order Equations with Constant Coefficients

Now that we have a better feel for linear differential equations, we are going to concentrate on solving second-order
equations of the form

                                                                                                                                                                   (7.2)

where and are constants.

Since all the coefficients are constants, the solutions are probably going to be functions with derivatives that are
constant multiples of themselves. We need all the terms to cancel out, and if taking a derivative introduces a term that is
not a constant multiple of the original function, it is difficult to see how that term cancels out. Exponential functions have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 751

derivatives that are constant multiples of the original function, so let's see what happens when we try a solution of the

form               where (the lowercase Greek letter lambda) is some constant.

If              then         and                   Substituting these expressions into Equation 7.1, we get

Since is never zero, this expression can be equal to zero for all x only if

We call this the characteristic equation of the differential equation.

    Definition

    The characteristic equation of the differential equation                 is

The characteristic equation is very important in finding solutions to differential equations of this form. We can solve the
characteristic equation either by factoring or by using the quadratic formula

This gives three cases. The characteristic equation has (1) distinct real roots; (2) a single, repeated real root; or (3)
complex conjugate roots. We consider each of these cases separately.

Distinct Real Roots

If the characteristic equation has distinct real roots and then         and      are linearly independent solutions to

Example 7.1, and the general solution is given by

where and are constants.

For example, the differential equation                        has the associated characteristic equation

This factors into            which has roots                   and           Therefore, the general solution to this

differential equation is

Single Repeated Real Root

Things are a little more complicated if the characteristic equation has a repeated real root, In this case, we know is

a solution to Equation 7.1, but it is only one solution and we need two linearly independent solutions to determine the

general solution. We might be tempted to try a function of the form          where k is some constant, but it would not be

linearly independent of Therefore, let's try       as the second solution. First, note that by the quadratic formula,

But, is a repeated root, so             and        Thus, if             we have

Substituting these expressions into Equation 7.1, we see that

This shows that       is a solution to Equation 7.1. Since and          are linearly independent, when the characteristic

equation has a repeated root the general solution to Equation 7.1 is given by
752 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

where and are constants.                                         has the associated characteristic equation

For example, the differential equation         which has a repeated root                  Therefore, the general solution to
                            This factors into

this differential equation is

Complex Conjugate Roots

The third case we must consider is when                In this case, when we apply the quadratic formula, we are taking

the square root of a negative number. We must use the imaginary number                    to find the roots, which take the

form       and                               The complex number    is called the conjugate of  Thus, we see that when

           the roots of our characteristic equation are always complex conjugates.

This creates a little bit of a problem for us. If we follow the same process we used for distinct real roots--using the roots

of the characteristic equation as the coefficients in the exponents of exponential functions--we get the functions

      and           as our solutions. However, there are problems with this approach. First, these functions take on

complex (imaginary) values, and a complete discussion of such functions is beyond the scope of this text. Second, even if

we were comfortable with complex-value functions, in this course we do not address the idea of a derivative for such

functions. So, if possible, we'd like to find two linearly independent real-value solutions to the differential equation. For

purposes of this development, we are going to manipulate and differentiate the functions               and   as if they

were real-value functions. For these particular functions, this approach is valid mathematically, but be aware that there

are other instances when complex-value functions do not follow the same rules as real-value functions. Those of you

interested in a more in-depth discussion of complex-value functions should consult a complex analysis text.

Based on the roots               of the characteristic equation, the functions       and       are linearly independent

solutions to the differential equation. and the general solution is given by

Using some smart choices for and and a little bit of algebraic manipulation, we can find two linearly independent,
real-value solutions to Equation 7.1 and express our general solution in those terms.

We encountered exponential functions with complex exponents earlier. One of the key tools we used to express these
exponential functions in terms of sines and cosines was Euler's formula, which tells us that

for all real numbers
Going back to the general solution, we have

Applying Euler's formula together with the identities                and                       we get

Now, if we choose                the second term is zero and we get

as a real-value solution to Equation 7.1. Similarly, if we choose               and       the first term is zero and we get

as a second, linearly independent, real-value solution to Equation 7.1.                        then the general solution to

Based on this, we see that if the characteristic equation has complex conjugate roots
Equation 7.1 is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 753

where and are constants.

For example, the differential equation       has the associated characteristic equation                              By

the quadratic formula, the roots of the characteristic equation are         Therefore, the general solution to this

differential equation is

Summary of Results

We can solve second-order, linear, homogeneous differential equations with constant coefficients by finding the roots of
the associated characteristic equation. The form of the general solution varies, depending on whether the characteristic
equation has distinct, real roots; a single, repeated real root; or complex conjugate roots. The three cases are
summarized in Table 7.1.

                           Characteristic Equation Roots General Solution to the Differential Equation

                           Distinct real roots, and

                           A repeated real root,

                           Complex conjugate roots

                         Table 7.1 Summary of Characteristic Equation Cases

  Problem-Solving Strategy

  Using the Characteristic Equation to Solve Second-Order Differential Equations with Constant Coefficients
   1. Write the differential equation in the form
   2. Find the corresponding characteristic equation
   3. Either factor the characteristic equation or use the quadratic formula to find the roots.
   4. Determine the form of the general solution based on whether the characteristic equation has distinct, real roots;

        a single, repeated real root; or complex conjugate roots.

EXAMPLE 7.6

Solving Second-Order Equations with Constant Coefficients
Find the general solution to the following differential equations. Give your answers as functions of x.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

     Solution
Note that all these equations are already given in standard form (step 1).

a. The characteristic equation is            (step 2). This factors into    so the roots of the
     characteristic equation are
                                        and  (step 3). Then the general solution to the differential equation is

b. The characteristic equation is                           (step 2). Applying the quadratic formula, we see this equation has
     complex conjugate roots            (step 3). Then the general solution to the differential equation is
754 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

c. The characteristic equation is                 (step 2). This factors into  so the characteristic equation
     has a repeated real root
                                             (step 3). Then the general solution to the differential equation is

d. The characteristic equation is            (step 2). This factors into                   so the roots of the characteristic
                                                                          so our first solution is just a constant. Then the
equation are            and                  (step 3). Note that

general solution to the differential equation is

e. The characteristic equation is                 (step 2). This factors into  so the roots of the
     characteristic equation are
                                             and  (step 3). Then the general solution to the differential equation is

f. The characteristic equation is                 (step 2). This has complex conjugate roots (step 3). Note that

                     so the exponential term in our solution is just a constant. Then the general solution to the differential

equation is

      7.6 Find the general solution to the following differential equations:

                  a.
                  b.

Initial-Value Problems and Boundary-Value Problems

So far, we have been finding general solutions to differential equations. However, differential equations are often used to

describe physical systems, and the person studying that physical system usually knows something about the state of

that system at one or more points in time. For example, if a constant-coefficient differential equation is representing how

far a motorcycle shock absorber is compressed, we might know that the rider is sitting still on his motorcycle at the start

of a race, time         This means the system is at equilibrium, so            and the compression of the shock absorber

is not changing, so              With these two initial conditions and the general solution to the differential equation, we

can find the specific solution to the differential equation that satisfies both initial conditions. This process is known as

solving an initial-value problem. (Recall that we discussed initial-value problems in Introduction to Differential Equations

(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/4-introduction).) Note that second-order equations have two

arbitrary constants in the general solution, and therefore we require two initial conditions to find the solution to the

initial-value problem.

Sometimes we know the condition of the system at two different times. For example, we might know                  and

      These conditions are called boundary conditions, and finding the solution to the differential equation that

satisfies the boundary conditions is called solving a boundary-value problem.

Mathematicians, scientists, and engineers are interested in understanding the conditions under which an initial-value
problem or a boundary-value problem has a unique solution. Although a complete treatment of this topic is beyond the
scope of this text, it is useful to know that, within the context of constant-coefficient, second-order equations, initial-
value problems are guaranteed to have a unique solution as long as two initial conditions are provided. Boundary-value
problems, however, are not as well behaved. Even when two boundary conditions are known, we may encounter
boundary-value problems with unique solutions, many solutions, or no solution at all.

EXAMPLE 7.7

Solving an Initial-Value Problem
Solve the following initial-value problem:

     Solution
We already solved this differential equation in Example 7.6a. and found the general solution to be

Then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 755

When        we have       and                                 Applying the initial conditions, we have

Then        Substituting this expression into the second equation, we see that

So,         and the solution to the initial-value problem is

      7.7 Solve the initial-value problem

  EXAMPLE 7.8

Solving an Initial-Value Problem and Graphing the Solution
Solve the following initial-value problem and graph the solution:

     Solution
We already solved this differential equation in Example 7.6b. and found the general solution to be

Then

When        we have  and                   Applying the initial conditions, we obtain

Therefore,           and the solution to the initial value problem is shown in the following graph.

      7.8 Solve the following initial-value problem and graph the solution:
756 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

  EXAMPLE 7.9

Initial-Value Problem Representing a Spring-Mass System
The following initial-value problem models the position of an object with mass attached to a spring. Spring-mass systems
are examined in detail in Applications. The solution to the differential equation gives the position of the mass with
respect to a neutral (equilibrium) position (in meters) at any given time. (Note that for spring-mass systems of this type,
it is customary to define the downward direction as positive.)

Solve the initial-value problem and graph the solution. What is the position of the mass at time          sec? How fast is the

mass moving at time              sec? In what direction?

     Solution
In Example 7.6c. we found the general solution to this differential equation to be

Then

When   we have                     and                    Applying the initial conditions, we obtain

Thus,                and the solution to the initial value problem is

This solution is represented in the following graph. At time            the mass is at position
                                                  m below equilibrium.

To calculate the velocity at time            we need to find the derivative. We have                  so

Then                               At time   the mass is moving upward at 0.3679 m/sec.

      7.9 Suppose the following initial-value problem models the position (in feet) of a mass in a spring-mass system

       at any given time. Solve the initial-value problem and graph the solution. What is the position of the mass

       at time                   sec? How fast is it moving at time     sec? In what direction?

EXAMPLE 7.10

Solving a Boundary-Value Problem

In Example 7.6f. we solved the differential equation                    and found the general solution to be

                     If possible, solve the boundary-value problem if the boundary conditions are the following:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.1 · Second-Order Linear Equations 757

 a.
b.
 c.

     Solution
We have

a. Applying the first boundary condition given here, we get               So the solution is of the form
     When we apply the second boundary condition, though, we get                                                    for all values

     of The boundary conditions are not sufficient to determine a value for so this boundary-value problem has

     infinitely many solutions. Thus,      is a solution for any value of

b. Applying the first boundary condition given here, we get               Applying the second boundary condition

     gives            so               In this case, we have a unique solution:

c. Applying the first boundary condition given here, we get                      However, applying the second boundary

     condition gives                   so  We cannot have                        so this boundary value problem has

     no solution.

        SECTION 7.1 EXERCISES

Classify each of the following equations as linear or nonlinear. If the equation is linear, determine whether it is
homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.

1.                                2.                                  3.

4.                                5.                              6.

For each of the following problems, verify that the given function is a solution to the differential equation. Use a
graphing utility to graph the particular solutions for several values of c1 and c2. What do the solutions have in common?

7. [T]                            8. [T]                                         9. [T]

10. [T]                           11.                             12.

     Find the general solution
     to the linear differential
     equation.

13.                               14.                             15.

16.                               17.                             18.

19.                               20.                             21.

22.                               23.                             24.

25.                               26.                             27.

28.                               29.                             30.

Solve the initial-value problem.             32.
31.                                        34.
33.
35.                                            36.
758 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

37.                                                     38.

Solve the boundary-value problem, if possible.

39.                                                40.

41.                                                     42.

43.                                                     44.

45.                                                46.

47. Find a differential equation             48. Find a differential equation
      with a general solution that                 with a general solution that
      is                                           is

For each of the following differential equations:

a. Solve the initial value problem.
b. [T] Use a graphing utility to graph the particular solution.

49.                                                50.

51.                                                     52. (Principle of superposition)

                                                                 Prove that if      and

                                                                 are solutions to a

                                                                 linear homogeneous

                                                                 differential equation,

                                                                 then the function

                                                                 where and are
                                                                 constants, is also a
                                                                 solution.

53. Prove that if a, b, and c are
      positive constants, then all
      solutions to the second-
      order linear differential
      equation

     approach zero as            

     (Hint: Consider three cases:
     two distinct roots, repeated
     real roots, and complex
     conjugate roots.)

7.2 Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations

Learning Objectives

      7.2.1 Write the general solution to a nonhomogeneous differential equation.
      7.2.2 Solve a nonhomogeneous differential equation by the method of undetermined coefficients.
      7.2.3 Solve a nonhomogeneous differential equation by the method of variation of parameters.

In this section, we examine how to solve nonhomogeneous differential equations. The terminology and methods are
different from those we used for homogeneous equations, so let's start by defining some new terms.

General Solution to a Nonhomogeneous Linear Equation

Consider the nonhomogeneous linear differential equation

The associated homogeneous equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.2 · Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 759

                                                                                           (7.3)

is called the complementary equation. We will see that solving the complementary equation is an important step in
solving a nonhomogeneous differential equation.

Definition

A solution    of a differential equation that contains no arbitrary constants is called a particular solution to the
equation.

Theorem 7.4

General Solution to a Nonhomogeneous Equation

Let         be any particular solution to the nonhomogeneous linear differential equation

Also, let              denote the general solution to the complementary equation. Then, the general solution to

the nonhomogeneous equation is given by

                                                                                           (7.4)

Proof

To prove    is the general solution, we must first show that it solves the differential equation and, second, that any

solution to the differential equation can be written in that form. Substituting     into the differential equation, we have

So     is a solution.

Now, let    be any solution to                                                Then

so           is a solution to the complementary equation. But,                       is the general solution to the
                                                                                    write the general solution and check
complementary equation, so there are constants and such that

Hence, we see that


EXAMPLE 7.11

Verifying the General Solution

Given that             is a particular solution to the differential equation

by verifying that the solution satisfies the equation.
760 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

     Solution                                which has the general solution               So, the general solution to
The complementary equation is
the nonhomogeneous equation is

To verify that this is a solution, substitute it into the differential equation. We have

Then

So,    is a solution to

      7.10 Given that                        is a particular solution to        write the general solution and verify

               that the general solution satisfies the equation.

In the preceding section, we learned how to solve homogeneous equations with constant coefficients. Therefore, for

nonhomogeneous equations of the form                                      we already know how to solve the complementary

equation, and the problem boils down to finding a particular solution for the nonhomogeneous equation. We now

examine two techniques for this: the method of undetermined coefficients and the method of variation of parameters.

Undetermined Coefficients

The method of undetermined coefficients involves making educated guesses about the form of the particular solution

based on the form of             When we take derivatives of polynomials, exponential functions, sines, and cosines, we get

polynomials, exponential functions, sines, and cosines. So when has one of these forms, it is possible that the

solution to the nonhomogeneous differential equation might take that same form. Let's look at some examples to see

how this works.

EXAMPLE 7.12

Undetermined Coefficients When               Is a Polynomial
Find the general solution to

     Solution

The complementary equation is                      with general solution                  Since  the particular
                                                                                          and    For to be a
solution might have the form                 If this is the case, then we have

solution to the differential equation, we must find values for and such that

Setting coefficients of like terms equal, we have

Then,          and               so          and the general solution is

In Example 7.12, notice that even though did not include a constant term, it was necessary for us to include the

constant term in our guess. If we had assumed a solution of the form            (with no constant term), we would not

have been able to find a solution. (Verify this!) If the function is a polynomial, our guess for the particular solution

should be a polynomial of the same degree, and it must include all lower-order terms, regardless of whether they are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.2 · Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 761

present in

EXAMPLE 7.13

Undetermined Coefficients When           Is an Exponential
Find the general solution to

     Solution

The complementary equation is               with the general solution                 Since        the
                                                                               and              For to be
particular solution might have the form           Then, we have

a solution to the differential equation, we must find a value for such that

So,         and    Then,                    and the general solution is

     7.11 Find the general solution to

In the previous checkpoint, included both sine and cosine terms. However, even if included a sine term only or a
cosine term only, both terms must be present in the guess. The method of undetermined coefficients also works with
products of polynomials, exponentials, sines, and cosines. Some of the key forms of and the associated guesses for

        are summarized in Table 7.2.

                                                            Initial guess for

     (a constant)                   (a constant)

                                         (Note: The guess must include both terms even if    )

                                                  (Note: The guess must include all three terms even if or are

                                zero.)

Higher-order polynomials        Polynomial of the same order as

                                                  (Note: The guess must include both terms even if either

                                or       )

Table 7.2 Key Forms for the Method of Undetermined Coefficients
762 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

Keep in mind that there is a key pitfall to this method. Consider the differential equation             Based

on the form of      we guess a particular solution of the form                 But when we substitute this expression

into the differential equation to find a value for we run into a problem. We have

and

so we want

which is not possible.

Looking closely, we see that, in this case, the general solution to the complementary equation is       The

exponential function in is actually a solution to the complementary equation, so, as we just saw, all the terms on the

left side of the equation cancel out. We can still use the method of undetermined coefficients in this case, but we have to

alter our guess by multiplying it by Using the new guess,                      we have

and
Substitution gives

So,      and                     This gives us the following general solution

Note that if        were also a solution to the complementary equation, we would have to multiply by again, and we
would try

Problem-Solving Strategy

Method of Undetermined Coefficients

1. Solve the complementary equation and write down the general solution.

2. Based on the form of          make an initial guess for

3. Check whether any term in the guess for   is a solution to the complementary equation. If so, multiply the

     guess by Repeat this step until there are no terms in      that solve the complementary equation.

4. Substitute           into the differential equation and equate like terms to find values for the unknown coefficients

     in

5. Add the general solution to the complementary equation and the particular solution you just found to obtain the

     general solution to the nonhomogeneous equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.2 · Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 763

EXAMPLE 7.14

Solving Nonhomogeneous Equations
Find the general solutions to the following differential equations.

a.
b.
c.
d.

    Solution

a. The complementary equation is  which has the general solution                             (step 1). Based on the

    form of                   our initial guess for the particular solution is                (step 2). None of

    the terms in       solve the complementary equation, so this is a valid guess (step 3).

    Now we want to find values for and so substitute into the differential equation. We have

    so we want to find values of and such that

    Therefore,

    This gives    and         so                (step 4).

    Putting everything together, we have the general solution

b. The complementary equation is                which has the general solution                (step 1). Based on

    the form           our initial guess for the particular solution is                  (step 2). However, we see that this

    guess solves the complementary equation, so we must multiply by which gives a new guess:                     (step

    3). Checking this new guess, we see that it, too, solves the complementary equation, so we must multiply by t again,

    which gives               (step 3 again). Now, checking this guess, we see that          does not solve the

    complementary equation, so this is a valid guess (step 3 yet again).

    We now want to find a value for so we substitute into the differential equation. We have

    and                                                                         so that
    Substituting into the differential equation, we want to find a value of

    This gives    so              (step 4). Putting everything together, we have the general solution

c. The complementary equation is                which has the general solution                                   (step 1).

    Based on the form             our initial guess for the particular solution is                               (step

    2). None of the terms in  solve the complementary equation, so this is a valid guess (step 3). We now want to
764 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

find values for   and so we substitute into the differential equation. We have                      and

            so we want to find values of             and such that

Therefore,

This gives                       and             so                (step 4). Putting everything together, we have the

general solution

d. The complementary equation is                     which has the general solution    (step 1). Based on the form

            our initial guess for the particular solution is        (step 2). However, we see that the constant

term in this guess solves the complementary equation, so we must multiply by which gives a new guess:

                  (step 3). Checking this new guess, we see that none of the terms in               solve the complementary

equation, so this is a valid guess (step 3 again). We now want to find values for and so we substitute into the

differential equation. We have                       and            so we want to find values of and such that

Therefore,

This gives        and                        so           (step 4). Putting everything together, we have the general

solution

7.12 Find the general solution to the following differential equations.

             a.
             b.

Variation of Parameters

Sometimes, is not a combination of polynomials, exponentials, or sines and cosines. When this is the case, the
method of undetermined coefficients does not work, and we have to use another approach to find a particular solution
to the differential equation. We use an approach called the method of variation of parameters.

To simplify our calculations a little, we are going to divide the differential equation through by  so we have a leading
coefficient of 1. Then the differential equation has the form

where and are constants.

If the general solution to the complementary equation is given by                    we are going to look for a

particular solution of the form                               In this case, we use the two linearly independent

solutions to the complementary equation to form our particular solution. However, we are assuming the coefficients are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     7.2 · Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 765

functions of x, rather than constants. We want to find functions   and    such that  satisfies the differential

equation. We have

Substituting into the differential equation, we obtain

Note that and are solutions to the complementary equation, so the first two terms are zero. Thus, we have

If we simplify this equation by imposing the additional condition         the first two terms are zero, and this

reduces to                     So, with this additional condition, we have a system of two equations in two unknowns:

Solving this system gives us and which we can integrate to find u and v.

Then,                          is a particular solution to the differential equation. Solving this system of equations

is sometimes challenging, so let's take this opportunity to review Cramer's rule, which allows us to solve the system of

equations using determinants.

Rule: Cramer's Rule

The system of equations

has a unique solution if and only if the determinant of the coefficients is not zero. In this case, the solution is given by

  EXAMPLE 7.15
Using Cramer's Rule
Use Cramer's rule to solve the following system of equations.

     Solution
We have
766 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

Then,
and
Thus,

In addition,
Thus,

7.13 Use Cramer's rule to solve the following system of equations.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Method of Variation of Parameters
 1. Solve the complementary equation and write down the general solution

2. Use Cramer's rule or another suitable technique to find functions  and  satisfying

3. Integrate and to find and                 Then,                         is a particular solution to the

equation.

4. Add the general solution to the complementary equation and the particular solution found in step 3 to obtain the

general solution to the nonhomogeneous equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.2 · Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations 767

EXAMPLE 7.16

Using the Method of Variation of Parameters
Find the general solution to the following differential equations.

a.

b.

    Solution

a. The complementary equation is              with associated general solution        Therefore,
                                                                                    (step 1). Then, we
              and           Calculating the derivatives, we get          and

    want to find functions  and      so that

    Applying Cramer's rule, we have

    and

    Integrating, we get

    Then we have

    The term is a solution to the complementary equation, so we don't need to carry that term into our general
    solution explicitly. The general solution is

b. The complementary equation is     with associated general solution               So,                         and

              (step 1). Then, we want to find functions             and  such that

    Applying Cramer's rule, we have
768 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

     and

     Integrating first to find u, we get

     Now, we integrate to find v. Using substitution (with  ), we get

     Then,

     The general solution is

     7.14 Find the general solution to the following differential equations.
                  a.
                  b.

        SECTION 7.2 EXERCISES

Solve the following equations using the method of undetermined coefficients.

54.                                          55.            56.

57.                                          58.            59.

60.                                          61.            62.

63.                                          64.            65.

In each of the following problems,

a. Write the form for the particular solution     for the method of undetermined coefficients.

b. [T] Use a computer algebra system to find a particular solution to the given equation.

66.                                          67.            68.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.3 · Applications 769

69.  70.                                                                      71.

Solve the differential equation using either the method of undetermined coefficients or the variation of parameters.

72.  73.  74.

75.

Solve the differential equation using the method of variation of parameters.

76.  77.  78.

79.

Find the unique solution satisfying the differential equation and the initial conditions given, where  is the particular
solution.

80.  81.  82.

83.

In each of the following problems, two linearly independent solutions-- and --are given that satisfy the
corresponding homogeneous equation. Use the method of variation of parameters to find a particular solution to the
given nonhomogeneous equation. Assume x > 0 in each exercise.

84.  85.

7.3 Applications

Learning Objectives

      7.3.1 Solve a second-order differential equation representing simple harmonic motion.
      7.3.2 Solve a second-order differential equation representing damped simple harmonic motion.
      7.3.3 Solve a second-order differential equation representing forced simple harmonic motion.
      7.3.4 Solve a second-order differential equation representing charge and current in an RLC series circuit.

We saw in the chapter introduction that second-order linear differential equations are used to model many situations in
physics and engineering. In this section, we look at how this works for systems of an object with mass attached to a
vertical spring and an electric circuit containing a resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor connected in series. Models such
as these can be used to approximate other more complicated situations; for example, bonds between atoms or
molecules are often modeled as springs that vibrate, as described by these same differential equations.

Simple Harmonic Motion

Consider a mass suspended from a spring attached to a rigid support. (This is commonly called a spring-mass system.)
Gravity is pulling the mass downward and the restoring force of the spring is pulling the mass upward. As shown in
Figure 7.2, when these two forces are equal, the mass is said to be at the equilibrium position. If the mass is displaced
from equilibrium, it oscillates up and down. This behavior can be modeled by a second-order constant-coefficient
differential equation.
770 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

Figure 7.2 A spring in its natural position (a), at equilibrium with a mass m attached (b), and in oscillatory motion (c).

Let denote the displacement of the mass from equilibrium. Note that for spring-mass systems of this type, it is
customary to adopt the convention that down is positive. Thus, a positive displacement indicates the mass is below the
equilibrium point, whereas a negative displacement indicates the mass is above equilibrium. Displacement is usually
given in feet in the English system or meters in the metric system.

Consider the forces acting on the mass. The force of gravity is given by In the English system, mass is in slugs and

the acceleration resulting from gravity is in feet per second squared. The acceleration resulting from gravity is constant,

so in the English system,        ft/sec2. Recall that 1 slug-foot/sec2 is a pound, so the expression mg can be expressed in

pounds. Metric system units are kilograms for mass and m/sec2 for gravitational acceleration. In the metric system, we

have           m/sec2.

According to Hooke's law, the restoring force of the spring is proportional to the displacement and acts in the opposite

direction from the displacement, so the restoring force is given by           The spring constant is given in pounds per

foot in the English system and in newtons per meter in the metric system.

Now, by Newton's second law, the sum of the forces on the system (gravity plus the restoring force) is equal to mass
times acceleration, so we have

However, by the way we have defined our equilibrium position,        the differential equation becomes

It is convenient to rearrange this equation and introduce a new variable, called the angular frequency,  Letting
                 we can write the equation as                                                                         (7.5)

This differential equation has the general solution

                                                                                                         (7.6)

which gives the position of the mass at any point in time. The motion of the mass is called simple harmonic motion.

The period of this motion (the time it takes to complete one oscillation) is  and the frequency is

(Figure 7.3).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.3 · Applications 771

                         Figure 7.3 A graph of vertical displacement versus time for simple harmonic motion.

  EXAMPLE 7.17

Simple Harmonic Motion
Assume an object weighing 2 lb stretches a spring 6 in. Find the equation of motion if the spring is released from the
equilibrium position with an upward velocity of 16 ft/sec. What is the period of the motion?

     Solution
We first need to find the spring constant. We have

We also know that weight W equals the product of mass m and the acceleration due to gravity g. In English units, the
acceleration due to gravity is 32 ft/sec2.

Thus, the differential equation representing this system is

Multiplying through by 16, we get        which can also be written in the form  This equation has
the general solution

The mass was released from the equilibrium position, so                    and it had an initial upward velocity of 16 ft/sec, so
                   Applying these initial conditions to solve for  and gives

The period of this motion is       sec.
772 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

7.15 A 200-g mass stretches a spring 5 cm. Find the equation of motion of the mass if it is released from rest
            from a position 10 cm below the equilibrium position. What is the frequency of this motion?

Writing the general solution in the form                            has some advantages. It is easy to see the link

between the differential equation and the solution, and the period and frequency of motion are evident. This form of the

function tells us very little about the amplitude of the motion, however. In some situations, we may prefer to write the

solution in the form

                                                                                (7.7)

Although the link to the differential equation is not as explicit in this case, the period and frequency of motion are still
evident. Furthermore, the amplitude of the motion, A, is obvious in this form of the function. The constant is called a
phase shift and has the effect of shifting the graph of the function to the left or right.

To convert the solution to this form, we want to find the values of A and such that

We first apply the trigonometric identity

to get

Thus,
If we square both of these equations and add them together, we get

Thus,

Now, to find go back to the equations for and        but this time, divide the first equation by the second equation to
get

Then,

We summarize this finding in the following theorem.

Theorem 7.5

Solution to the Equation for Simple Harmonic Motion

The function                                 can be written in the form  where

and

Note that when using the formula             to find we must take care to ensure is in the right quadrant (Figure
7.4).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            7.3 · Applications 773

Figure 7.4 A graph of vertical displacement versus time for simple harmonic motion with a phase change.

EXAMPLE 7.18

Expressing the Solution with a Phase Shift   What is the frequency of motion? The amplitude?
Express the following functions in the form

 a.
b.

     Solution
 a. We have

and

Note that both and are positive, so is in the first quadrant. Thus,
so we have

     The frequency is  The amplitude is
b. We have

and

Note that is positive but is negative, so is in the fourth quadrant. Thus,
774 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

             so we have

The frequency is                             The amplitude is

7.16 Express the function                                      in the form        What is the frequency of
            motion? The amplitude?

Damped Vibrations

With the model just described, the motion of the mass continues indefinitely. Clearly, this doesn't happen in the real
world. In the real world, there is almost always some friction in the system, which causes the oscillations to die off
slowly--an effect called damping. So now let's look at how to incorporate that damping force into our differential
equation.

Physical spring-mass systems almost always have some damping as a result of friction, air resistance, or a physical
damper, called a dashpot (a pneumatic cylinder; see Figure 7.5).

Figure 7.5 A dashpot is a pneumatic cylinder that dampens the motion of an oscillating system.

Because damping is primarily a friction force, we assume it is proportional to the velocity of the mass and acts in the

opposite direction. So the damping force is given by           for some constant  Again applying Newton's second law,

the differential equation becomes

Then the associated characteristic equation is

Applying the quadratic formula, we have

Just as in Second-Order Linear Equations we consider three cases, based on whether the characteristic equation has
distinct real roots, a repeated real root, or complex conjugate roots.

Case 1:

In this case, we say the system is overdamped. The general solution has the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     7.3 · Applications 775

where both and are less than zero. Because the exponents are negative, the displacement decays to zero over
time, usually quite quickly. Overdamped systems do not oscillate (no more than one change of direction), but simply
move back toward the equilibrium position. Figure 7.6 shows what typical critically damped behavior looks like.

Figure 7.6 Behavior of an overdamped spring-mass system, with no change in direction (a) and only one change in
direction (b).

EXAMPLE 7.19

Overdamped Spring-Mass System
A 16-lb mass is attached to a 10-ft spring. When the mass comes to rest in the equilibrium position, the spring measures
15 ft 4 in. The system is immersed in a medium that imparts a damping force equal to times the instantaneous

velocity of the mass. Find the equation of motion if the mass is pushed upward from the equilibrium position with an
initial upward velocity of 5 ft/sec. What is the position of the mass after 10 sec? Its velocity?

     Solution                                  ft. Thus,             so  We also have  so the
The mass stretches the spring 5 ft 4 in., or
differential equation is

Multiplying through by 2 gives                 which has the general solution

Applying the initial conditions,      and                    we get

After 10 sec the mass is at position

so it is, effectively, at the equilibrium position. We have              so after 10 sec the mass is moving at a
velocity of

After only 10 sec, the mass is barely moving.

7.17 A 2-kg mass is attached to a spring with spring constant 24 N/m. The system is then immersed in a
            medium imparting a damping force equal to 16 times the instantaneous velocity of the mass. Find the
            equation of motion if it is released from rest at a point 40 cm below equilibrium.
776 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

Case 2:

In this case, we say the system is critically damped. The general solution has the form

where is less than zero. The motion of a critically damped system is very similar to that of an overdamped system. It

does not oscillate. However, with a critically damped system, if the damping is reduced even a little, oscillatory behavior

results. From a practical perspective, physical systems are almost always either overdamped or underdamped (case 3,

which we consider next). It is impossible to fine-tune the characteristics of a physical system so that and  are

exactly equal. Figure 7.7 shows what typical critically damped behavior looks like.

Figure 7.7 Behavior of a critically damped spring-mass system. The system graphed in part (a) has more damping than
the system graphed in part (b).

EXAMPLE 7.20

Critically Damped Spring-Mass System
A 1-kg mass stretches a spring 20 cm. The system is attached to a dashpot that imparts a damping force equal to 14
times the instantaneous velocity of the mass. Find the equation of motion if the mass is released from equilibrium with
an upward velocity of 3 m/sec.

     Solution                    so          Then, the differential equation is
We have

which has general solution

Applying the initial conditions              and  gives

       7.18 A 1-lb weight stretches a spring 6 in., and the system is attached to a dashpot that imparts a damping
                    force equal to half the instantaneous velocity of the mass. Find the equation of motion if the mass is
                    released from rest at a point 6 in. below equilibrium.

Case 3:

In this case, we say the system is underdamped. The general solution has the form

where is less than zero. Underdamped systems do oscillate because of the sine and cosine terms in the solution.
However, the exponential term dominates eventually, so the amplitude of the oscillations decreases over time. Figure 7.8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.3 · Applications 777

shows what typical underdamped behavior looks like.

                   Figure 7.8 Behavior of an underdamped spring-mass system.

Note that for all damped systems,                         The system always approaches the equilibrium position over time.
                                                   

EXAMPLE 7.21

Underdamped Spring-Mass System
A 16-lb weight stretches a spring 3.2 ft. Assume the damping force on the system is equal to the instantaneous velocity
of the mass. Find the equation of motion if the mass is released from rest at a point 9 in. below equilibrium.

Solution

We have       and                                    so the differential equation is

This equation has the general solution

Applying the initial conditions,                     and  we get

7.19 A 1-kg mass stretches a spring 49 cm. The system is immersed in a medium that imparts a damping force
            equal to four times the instantaneous velocity of the mass. Find the equation of motion if the mass is
            released from rest at a point 24 cm above equilibrium.
778 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

         EXAMPLE 7.22
       Chapter Opener: Modeling a Motorcycle Suspension System

                                                     Figure 7.9 (credit: modification of work by nSeika, Flickr)
       For motocross riders, the suspension systems on their motorcycles are very important. The off-road courses on which
       they ride often include jumps, and losing control of the motorcycle when they land could cost them the race.
       This suspension system can be modeled as a damped spring-mass system. We define our frame of reference with
       respect to the frame of the motorcycle. Assume the end of the shock absorber attached to the motorcycle frame is fixed.
       Then, the "mass" in our spring-mass system is the motorcycle wheel. We measure the position of the wheel with respect
       to the motorcycle frame. This may seem counterintuitive, since, in many cases, it is actually the motorcycle frame that
       moves, but this frame of reference preserves the development of the differential equation that was done earlier. As with
       earlier development, we define the downward direction to be positive.
       When the motorcycle is lifted by its frame, the wheel hangs freely and the spring is uncompressed. This is the spring's
       natural position. When the motorcycle is placed on the ground and the rider mounts the motorcycle, the spring
       compresses and the system is in the equilibrium position (Figure 7.10).

                                   Figure 7.10 We can use a spring-mass system to model a motorcycle suspension.
       This system can be modeled using the same differential equation we used before:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    7.3 · Applications 779

A motocross motorcycle weighs 204 lb, and we assume a rider weight of 180 lb. When the rider mounts the motorcycle,
the suspension compresses 4 in., then comes to rest at equilibrium. The suspension system provides damping equal to
240 times the instantaneous vertical velocity of the motorcycle (and rider).

a. Set up the differential equation that models the behavior of the motorcycle suspension system.

b. We are interested in what happens when the motorcycle lands after taking a jump. Let time        denote the time

when the motorcycle first contacts the ground. If the motorcycle hits the ground with a velocity of 10 ft/sec

downward, find the equation of motion of the motorcycle after the jump.

c. Graph the equation of motion over the first second after the motorcycle hits the ground.

    Solution                                          so we have
a. We have defined equilibrium to be the point where

We also have

     Therefore, the differential equation that models the behavior of the motorcycle suspension is
     Dividing through by 12, we get
b. The differential equation found in part a. has the general solution

Now, to determine our initial conditions, we consider the position and velocity of the motorcycle wheel when the

wheel first contacts the ground. Since the motorcycle was in the air prior to contacting the ground, the wheel was

hanging freely and the spring was uncompressed. Therefore the wheel is 4 in.      below the equilibrium position

(with respect to the motorcycle frame), and we have   According to the problem statement, the motorcycle

has a velocity of 10 ft/sec downward when the motorcycle contacts the ground, so                    Applying these initial

conditions, we get  and                so the equation of motion is

c. The graph is shown in Figure 7.11.
780 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

                                             Figure 7.11 Graph of the equation of motion over a time of one second.
         STUDENT PROJECT
         Landing Vehicle
         NASA is planning a mission to Mars. To save money, engineers have decided to adapt one of the moon landing
         vehicles for the new mission. However, they are concerned about how the different gravitational forces will affect the
         suspension system that cushions the craft when it touches down. The acceleration resulting from gravity on the
         moon is 1.6 m/sec2, whereas on Mars it is 3.7 m/sec2.
         The suspension system on the craft can be modeled as a damped spring-mass system. In this case, the spring is
         below the moon lander, so the spring is slightly compressed at equilibrium, as shown in Figure 7.12.

         Figure 7.12 The landing craft suspension can be represented as a damped spring-mass system. (credit "lander":
         NASA)
         We retain the convention that down is positive. Despite the new orientation, an examination of the forces affecting
         the lander shows that the same differential equation can be used to model the position of the landing craft relative to
         equilibrium:
         where m is the mass of the lander, b is the damping coefficient, and k is the spring constant.
          1. The lander has a mass of 15,000 kg and the spring is 2 m long when uncompressed. The lander is designed to

                compress the spring 0.5 m to reach the equilibrium position under lunar gravity. The dashpot imparts a damping
                force equal to 48,000 times the instantaneous velocity of the lander. Set up the differential equation that models

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.3 · Applications 781

       the motion of the lander when the craft lands on the moon.

    2. Let time        denote the instant the lander touches down. The rate of descent of the lander can be controlled by

       the crew, so that it is descending at a rate of 2 m/sec when it touches down. Find the equation of motion of the

       lander on the moon.

    3. If the lander is traveling too fast when it touches down, it could fully compress the spring and "bottom out."

       Bottoming out could damage the landing craft and must be avoided at all costs. Graph the equation of motion

       found in part 2. If the spring is 0.5 m long when fully compressed, will the lander be in danger of bottoming out?

    4. Assuming NASA engineers make no adjustments to the spring or the damper, how far does the lander compress

       the spring to reach the equilibrium position under Martian gravity?

    5. If the lander crew uses the same procedures on Mars as on the moon, and keeps the rate of descent to 2 m/sec,

       will the lander bottom out when it lands on Mars?

    6. What adjustments, if any, should the NASA engineers make to use the lander safely on Mars?

Forced Vibrations

The last case we consider is when an external force acts on the system. In the case of the motorcycle suspension system,
for example, the bumps in the road act as an external force acting on the system. Another example is a spring hanging
from a support; if the support is set in motion, that motion would be considered an external force on the system. We
model these forced systems with the nonhomogeneous differential equation

                                                                                                                                                                   (7.8)

where the external force is represented by the term. As we saw in Nonhomogenous Linear Equations, differential
equations such as this have solutions of the form

where                    is the general solution to the complementary equation and  is a particular solution to the

nonhomogeneous equation. If the system is damped,                               Since these terms do not affect the
                                                                              

long-term behavior of the system, we call this part of the solution the transient solution. The long-term behavior of the

system is determined by         so we call this part of the solution the steady-state solution.

    MEDIA

    This website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_Oscillations) shows a simulation of forced vibrations.

EXAMPLE 7.23

Forced Vibrations

A mass of 1 slug stretches a spring 2 ft and comes to rest at equilibrium. The system is attached to a dashpot that

imparts a damping force equal to eight times the instantaneous velocity of the mass. Find the equation of motion if an

external force equal to             is applied to the system beginning at time      What is the transient solution?

What is the steady-state solution?

     Solution               so      and the differential equation is
We have

The general solution to the complementary equation is

Assuming a particular solution of the form                                      and using the method of undetermined

coefficients, we find               so

At     the mass is at rest in the equilibrium position, so                      Applying these initial conditions to solve for
782 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

           and we get

The transient solution is                    The steady-state solution is

7.20 A mass of 2 kg is attached to a spring with constant 32 N/m and comes to rest in the equilibrium position.

         Beginning at time                   an external force equal to    is applied to the system. Find the

         equation of motion if there is no damping. What is the transient solution? What is the steady-state

         solution?

STUDENT PROJECT

Resonance
Consider an undamped system exhibiting simple harmonic motion. In the real world, we never truly have an
undamped system; -some damping always occurs. For theoretical purposes, however, we could imagine a spring-
mass system contained in a vacuum chamber. With no air resistance, the mass would continue to move up and down
indefinitely.

The frequency of the resulting motion, given by  is called the natural frequency of the system. If an

external force acting on the system has a frequency close to the natural frequency of the system, a phenomenon
called resonance results. The external force reinforces and amplifies the natural motion of the system.

1. Consider the differential equation            Find the general solution. What is the natural frequency of the

system?

2. Now suppose this system is subjected to an external force given by      Solve the initial-value problem

3. Graph the solution. What happens to the behavior of the system over time?
4. In the real world, there is always some damping. However, if the damping force is weak, and the external force is

     strong enough, real-world systems can still exhibit resonance. One of the most famous examples of resonance is
     the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge on November 7, 1940. The bridge had exhibited strange behavior
     ever since it was built. The roadway had a strange "bounce" to it. On the day it collapsed, a strong windstorm
     caused the roadway to twist and ripple violently. The bridge was unable to withstand these forces and it
     ultimately collapsed. Experts believe the windstorm exerted forces on the bridge that were very close to its
     natural frequency, and the resulting resonance ultimately shook the bridge apart.

            MEDIA

            This website (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_TacomaNarrow) contains more information about the collapse
            of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge.

MEDIA

During the short time the Tacoma Narrows Bridge stood, it became quite a tourist attraction. Several people
were on site the day the bridge collapsed, and one of them caught the collapse on film. Watch the video
(http://www.openstax.org/l/20_TacomaNarro2) to see the collapse.

5. Another real-world example of resonance is a singer shattering a crystal wineglass when she sings just the right
     note. When someone taps a crystal wineglass or wets a finger and runs it around the rim, a tone can be heard.
     That note is created by the wineglass vibrating at its natural frequency. If a singer then sings that same note at a
     high enough volume, the glass shatters as a result of resonance.
            MEDIA

           The TV show Mythbusters aired an episode on this phenomenon. Adam Savage described the experience.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          7.3 · Applications 783

Watch this video (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_glass2) for his account.

The RLC Series Circuit

Consider an electrical circuit containing a resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor, as shown in Figure 7.10. Such a circuit is
called an RLC series circuit. RLC circuits are used in many electronic systems, most notably as tuners in AM/FM radios.
The tuning knob varies the capacitance of the capacitor, which in turn tunes the radio. Such circuits can be modeled by
second-order, constant-coefficient differential equations.

Let denote the current in the RLC circuit and denote the charge on the capacitor. Furthermore, let L denote

inductance in henrys (H), R denote resistance in ohms  and C denote capacitance in farads (F). Last, let     denote

electric potential in volts (V).

Kirchhoff's voltage rule states that the sum of the voltage drops around any closed loop must be zero. So, we need to

consider the voltage drops across the inductor (denoted ), the resistor (denoted ), and the capacitor (denoted ).

Because the RLC circuit shown in Figure 7.10 includes a voltage source,  which adds voltage to the circuit, we have

We present the formulas below without further development. Those of you interested in the derivation of these formulas
should consult a physics text. Using Faraday's law and Lenz's law, the voltage drop across an inductor can be shown to be
proportional to the instantaneous rate of change of current, with proportionality constant L. Thus,

Next, according to Ohm's law, the voltage drop across a resistor is proportional to the current passing through the
resistor, with proportionality constant R. Therefore,

Last, the voltage drop across a capacitor is proportional to the charge, q, on the capacitor, with proportionality constant
      Thus,

Adding these terms together, we get

Noting that  this becomes

                                                                                                             (7.9)

Mathematically, this system is analogous to the spring-mass systems we have been examining in this section.

Figure 7.13 An RLC series circuit can be modeled by the same differential equation as a mass-spring system.
784 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

EXAMPLE 7.24

The RLC Series Circuit

Find the charge on the capacitor in an RLC series circuit where                   H,                F, and           V.

Assume the initial charge on the capacitor is 0 C and the initial current is 9 A. What happens to the charge on the

capacitor over time?

     Solution
We have

The general solution to the complementary equation is

Assume a particular solution of the form          where is a constant. Using the method of undetermined coefficients,

we find           So,

Applying the initial conditions              and                                  we find      and          So the charge on

the capacitor is

Looking closely at this function, we see the first two terms will decay over time (as a result of the negative exponent in
the exponential function). Therefore, the capacitor eventually approaches a steady-state charge of 10 C.

7.21 Find the charge on the capacitor in an RLC series circuit where                       H,                        F, and

                        V. Assume the initial charge on the capacitor is 0 C and the initial current is 4 A.

         SECTION 7.3 EXERCISES

86. A mass weighing 4 lb                     87. A mass weighing 2 lb             88. A 100-g mass stretches a
      stretches a spring 8 in. Find                stretches a spring 2 ft. Find        spring 0.1 m. Find the
      the equation of motion if                    the equation of motion if            equation of motion of the
      the spring is released from                  the spring is released from          mass if it is released from
      the equilibrium position                     2 in. below the equilibrium          rest from a position 20 cm
      with a downward velocity                     position with an upward              below the equilibrium
      of 12 ft/sec. What is the                    velocity of 8 ft/sec. What is        position. What is the
      period and frequency of                      the period and frequency             frequency of this motion?
      the motion?                                  of the motion?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     7.3 · Applications 785

89. A 400-g mass stretches a           90. A block has a mass of 9 kg         91. A block has a mass of 5 kg
      spring 5 cm. Find the                  and is attached to a vertical          and is attached to a vertical
      equation of motion of the              spring with a spring                   spring with a spring
      mass if it is released from            constant of 0.25 N/m. The              constant of 20 N/m. The
      rest from a position 15 cm             block is stretched 0.75 m              block is released from the
      below the equilibrium                  below its equilibrium                  equilibrium position with a
      position. What is the                  position and released.                 downward velocity of 10
      frequency of this motion?               a. Find the position                  m/sec.
                                                    function of the                  a. Find the position
                                                    block.                                 function of the
                                              b. Find the period and                       block.
                                                    frequency of the                 b. Find the period and
                                                    vibration.                             frequency of the
                                              c. Sketch a graph of                         vibration.
                                              d. At what time does the               c. Sketch a graph of
                                                    block first pass through         d. At what time does the
                                                    the equilibrium                        block first pass through
                                                    position?                              the equilibrium
                                                                                           position?

92. A 1-kg mass is attached to         93. An 800-lb weight (25 slugs)        94. A 9-kg mass is attached to
      a vertical spring with a               is attached to a vertical              a vertical spring with a
      spring constant of 21 N/m.             spring with a spring                   spring constant of 16 N/m.
      The resistance in the                  constant of 226 lb/ft. The             The system is immersed in
      spring-mass system is                  system is immersed in a                a medium that imparts a
      equal to 10 times the                  medium that imparts a                  damping force equal to 24
      instantaneous velocity of              damping force equal to 10              times the instantaneous
      the mass.                              times the instantaneous                velocity of the mass.
       a. Find the equation of               velocity of the mass.                   a. Find the equation of
             motion if the mass is            a. Find the equation of                      motion if it is released
             released from a position               motion if it is released               from its equilibrium
             2 m below its                          from a position 20 ft                  position with an upward
             equilibrium position                   below its equilibrium                  velocity of 4 m/sec.
             with a downward                        position with a                  b. Graph the solution and
             velocity of 2 m/sec.                   downward velocity of 41                determine whether the
       b. Graph the solution and                    ft/sec.                                motion is overdamped,
             determine whether the            b. Graph the solution and                    critically damped, or
             motion is overdamped,                  determine whether the                  underdamped.
             critically damped, or                  motion is overdamped,
             underdamped.                           critically damped, or
                                                    underdamped.
786 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

95. A 1-kg mass stretches a                  96. A 32-lb weight (1 slug)            97. A 64-lb weight is attached
      spring 6.25 cm. The                          stretches a vertical spring 4          to a vertical spring with a
      resistance in the spring-                    in. The resistance in the              spring constant of 4.625 lb/
      mass system is equal to                      spring-mass system is                  ft. The resistance in the
      eight times the                              equal to four times the                spring-mass system is
      instantaneous velocity of                    instantaneous velocity of              equal to the instantaneous
      the mass.                                    the mass.                              velocity. The weight is set
       a. Find the equation of                      a. Find the equation of               in motion from a position 1
             motion if the mass is                        motion if it is released        ft below its equilibrium
             released from a position                     from its equilibrium            position with an upward
             5 m below its                                position with a                 velocity of 2 ft/sec. Is the
             equilibrium position                         downward velocity of 12         mass above or below the
             with an upward velocity                      ft/sec.                         equation position at the
             of 10 m/sec.                           b. Determine whether the              end of sec? By what
       b. Determine whether the                           motion is overdamped,           distance?
             motion is overdamped,                        critically damped, or
             critically damped, or                        underdamped.
             underdamped.

98. A mass that weighs 8 lb                  99. A mass that weighs 6 lb            100. Find the charge on the
      stretches a spring 6 inches.                 stretches a spring 3 in. The
      The system is acted on by                    system is acted on by an         capacitor in an RLC series
      an external force of                         external force of
      lb. If the mass is pulled                    lb. If the mass is pulled        circuit where            H,
      down 3 inches and then                       down 1 inch and then
      released, determine the                      released, determine the                                   F,
      position of the mass at any                  position of the mass at any
      time.                                        time.                            and             V. Assume

                                                                                    the initial charge on the

                                                                                    capacitor is 7 C and the

                                                                                    initial current is 0 A.

101. Find the charge on the                  102. A series circuit consists of      103. A series circuit consists of

capacitor in an RLC series                   a device where         H,              a device where               H,

circuit where  H,                                            F,                                     F, and

                                 F,          and      V. If the                                     V. If the initial
                                                                                    charge on the capacitor is
and                              V.          initial charge and current             0 C and the initial current
                                                                                    is 18 A, find the charge
Assume the initial charge                    are both zero, find the                and current at time t.

on the capacitor is 0.001 C                  charge and current at

and the initial current is 0                 time t.

A.

7.4 Series Solutions of Differential Equations

Learning Objectives

      7.4.1 Use power series to solve first-order and second-order differential equations.

In Introduction to Power Series (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/6-introduction), we studied how

functions can be represented as power series,                
                                                                           We also saw that we can find series representations

                                                                                                                        

of the derivatives of such functions by differentiating the power series term by term. This gives                         and

    
                               In some cases, these power series representations can be used to find solutions to

differential equations.

Be aware that this subject is given only a very brief treatment in this text. Most introductory differential equations
textbooks include an entire chapter on power series solutions. This text has only a single section on the topic, so several
important issues are not addressed here, particularly issues related to existence of solutions. The examples and
exercises in this section were chosen for which power solutions exist. However, it is not always the case that power
solutions exist. Those of you interested in a more rigorous treatment of this topic should consult a differential equations

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7.4 · Series Solutions of Differential Equations 787

text.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Finding Power Series Solutions to Differential Equations                                                            
                                                                                             and               in the power series.
 1. Assume the differential equation has a solution of the form
                                                                                         

 2. Differentiate the power series term by term to get

3. Substitute the power series expressions into the differential equation.
4. Re-index sums as necessary to combine terms and simplify the expression.
5. Equate coefficients of like powers of to determine values for the coefficients
6. Substitute the coefficients back into the power series and write the solution.

EXAMPLE 7.25

Series Solutions to Differential Equations
Find a power series solution for the following differential equations.

a.
b.

    Solution                                                                                                   (step 2). We want
a. Assume                  (step 1). Then,                                                 and

       to find values for the coefficients such that

                          

       We want the indices on our sums to match so that we can express them using a single summation. That is, we want

       to rewrite the first summation so that it starts with

       To re-index the first term, replace n with     inside the sum, and change the lower summation limit to                        We

       get

                                                              

       This gives
                                                  

                                                           

       Because power series expansions of functions are unique, this equation can be true only if the coefficients of each
       power of x are zero. So we have
788 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

             This recurrence relationship allows us to express each coefficient in terms of the coefficient two terms earlier.
             This yields one expression for even values of n and another expression for odd values of n. Looking first at the
             equations involving even values of n, we see that

Thus, in general, when n is even,                         (step 5).

For the equations involving odd values of n, we see that

Therefore, in general, when n is odd,                     (step 5 continued).

Putting this together, we have
                                                      

Re-indexing the sums to account for the even and odd values of n separately, we obtain

                                                                       

Analysis for part a.

As expected for a second-order differential equation, this solution depends on two arbitrary constants. However,

note that our differential equation is a constant-coefficient differential equation, yet the power series solution does

not appear to have the familiar form (containing exponential functions) that we are used to seeing. Furthermore,

since                 is the general solution to this equation, we must be able to write any solution in this

form, and it is not clear whether the power series solution we just found can, in fact, be written in that form.

Fortunately, after writing the power series representations of and             and doing some algebra, we find that if

we choose

                                                                     

we then have          and                                 and

                                   

      So we have, in fact, found the same general solution. Note that this choice of and is not obvious. This is a case

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             7.4 · Series Solutions of Differential Equations 789

when we know what the answer should be, and have essentially "reverse-engineered" our choice of coefficients.

b. Assume                                                                                      (step 2). We want
                            (step 1). Then,                              and

to find values for the coefficients such that

                                                                                             

                                                                                             

Taking the external factors inside the summations, we get

                                                                           

Now, in the first summation, we see that when                    or      the term evaluates to zero, so we can add these
terms back into our sum to get
                                                                       
                                                      

Similarly, in the third term, we see that when                   the expression evaluates to zero, so we can add that term back
in as well. We have                                                         

                                                               

Then, we need only shift the indices in our second term. We get

                                                                     

Thus, we have
790 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

                                                                      

                                             
                                             

                                                    
                                                         
                                                        

Looking at the coefficients of each power of x, we see that the constant term must be equal to  and the
coefficients of all other powers of x must be zero. Then, looking first at the constant term,

For       we have

Since                            we see that
and thus

For even values of n, we have

In general,                                  (step 5).
For odd values of n, we have

In general,                                  (step 5 continued).

Putting this together, we have

                                                                  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          7.4 · Series Solutions of Differential Equations 791

       7.22 Find a power series solution for the following differential equations.
                     a.
                     b.

We close this section with a brief introduction to Bessel functions. Complete treatment of Bessel functions is well beyond
the scope of this course, but we get a little taste of the topic here so we can see how series solutions to differential
equations are used in real-world applications. The Bessel equation of order n is given by

This equation arises in many physical applications, particularly those involving cylindrical coordinates, such as the
vibration of a circular drum head and transient heating or cooling of a cylinder. In the next example, we find a power
series solution to the Bessel equation of order 0.

  EXAMPLE 7.26

Power Series Solution to the Bessel Equation
Find a power series solution to the Bessel equation of order 0 and graph the solution.

     Solution
The Bessel equation of order 0 is given by

                                                                            
We assume a solution of the form  Then                    and

Substituting this into the differential equation, we get

                                                   
                                  
                                  
       
                                           
                
                
                

Then,  and for
792 7 · Second-Order Differential Equations

Because  all odd terms are zero. Then, for even values of n, we have

In general,                                                                                                   (7.10)

Thus, we have
                                                                               

The graph appears below.

      7.23 Verify that the expression found in Example 7.26 is a solution to the Bessel equation of order 0.

        SECTION 7.4 EXERCISES

Find a power series solution for the following differential equations.

104.                                         105.                                106.

107.                                         108.                                109.

110.                                         111.                                112.

113.                                         114.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      7.4 · Series Solutions of Differential Equations 793

115.  116. The differential equation

      is a Bessel equation of order
      1. Use a power series of the

                    

      form           to find

      the solution.
794 7 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

boundary conditions the conditions that give the state of a system at different times, such as the position of a spring-

mass system at two different times

boundary-value problem a differential equation with associated boundary conditions

characteristic equation the equation                      for the differential equation

complementary equation for the nonhomogeneous linear differential equation

the associated homogeneous equation, called the complementary equation, is

homogeneous linear equation a second-order differential equation that can be written in the form

                                         but      for every value of

linearly dependent a set of functions                     for which there are constants              not all zero,

such that                                     for all x in the interval of interest

linearly independent a set of functions                       for which there are no constants         such that

                                         for all x in the interval of interest

method of undetermined coefficients a method that involves making a guess about the form of the particular

solution, then solving for the coefficients in the guess

method of variation of parameters a method that involves looking for particular solutions in the form

                                 where and are linearly independent solutions to the complementary equations,

and then solving a system of equations to find and

nonhomogeneous linear equation a second-order differential equation that can be written in the form

                                         but      for some value of

particular solution a solution      of a differential equation that contains no arbitrary constants

RLC series circuit a complete electrical path consisting of a resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor; a second-order,

constant-coefficient differential equation can be used to model the charge on the capacitor in an RLC series circuit

simple harmonic motion motion described by the equation                                  as exhibited by an

undamped spring-mass system in which the mass continues to oscillate indefinitely

steady-state solution a solution to a nonhomogeneous differential equation related to the forcing function; in the

long term, the solution approaches the steady-state solution

Key Equations

Linear second-order differential equation

Second-order equation with constant coefficients

Complementary equation
General solution to a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation

Equation of simple harmonic motion
Solution for simple harmonic motion
Alternative form of solution for SHM
Forced harmonic motion

Charge in a RLC series circuit

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                7 · Chapter Review 795

Key Concepts

7.1 Second-Order Linear Equations

· Second-order differential equations can be classified as linear or nonlinear, homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.

· To find a general solution for a homogeneous second-order differential equation, we must find two linearly

independent solutions. If    and        are linearly independent solutions to a second-order, linear,

homogeneous differential equation, then the general solution is given by

· To solve homogeneous second-order differential equations with constant coefficients, find the roots of the
    characteristic equation. The form of the general solution varies depending on whether the characteristic equation
    has distinct, real roots; a single, repeated real root; or complex conjugate roots.

· Initial conditions or boundary conditions can then be used to find the specific solution to a differential equation that
    satisfies those conditions, except when there is no solution or infinitely many solutions.

7.2 Nonhomogeneous Linear Equations

· To solve a nonhomogeneous linear second-order differential equation, first find the general solution to the

complementary equation, then find a particular solution to the nonhomogeneous equation.

· Let    be any particular solution to the nonhomogeneous linear differential equation

and let                    denote the general solution to the complementary equation. Then, the general solution

to the nonhomogeneous equation is given by

· When is a combination of polynomials, exponential functions, sines, and cosines, use the method of

undetermined coefficients to find the particular solution. To use this method, assume a solution in the same form as

       multiplying by x as necessary until the assumed solution is linearly independent of the general solution to the

complementary equation. Then, substitute the assumed solution into the differential equation to find values for the

coefficients.

· When is not a combination of polynomials, exponential functions, or sines and cosines, use the method of

variation of parameters to find the particular solution. This method involves using Cramer's rule or another suitable

technique to find functions        and  satisfying

Then,                                   is a particular solution to the differential equation.

7.3 Applications

· Second-order constant-coefficient differential equations can be used to model spring-mass systems.
· An examination of the forces on a spring-mass system results in a differential equation of the form

where represents the mass, is the coefficient of the damping force, is the spring constant, and represents

any net external forces on the system.

· If     there is no damping force acting on the system, and simple harmonic motion results. If        the behavior

of the system depends on whether                    or

· If              the system is overdamped and does not exhibit oscillatory behavior.

· If              the system is critically damped. It does not exhibit oscillatory behavior, but any slight reduction in

the damping would result in oscillatory behavior.

· If              the system is underdamped. It exhibits oscillatory behavior, but the amplitude of the oscillations

decreases over time.

· If     the solution to the differential equation is the sum of a transient solution and a steady-state solution.

The steady-state solution governs the long-term behavior of the system.

· The charge on the capacitor in an RLC series circuit can also be modeled with a second-order constant-coefficient

differential equation of the form
796 7 · Chapter Review

      where L is the inductance, R is the resistance, C is the capacitance, and  is the voltage source.

7.4 Series Solutions of Differential Equations

· Power series representations of functions can sometimes be used to find solutions to differential equations.
· Differentiate the power series term by term and substitute into the differential equation to find relationships

    between the power series coefficients.

Review Exercises

True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample.

117. If and are both                   118. The following system of       119.
        solutions to                           algebraic equations has a          is a solution to the
                                 then          unique solution:                   second-order differential
                is also a solution.                                               equation

120. To find the particular
        solution to a second-
        order differential
        equation, you need one
        initial condition.

Classify the differential equation. Determine the order, whether it is linear and, if linear, whether the differential equation
is homogeneous or nonhomogeneous. If the equation is second-order homogeneous and linear, find the characteristic
equation.

121.                                   122.                               123.

124.

For the following problems, find the general solution.

125.                                   126.                               127.

128.                                   129.                               130.

131.                                   132.

For the following problems, find the solution to the initial-value problem, if possible.

133.                                   134.

For the following problems, find the solution to the boundary-value problem.

135.                                   136.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              7 · Chapter Review 797

For the following problem, set up and solve the differential equation.

137. The motion of a swinging
        pendulum for small
        angles can be
        approximated by

                              where is

        the angle the pendulum
        makes with respect to a
        vertical line, g is the
        acceleration resulting
        from gravity, and L is the
        length of the pendulum.
        Find the equation
        describing the angle of
        the pendulum at time
        assuming an initial
        displacement of and
        an initial velocity of zero.

The following problems consider the "beats" that occur when the forcing term of a differential equation causes "slow"

and "fast" amplitudes. Consider the general differential equation       that governs undamped motion.

Assume that

138. Find the general solution           139. Assuming the system starts from rest, show
        to this equation (Hint: call             that the particular solution can be written
                        ).                       as

140. [T] Using your solutions
        derived earlier, plot the
        solution to the system
                                   over
        the interval
        Find, analytically, the
        period of the fast and
        slow amplitudes.
798 7 · Chapter Review

For the following problem, set up and solve the differential equations.
141. An opera singer is

        attempting to shatter a
        glass by singing a
        particular note. The
        vibrations of the glass can
        be modeled by

                                  where
                         represents
        the natural frequency of
        the glass and the singer is
        forcing the vibrations at
                   For what value
        would the singer be able
        to break that glass? (Note:
        in order for the glass to
        break, the oscillations
        would need to get higher
        and higher.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                         A · Table of Integrals 799

 A TABLE OF INTEGRALS

Basic Integrals

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Trigonometric Integrals

18.
19.
20.
21.
800 A · Table of Integrals

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.

Exponential and Logarithmic Integrals

42.
43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 A · Table of Integrals 801

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

Hyperbolic Integrals

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

Inverse Trigonometric Integrals

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.
802 A · Table of Integrals

66.
67.

Integrals Involving a2 + u2, a > 0

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

Integrals Involving u2 - a2, a > 0

77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84a.
84b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     A · Table of Integrals 803

Integrals Involving a2 - u2, a > 0

85.
86.

87.

88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93a.
93b.

Integrals Involving 2au - u2, a > 0

94.
95.
96.
97.

Integrals Involving a + bu, a  0

98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
804 A · Table of Integrals

104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       B · Table of Derivatives 805

 B TABLE OF DERIVATIVES

General Formulas

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

Trigonometric Functions

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Inverse Trigonometric Functions

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

21.
22.
23.
24.

Hyperbolic Functions

25.
26.
806 B · Table of Derivatives

27.
28.
29.
30.

Inverse Hyperbolic Functions

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Access for free at openstax.org
                           C · Review of Pre-Calculus 807

 C REVIEW OF PRE-CALCULUS

Formulas from Geometry

Formulas from Algebra

Laws of Exponents

Special Factorizations

Quadratic Formula

If     then

Binomial Theorem

where
808 C · Review of Pre-Calculus

Formulas from Trigonometry

Right-Angle Trigonometry

Trigonometric Functions of Important Angles

                                                                                                           --

Fundamental Identities
Law of Sines

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               C · Review of Pre-Calculus 809

Law of Cosines
Addition and Subtraction Formulas
Double-Angle Formulas
Half-Angle Formulas
810 C · Review of Pre-Calculus
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    Answer Key 811

Answer Key

Chapter 1

Checkpoint

1.1

1.2  or                 This equation describes a portion of a rectangular hyperbola centered at

1.3 One possibility is                      Another possibility is

     There are, in fact, an infinite number of possibilities.

1.4  and                                so

     This expression is undefined when      and equal to zero when
812 Answer Key

1.5 The equation of the tangent line is

1.6                  Critical points

1.7   (Note that the integral formula actually yields a negative answer. This is due to the fact that is a

      decreasing function over the interval  that is, the curve is traced from right to left.)

1.8

1.9

1.10            and

1.11

1.12

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 813

      The name of this shape is a cardioid, which we will study further later in this section.

1.13  which is the equation of a parabola opening upward.

1.14 Symmetric with respect to the polar axis.

1.15
1.16
1.17
1.18
814 Answer Key

1.19

1.20                             This is a vertical hyperbola. Asymptotes

1.21            and              This conic section is an ellipse.
1.22 Here

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    Answer Key 815

1.23 The conic is a hyperbola and the angle of rotation of the axes is

Section 1.1 Exercises

 1.

      orientation: bottom to top
 3.

      orientation: left to right
 5.
816 Answer Key

 7.
 9.
11.
13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                          Answer Key 817

15.

     Asymptotes are  and

17.

19.
818 Answer Key

21.            ; domain:    

23.             domain

25.             domain: all real numbers.

27.                       domain:

29.             domain:

31.             domain:

33.           domain:     

35.           domain:     

37.             domain:

39. line

41. parabola

43. circle

45. ellipse

47. hyperbola

51. The equations represent a cycloid.

53.

55. 22,092 meters at approximately 51 seconds.
57.

Access for free at openstax.org
                         Answer Key 819

59.

61.

Section 1.2 Exercises

63. 0
65.
67.
69. Slope is undefined;
820 Answer Key

71.                                                                                      ,

                .

73. No points possible; undefined expression.
75.
77.
79.

81.

83.          and                 so the curve is neither concave up nor concave down at  Therefore the graph is linear

      and has a constant slope but no concavity.

85.                              the curve is concave down at

87. No horizontal tangents. Vertical tangents at

89.

91. Horizontal     vertical

93. 1

95. 0

97. 4

99. Concave up on

101.
103.
105.
107.
109.

111.
113.
115.

119.
121. 59.101
123.

Section 1.3 Exercises

125.

127.

Access for free at openstax.org
      Answer Key 821

129.

131.

133.
135.
137.
139.
822 Answer Key

141.

143.

145.

147.

149. Symmetry with respect to the x-axis, y-axis, and origin.

151. Symmetric with respect to x-axis only.

153. Symmetry with respect to x-axis only.

155. Line

157.

159. Hyperbola; polar form                   or

161.

163.

Access for free at openstax.org
      Answer Key 823

165.
167.
824 Answer Key

       y-axis symmetry
169.

       y-axis symmetry
171.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 825

       x- and y-axis symmetry and symmetry about the pole
173.

       x-axis symmetry
175.
826 Answer Key

       x- and y-axis symmetry and symmetry about the pole
177.

        no symmetry
179.

Access for free at openstax.org
                Answer Key 827

        a line
181.

183.
828 Answer Key

185.

187. Answers vary. One possibility is the spiral lines become closer together and the total number of spirals increases.

Section 1.4 Exercises

189.
191.
193.
195.
197.
199.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    Answer Key 829

201.
203.
205.

207.
209.

211.
213.

215.

217.

219.
221. 32
223. 6.238
225. 2
227. 4.39

229.

231.

233.

235.

237. The slope is

239. The slope is 0.

241. At     the slope is undefined. At  the slope is 0.

243. The slope is undefined at

245. Slope = -1.
247. Slope is

249. Calculator answer: -0.836.

251. Horizontal tangent at

253. Horizontal tangents at             Vertical tangents at  and also at the pole

Section 1.5 Exercises

255.
257.
259.
261.
263.
265.
267.
269.
271.
273.
275.
277.
830 Answer Key

279.  parabola

281.  ellipse

283.  hyperbola

285.

287.

289.

291.

293.

295.

Access for free at openstax.org
      Answer Key 831

297.
299.
301.
832 Answer Key

303.

305.

307. Hyperbola
309. Ellipse
311. Ellipse
313. At the point 2.25 feet above the vertex.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                Answer Key 833

315. 0.5625 feet
317. Length is 96 feet and height is approximately 26.53 feet.
319.
321.

Review Exercises

323. True.
325. False. Imagine
327.

329.

331.
834 Answer Key

        Symmetric about polar axis
333.
335.

337.

339.
341.

343.

345.  ellipse

347.

Chapter 2

Checkpoint

2.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  Answer Key 835

2.2

2.3 Vectors  and are equivalent.
2.4
2.5 a.       b.          c.
2.7

2.8

2.9                 mph
2.10 Approximately
2.11

2.12
2.13
2.14
836 Answer Key

2.15

2.16 The set of points forms the two planes            and

2.17 A cylinder of radius 4 centered on the line with

2.18
2.19

2.20

2.21 7

2.22 a.                          b.

2.23     rad

2.24

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   Answer Key 837

2.25 a.       rad; b.                rad; c.      rad

2.26 Sales = $15,685.50; profit = $14,073.15

2.27          where                  and

2.28  21 knots
2.29  150 ft-lb
2.30
2.31  Up (the positive z-direction)
2.32
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.36

2.37

2.38    units3                                so the three vectors form the adjacent edges of a parallelepiped. They are
2.39  No, the triple scalar product is
2.40  not coplanar.
2.41
          N
2.42  Possible set of parametric equations:
2.43  related set of symmetric equations:

2.44

2.45

2.46  These lines are skew because their direction vectors are not parallel and there is no point  that lies on
      both lines.
2.47
2.48                                                     or

2.49

2.50     rad

2.51

2.52

2.53 The traces parallel to the xy-plane are ellipses and the traces parallel to the xz- and yz-planes are hyperbolas.

      Specifically, the trace in the xy-plane is ellipse  the trace in the xz-plane is hyperbola

      and the trace in the yz-plane is hyperbola          (see the following figure).
838 Answer Key

2.54 Hyperboloid of one sheet, centered at
2.55 The rectangular coordinates of the point are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 839

2.56
2.57 This surface is a cylinder with radius

2.58

      Cartesian:                    cylindrical:

2.59  a. This is the set of all points units from the origin. This set forms a sphere with radius b. This set of points

2.60  forms a half plane. The angle between the half plane and the positive x-axis is     c. Let be a point on this
2.61
      surface. The position vector of this point forms an angle of  with the positive z-axis, which means that

      points closer to the origin are closer to the axis. These points form a half-cone.

      Spherical coordinates with the origin located at the center of the earth, the z-axis aligned with the North Pole,
      and the x-axis aligned with the prime meridian

Section 2.1 Exercises

1. a.             b.
3. a.                 b.
5. a.                      b.
7. a.                           b.

9. a.             b.
840 Answer Key

11.

13.

15. a.                          b.                                         c. Answers will vary; d.

17.                             b. Answers may vary; c. Answers may vary
19.
21. a.
23. Answers may vary
25.

27.

29.

31.
33.

35.

37. Answers may vary

39. a.                b.

43.

45.

47. The horizontal and vertical components are ft/sec and                  ft/sec, respectively.

49. The magnitude of resultant force is        lb; the direction angle is

51. The magnitude of the third vector is       N; the direction angle is

53. The new ground speed of the airplane is    mph; the new direction is

55.

57.             lb,         lb

59. The two horizontal and vertical components of the force of tension are lb and lb, respectively.

Section 2.2 Exercises                                             b.       (a plane parallel to the xy-plane)
                            (a plane parallel to the xz-plane) and
61. a.
63. A union of two planes:

65. A cylinder of radius centered on the line

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 841

67.              and radius
69.                    b.
71.                     b.
73.
75. Center
77. a.
79. a.
81.
83.
85.
87.
89.
91.

93.

95.
97. Equivalent vectors
99.

101.

103.

105.                   b.       N; b.     N
111. a.          N; b.                                               and
113.                                                                                      (each
115.
117. a.

119. a.

      component is expressed in newtons)

121. a.                         (each component is expressed in centimeters per second);  (expressed in

      centimeters per second);            (each component expressed in centimeters per second

      squared);

      b.
842 Answer Key

Section 2.3 Exercises

123. 6        rad; b. is not acute.
125. 0     rad; b. is acute.
127.
129.
131. a.
133. a.

135.

137.

139.       rad

141. Orthogonal

143. Not orthogonal

145.                 where                is a real number

147.                 where and are real numbers such that

149.

151. a.                                   b.

153.

155. and are orthogonal; and are orthogonal.

161. a.                              and       b.                  and

163. a.                                   and               b.          and
                                                                         and
167. a.              b.

169. a.                          b.

171. a.                          b.
                                  lb; b. The direction angles are
173. a.    b.

175.

177. 1175

179. W = 43301.27

181. a.

Section 2.4 Exercises

183. a.
        b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                          Answer Key 843

185. a.
        b.

187.
189.

191.

193.
197.
199.

201.
203.
209.

211. a.     b.        c.

213. a.     b.
215.              b.
217.
219. a.
844 Answer Key

225. Yes,                        where   and
227.
229.                             where is any real number

233.
235. 8.66 ft-lb
237. 559 N
239.

241. a.

        b.

Section 2.5 Exercises

243. a.                                   b.                     c.                                        d.

245. a.                                  b.                 c.                                  d.

247. a.                                       b.                           c.
249. a.                                           c. The line does not intersect the xy-plane.
251. a.                              b.
253.
                                 b.
255. a. Parallel; b.
                                          b. For instance, the line passing through with direction vector
259.
261. The lines are skew.
263. The lines are equal.
265. a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                     c. For instance, the line passing through and point                                        Answer Key 845

                                                                          that belongs to is a line that

        intersects;  b.

267. a.                                      b.
269. a.
271. a.              b.                          and

        c.

273. a.              b.

      c.

275.

277.                                         

281. a.              b.                                     c.            

        Answers may vary by a sign, depending on how the vector cross multiplication is performed.
283. a. Answers may vary; b.

285.
287. The line intersects the plane at point
289.

291. a. The planes are neither parallel nor orthogonal; b.
293. a. The planes are parallel.
295.
846 Answer Key

297. a.   b.

299.

301. a.                          b.

      c.

Section 2.6 Exercises

303. The surface is a cylinder with the rulings parallel to the y-axis.

305. The surface is a cylinder with rulings parallel to the y-axis.
307. The surface is a cylinder with rulings parallel to the x-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  Answer Key 847

309. a. Cylinder; b. The x-axis
311. a. Hyperboloid of two sheets; b. The x-axis
313. b.
315. d.
317. a.

319.           hyperboloid of one sheet with the x-axis as its axis of symmetry

321.           hyperboloid of two sheets with the y-axis as its axis of symmetry

323.             hyperbolic paraboloid with the y-axis as its axis of symmetry
325.                   ellipsoid
327.                   elliptic cone with the z-axis as its axis of symmetry
329.
331. Parabola  elliptic paraboloid with the x-axis as its axis of symmetry

333. Ellipse
848 Answer Key

335. Ellipse

337. a. Ellipsoid; b. The third equation; c.

339. a.                          b. Cylinder centered at       with rulings parallel to the y-axis

341. a.                                       b. Hyperboloid of one sheet centered at               with the z-axis as its axis
        of symmetry
                                 b. Elliptic cone centered at  with the z-axis as its axis of symmetry
343. a.

345.          and
347.                      elliptic paraboloid
349.
351.                                          where
355. a.

        b.

357.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        Answer Key 849

        two ellipses of equations  in planes

359. a.
        b.

        ;                                                               and the intersection is an
        c. The intersection curve is the ellipse of equation

        ellipse.; d. The intersection curve is the ellipse of equation
361. a.
850 Answer Key

        b. The intersection curve is

Section 2.7 Exercises                 with its center at the origin and rulings parallel to the z-axis,

363.
365.
367.
369.
371. A cylinder of equation

373. Hyperboloid of two sheets of equation                    with the y-axis as the axis of symmetry,

375. Cylinder of equation                   with a center at  and radius with rulings parallel to the z-axis,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             Answer Key 851

377. Plane of equation

379.                     centered at the origin with radius
381.
383.
385.

387.

389.
391.
393. Sphere of equation

395. Sphere of equation  centered at  with radius
852 Answer Key

397. The xy-plane of equation

399.  or                  Elliptic cone

401.            Plane at

403.

405.

407.
409.
411. Cartesian system,

413. Cylindrical system,

415. The region is described by the set of points

417.
419.
421. a.

        c.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             Answer Key 853

Review Exercises

423. True             b.  c. Can't cross a vector with a scalar; d.
425. False
427. a.
429.

431.

433.

435.

437.

439.          trace:      is a circle,  trace:                        is a hyperbola (or a pair of lines if
                                                                     The surface is a cone.
      trace:              is a hyperbola (or a pair of lines if

441. Cylindrical:         spherical:
                           sphere
443.

445. 331 N, and 244 N

447.

449. More,            J

Chapter 3                               is all real numbers.

Checkpoint

3.1
      The domain of
854 Answer Key

3.2

3.3

3.4
3.5
3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9                              so

3.10  or            Substituting this into                            gives

3.11

3.12
3.13

      At the point  the curvature is equal to 4. Therefore, the radius of the osculating circle is

      A graph of this function appears next:

      The vertex of this parabola is located at the point  Furthermore, the center of the osculating circle is directly

      above the vertex. Therefore, the coordinates of the center are         The equation of the osculating circle is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    Answer Key 855

3.14
        The units for velocity and speed are feet per second, and the units for acceleration are feet per second squared.

3.15 a.

         b.
3.16 967.15 m
3.17

Section 3.1 Exercises

 1.
 3.

5. a.  b.      c. Yes, the limit as t approaches is equal to  d.

7. a.      b.                                      c. Yes
                                                        as t approaches infinity does not exist.
 9.
11.

13. The limit does not exist because the limit of

15.        where k is an integer

17.    where n is an integer

19.
856 Answer Key

21. All t such that              

23.  a variation of the cube-root function

25.             a circle centered at  with radius 3, and a counterclockwise orientation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   Answer Key 857

27.
29.
858 Answer Key

     Find a vector-valued function that traces out the given curve in the indicated direction.

31. For left to right,           where t increases

33.

35.

37.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               Answer Key 859

39. One possibility is                         By increasing the coefficient of t in the third component, the
      number of turning points will increase.

Section 3.2 Exercises

41.
43.
45.
860 Answer Key

47.
49.
51.
53.
55.

57.
59.
61.
63.
65. a.

       b. Undefined or infinite  To show orthogonality, note that

67.
69.
71.
73.

     The last statement implies that the velocity and acceleration are perpendicular or orthogonal.

75.

77.

79.             at

81.

83.

85.

87.

89.

91.
93.
95.

97.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      Answer Key 861

99.
101.

Section 3.3 Exercises

103.
105.
107. Length
109.
111.
113.

115.

117.

119.

121.

123.

125.                       r as a parameter of s:
127. Arc-length function:

129.

131. The maximum value of the curvature occurs at
133.
135.

137.

139. The curvature approaches zero.

141.             and

143.

145.

147.
149.
151. The curvature is decreasing over this interval.
153.

Section 3.4 Exercises                speed =

155.
157.
159.
161.
163.
165.

167.
169.
171.
173. 44.185 sec
862 Answer Key

175.            sec

177. 88.37 sec

179. The range is approximately 886.29 m.

181.            m/sec

183.

185.
187.
189.

191.

193.
195.
197. 10.94 km/sec
201.

Review Exercises

203. False,
205. False, it is
207.
209.

211.                              m/sec,   m/sec,  m/sec2, and          unit
213.                             m,
                                                                        m/sec;
        tangent vector:                                         m/sec

215.
217.
219.
221.

223.
225.

        at
227.

Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter 4                                                                                                    Answer Key 863

Checkpoint                                                      which has a circle of radius as its

4.1 The domain is the shaded circle defined by the inequality
      boundary. The range is

4.2 The equation of the level curve can be written as           which is a circle with radius centered
      at

4.3     This function describes a parabola opening downward in the plane

4.4           

4.5             describes a sphere of radius centered at the point

4.6

4.7 If  then                                                   Since the answer depends on the limit fails to exist.

4.8

4.9 1. The domain of contains the ordered pair         because
       2.

       3.
864 Answer Key

4.10  The polynomials                and     are continuous at every real number; therefore, by the product of

      continuous functions theorem,          is continuous at every point       in the           Furthermore,

      any constant function is continuous everywhere, so           is continuous at every point  in the

      Therefore,                     is continuous at every point    in the     Last,            is continuous

      at every real number so by the continuity of composite functions theorem                   is

      continuous at every point      in the

4.11

4.12

4.13

4.14 Using the curves corresponding to                    we obtain

        The exact answer is
4.15
4.16

4.17

4.19

4.20                             so

4.21

4.22
4.23
4.24
4.25

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       Answer Key 865

4.26

4.27
        Equation of the tangent line:

4.28

4.29

4.30 The gradient of at      is                  The unit vector that points in the same direction as
                                                     which gives an angle of
      is
                                       The maximum value of the directional derivative is

4.31

      Tangent vector:    or
866 Answer Key

4.32

4.33

4.34  is a saddle point,              is a local maximum.
4.35
4.36  The absolute minimum occurs at

4.37  The absolute maximum occurs at
4.38
      has a maximum value of at the point

      A maximum production level of   occurs with          labor hours and  of total capital input.

4.39

4.40            is a minimum.

Section 4.1 Exercises

1.

3.    This is the volume when the radius is and the height is

5. All points in the

7.

9. All real ordered pairs in the      of the form

11.

13. The set 

15.             a hyperbola

17.           a line;             line through the origin

19.                                   three lines

21.

23.

25.

27.

29. The level curves are parabolas of the form

31.             a curve in the        with rulings parallel to the

33.
35.
37. All points in
39.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    Answer Key 867

41.
43.
45.
47. The contour lines are circles.
868 Answer Key

49.                     a sphere of radius

51.                     a hyperboloid of one sheet

53.

55.

57.

59.                                The level curves represent circles of radii  and

Section 4.2 Exercises

61. 2.0
63.

65.
67.

69.

71.

73.

75.

77. The limit does not exist because when and both approach zero, the function approaches             which is

     undefined (approaches negative infinity).

79. every open disk centered at       contains points inside and outside

81.

83.

85. The limit does not exist.

87. The limit does not exist. The function approaches two different values along different paths.

89. The limit does not exist because the function approaches two different values along the paths.

91. The function is continuous in the region

93. The function is continuous at all points in the       except at

95. The function is continuous at     since the limit of the function at        is the same value of

97. The function is discontinuous at        The limit at  fails to exist and    does not exist.

99. Since the function           is continuous over                             is continuous where             is

     continuous. The inner function is continuous on all points of the          except where          Thus,

                                 is continuous on all points of the coordinate plane except at points at which

101. All points         in space

103. The graph increases without bound as            both approach zero.

105. a.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      Answer Key 869

      b. The level curves are circles centered at   with radius  c.           d.  e.

               f.

107.

109.     is continuous at all points                that are not on the line

111.

Section 4.3 Exercises

113.

115. The sign is negative.
117. The partial derivative is zero at the origin.
119.

121.       b.      c.

123.
125.
127.
129.
131.
133. a.
135.

137.
139.

141.

143.
145.
147.
149.

151.
153.
870 Answer Key

155.

159.

161. at                                at

Section 4.4 Exercises

163.

165. Normal vector:       tangent vector:
167. Normal vector:            tangent vector:

169.

171.

173.

175.

177.

179.

181.

183.

185.

187.

189. The differential of the function

191. Using the definition of differentiability, we have

193.                                            for small and      satisfies the definition of differentiability.
                                                                          The two values are close.
195.                 and               They are relatively close.

197. cm3

199.     exact change            approximate change is

201.

203.

205.

207.

209.

211.

213.

Section 4.5 Exercises

215.
217.
219.
221.
223.
225.

Access for free at openstax.org
                       Answer Key 871

227.  in both cases

229.

231.
233.

235.

237.

239.

241.

243.  and

245.

247.
249.
251.
253.
255.
257.

259.

Section 4.6 Exercises

261.
263.
265.

267.
269.
271.
273.

275.

277.

279.
281.
283.
285.

287.
872 Answer Key

289.

291.

293.
295.

297.

299.

301.

303. a.          b.
                 b.
305. a.
                       c.
307. a.  b.

309.

Section 4.7 Exercises

311.

313.

315. Maximum at

317. Relative minimum at

319. The second derivative test fails. Since    for all x and y different from zero, and  when either x or

      y equals zero (or both), then the absolute minimum occurs at

321.             is a saddle point.

323.                       is a saddle point.

325. The only critical point(s) are where both  and          and that is  . However, since

                                 at the critical point, the Second Derivative Test fails. By graphing, we can see that this point

      is a local maximum.

327. Relative minimum located at

329.     is a saddle point.

331.     and     are saddle points;             is a relative minimum.

333.     is a relative maximum.

335.     is a saddle point.

337. The relative maximum is at

339.     is a saddle point and     is the relative minimum.

341. A saddle point is located at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 873

343. There is a saddle point at  local maxima at         and local minima at

345.  is the absolute minimum and                is the absolute maximum.
                                           and an absolute maximum at
347. There is an absolute minimum at
                                                                minima:
349.

351.

353.

355.  and

357.               cm3

Section 4.8 Exercises

359. maximum:  minimum:

361. maximum:                    minimum:

363. maximum: minimum =

365. maxima:

367. maximum:  at                          minimum:  at

369.
371.

373.

375.
874 Answer Key

377.

379. minimum:

381. The maximum volume is ft3. The dimensions are             ft.

383. The point on the surface                       closest to the point  is  .

385.

387.

389.

391.

393. Roughly 3365 watches at the critical point

Review Exercises                                 except where

395. True, by Clairaut's theorem
397. False
399. Answers may vary
401. Does not exist
403. Continuous at all points on the
405.

407.

409.
411.
413.
415.

Access for free at openstax.org
417. maximum:  minimum:                                                                                     Answer Key 875

419.      cm3                                        and

Chapter 5                                                                    (iii)
                                                                     (v)
Checkpoint

5.1

5.2 a. 26 b. Answers may vary.
5.3

5.4
5.5
5.6 Answers to both parts a. and b. may vary.
5.7 Type I and Type II are expressed as

      respectively.
5.8
5.9
5.10 Same as in the example shown.
5.11

5.12                       cubic units
5.13      square units
5.14
5.15
5.16
5.17
5.18
5.19

5.20                                    cubic units

5.21

5.22
5.23

5.24

5.25 (i)                                       (ii)

                                        (iv)
876 Answer Key                                  and
                                                     and
5.26
5.27                                                                          Also,
5.28

5.29

5.30
5.31

5.32 Rectangular:

      Cylindrical:

      Spherical:

5.33                and
5.34                                 and
5.35
5.36                              and
5.37

5.38                                      and

5.39                             and

5.40

5.41

5.42 The moments of inertia of the tetrahedron about the  the  and the               are

                                 respectively.

5.43                where                 and

5.44

5.45

Access for free at openstax.org
5.46        and                and                                 Answer Key 877
5.47
5.48                                    and

Section 5.1 Exercises

 1. 27.     b. 1.75 ft.  here
 3. 0.      b.
 5. 21.3.
 7. a. 28
 9. a.
11.
13. 40.

15.

17.

19.

21. 0.
23.
25.

27.

29.
31.
33.
35.
37.

49. a.                   b.         c.

      d.

53. a. For                     b.

      c.
878 Answer Key

55. a.          b.

59.     F; here                                                     where and are the midpoints

      of the subintervals of the partitions of  and  respectively.

Section 5.2 Exercises

61.
63. Type I but not Type II
65.
67.

69.

71. Type I and Type II

73. The region is not of Type I: it does not lie between two vertical lines and the graphs of two continuous functions

        and         The region is not of Type II: it does not lie between two horizontal lines and the graphs of two

      continuous functions       and

75.

77.
79.

81.

83.
85.
87. a. Answers may vary; b.

89. a. Answers may vary; b.

91.

93.
95.

97.

99.

101.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   Answer Key 879

103.                   there is a  chance that a customer will spend minutes in the drive-
105.
109.
111.
113. a. b. c.
115. a. b. c.
117.
119.

        thru line.

Section 5.3 Exercises

123.
125.
127.
129.
131.
133.
135.
137.
139.
141.
143.
145.

147.

149.

151.

153.     b. c.
155.

157.

159.
161.
163. a.
165.
167.
169.
171.
173.
175.

177.

Section 5.4 Exercises

181.
183.
880 Answer Key

185.
187.
191.
193.
195.
197.
199.
201.
203.
205.
207.
209.
211.
213.

215.
217.
219.
221.
223.
225. a. Answers may vary; b.

Access for free at openstax.org
227. a.                b.                                                            Answer Key 881

229.                       b.
231.                                            b.
233.                                               b.
235.                                                                          b.

Section 5.5 Exercises

241.
243.
245.

249. a.
251. a.

253. a.

255. a.

257.
259.
261.
263.
265.
882 Answer Key                             b.
                                 b.
267.
269.
271.
277. a.
279. a.
281.
283.
285.
287.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     Answer Key 883

289.
291.

293.        watts

295.

Section 5.6 Exercises

297.

299.
301.
303.
305.

307.

309. a.                b.

      c.

311. a.                          b.
        c.                 b.

313. a.
        c.

315. a.            b.

      c.
884 Answer Key

317. a.                          b.

c.

319. a.                          b.

c.

321. a.                                      b.                  and
323. a.                                                     b.  and
325. a.
327. a.                                       b.
329. a.                                         b.
331. a.
                                        b.
Access for free at openstax.org      b.
333.                                                                                                                   Answer Key 885

337. a.  b.                                          c.                 d. the solid and its center of mass are

      shown in the following figure.

339. a.                               b. the solid and its center of mass are shown in the following figure.

343.

349. a.      b.

351.

355.

Section 5.7 Exercises                                and                The functions and are continuous and
                                                                in the
357. a.                                                                                        are
        differentiable, and the partial derivatives
        continuous on b.                                                and                    c. is the
        rectangle of vertices
                                                                        the following figure.
886 Answer Key

359. a.                                                          and                   The functions and are

continuous and differentiable, and the partial derivatives                                                        and

                are continuous on b.                                                   and                             c.

         is the sqaure of vertices                                    in the           see the following figure.

361. a.                                                     and               The functions and      are continuous and
                                                                                                and                 are
differentiable, and the partial derivatives
                                                                               and                   c. is the unit
continuous on b.

square in the                    see the following figure.

363. is not one-to-one: two points of have the same image. Indeed,

365. is one-to-one: We argue by contradiction.                                implies                and

Thus,           and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       Answer Key 887

367. is not one-to-one:  b. The area of is
369.
371.
373.

375.
377.
379.
381.
383.
385.
387.
389. a.

391.                     the boundary curves of           in the
393.                                             are graphed in the following figure.
395.
397.
399.

403. The area of is

405.                                        b. is graphed in the following figure;
409. a.

        c.                           b. The image is the quadrilateral of vertices
411. a.                  c. is graphed in the following figure;
888 Answer Key

        d.
413.
415.

Review Exercises

417. True.
419. False.
421. 0
423.

425. 1.475
427.

429.

431.
433.

435.

437.            ft-lb

439.                             average temperature approximately

441.

Chapter 6

Checkpoint

6.1
6.2

Access for free at openstax.org
                Answer Key 889

6.3 Rotational

6.4      m/sec

6.5 No.

6.6
890 Answer Key

6.7
6.8

6.9 No
6.10
6.11
6.12 No
6.13

6.14

6.15 Both line integrals equal
6.16

6.17

6.18

6.19 0

6.20      kg

6.21 3/2

6.22

6.23 0

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     Answer Key 891

6.24 Yes
6.25 The region in the figure is connected. The region in the figure is not simply connected.
6.26 2

6.27 If and represent the two curves, then

6.28
6.29
6.30

6.31  It is conservative.
6.32  Negative
6.33
6.34

6.35

6.36

6.37

6.38 No

6.39

6.40

6.41 Yes

6.42 All points on line

6.43

6.44

6.45 No

6.46 Yes

6.47 Cylinder

6.48 Cone

6.49                        

6.50 Yes
6.51
6.52 With the standard parameterization of a cylinder, Equation 6.18 shows that the surface area is

6.53

6.54 24
6.55 0
6.56

6.57

6.58  0
6.59  400 kg/sec/m
6.60  Both integrals give

6.61  Both integrals equal
6.62  30
6.63

6.64
6.65
6.66
6.67
6.68

Section 6.1 Exercises

 1. Vectors
 3. False
 5.
892 Answer Key

 7.
 9.
11.

Access for free at openstax.org
                       Answer Key 893

13.

15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33. H
35. d.
37. a.

Section 6.2 Exercises

39. True
41. False
43. False
45.
47.
49.
51.
53.
55.
57.
59.
61.
894 Answer Key

63.

65.

67.
69.

71. a.          b.               c. No

73.

75.

77.

79.

81.

83.

85.

87.
89.
91.
93.
95.
97.

Section 6.3 Exercises

99. True
101. True
103.

105.

107. Not conservative
109. Conservative,
111. Conservative,
113.

115.
117. F is not conservative.
119. F is conservative and a potential function is
121. F is conservative and a potential function is
123. F is conservative and a potential function is
125. F is conservative and a potential function is
127.

129.

131.

133.

135.

Access for free at openstax.org
                       Answer Key 895

137.
139.
141.
143.

Section 6.4 Exercises

147.
149.
151.
153.
155.
157.
159.
161.
163.
165.
167.
169.
171.
173.
175.
177.
179.
181.
183.
185.
187.
189.
191.
193.
195.
197.
199.
896 Answer Key

201.
203.
205.

Section 6.5 Exercises

207. False
209. True
211. True
213.
215.
217.
219.
221.
223.
225.
227.

229.
231.
233. Harmonic
235.
237.
239.
241.

243.

245.

247.

249.

251.

253.

255.

257. F is conservative.

259.

261.

263.

265.  does not have zero divergence.

267.

Section 6.6 Exercises            for          and     

269. True                               for   and   
271. True                        for
273.

275.
277.
279.
281.

283.

285.

Access for free at openstax.org
                            Answer Key 897

287.
289.
291.
293.
295.
297.
299.
301.
303.
305.

307.

309.

311.
313.
315.
317.
319.
321.
323.
325. The net flux is zero.

Section 6.7 Exercises

327.
329.
331.
333.
335.
337.
339.

341.
343.
898 Answer Key

345.

347.
349.
351.
353.
355.
357.
359.
361.
363.
365.
367.
369.
371.
373.
375. 0

Section 6.8 Exercises

377.
379.
381.
383.
385.
387.
389.
391.
393.
395.
397.
399.
401. 20
403.
405.

Access for free at openstax.org
                           Answer Key 899

407.
409.

411.

413.

415.

417.

419.

421.

423.
425.

Review Exercises

427. False
429. False
431.

433. Conservative,  curl:
435. Conservative,
437.

439.

441. Divergence:
443.
445.
447.
449.

451.
900 Answer Key

Chapter 7

Checkpoint

7.1 a. Nonlinear
       b. Linear, nonhomogeneous

7.4 Linearly independent
7.5
7.6 a.

       b.
7.7
7.8

7.9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   Answer Key 901

      At time                                                        The mass is 0.0367 ft below equilibrium. At time
                           The mass is moving downward at a speed of 0.1490 ft/sec.
7.10
7.11           (in meters); frequency is Hz.
7.12 a.

         b.

7.13
7.14 a.

         b.

7.15
7.16
7.17
7.18
7.19
7.20

7.21
                                 

7.22 a.
         b.

Section 7.1 Exercises

 1. linear, homogenous
 3. nonlinear
 5. linear, homogeneous
11.
13.
902 Answer Key

15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41. No solutions exist.
43.
45.
47.
49. a.

      b.

51. a.
      b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 Answer Key 903

Section 7.2 Exercises

55.
57.
59.
61.
63.
65.
67. a.

      b.
69. a.

      b.
71. a.

      b.
73.
75.
77.
79.
81.
83.
85.

Section 7.3 Exercises

87.                                  period           frequency
                            period           frequency
89.
91. a.           frequency

      b. period
      c.

      d.

93. a.
      b. underdamped

95. a.
      b. critically damped

97.              ft below

99.
904 Answer Key

101.
103.

Section 7.4 Exercises

                           
105.

                                 

107.

                  
109.

                                 

111.

113.
115.

Review Exercises

117. True
119. False
121. second order, linear, homogeneous,
123. first order, nonlinear, nonhomogeneous
125.
127.

129.
131.

133.

135.

137.

141.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Index 905

Index                                cylindrical coordinate system 210     Integrals 722
                                                                           Fundamental Theorem for Line
Symbols                              D                                     Integrals. 620
                                                                           Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
  ball 327                           definite integral of a vector-valued  722
  disk 317                           function 249
                                     derivative 243                        G
A                                    derivative of a vector-valued
                                     function 244                          Gauss' law 730
acceleration vector 274              determinant 155                       Gauss's law for magnetism 663
angular coordinate 39                differentiable 353                    general bounded region 488
angular frequency 770                direction angles 138                  general form 66
arc-length function 258              direction cosines 138                 general form of the equation of a
arc-length parameterization 259      direction vector 170                  plane 178
Archimedean spiral 49                directional cosines 383               general solution to a differential
                                     directional derivative 375            equation 750
B                                    directrix 64                          generalized chain rule 366
                                     discriminant 78, 390                  gradient 377
Bessel functions 791                 divergence 661                        gradient field 587
binormal vector 264                  divergence theorem 723                graph of a function of two
boundary conditions 754              domain 577                            variables 310
boundary point 322                   dot product 132                       gravitational force 628
boundary-value problem 754           double integral 422                   Green's theorem 636, 722
Brahe 284                            double Riemann sum 421                grid curves 682

C                                    E                                     H

cardioid 47                          Earth's orbit 8                       harmonic function 648
chain rule 245                       eccentricity 75                       heat equation 339
chambered nautilus 7, 48             electrical potential 386              heat flow 698
characteristic equation 751          Electrical power 360                  helix 239, 240
circulation 610                      electrical resistance 360             higher-order partial derivatives
cissoid of Diocles 63                electrostatic fields 730              337
Clairaut's theorem 590               ellipsoid 196                         homogeneous functions 372
closed curve 599, 616                Elliptic Cone 202                     homogeneous linear equation 746
closed set 323                       elliptic paraboloid 197               Hooke's law 770
Cobb-Douglas function 407            Elliptic Paraboloid 202               hurricanes 582
Cobb-Douglas production              epitrochoid 22                        Hyperboloid of One Sheet 201
function 347                         equivalent vectors 90                 Hyperboloid of Two Sheets 201
complementary equation 759           Ernest Rutherford 343                 hypocycloid 15
complex conjugates 752               error term 353
complex number 752                   Euler's formula 752                   I
component functions 236              expected values 456
components 96                                                              implicit differentiation 369
conic section 64                     F                                     improper double integral 452
connected region 618                                                       indefinite integral of a vector-
connected set 323                    Faraday's law 715                     valued function 249
conservative field 586               flow line 592                         independent of path 622
constant multiple rule 245           flux 609                              independent random variables
constraints 403                      flux integral 696                     455
contour map 308, 333                 focal parameter 76                    independent variables 365
coordinate planes 111                focus 64                              initial point 90, 237
critical point of a function of two  force 102                             initial-value problems 754
variables 387                        Fourier's law of heat transfer 737    interior point 322
cross product 150                    Frenet frame of reference 268         intermediate variables 362
cross-partial property 590           Fubini's theorem 425                  inverse-square law 730
curl 667                             Fubini's thereom 486                  iterated integral 425
curtate cycloid 19                   function of two variables 302
curvature 261                        Fundamental Theorem for Line
cusps 16
cycloid 15
cylinder 193
906 Index                             O                                   reparameterization 240
                                                                          resolution of a vector into
J                                     objective function 403              components 141
                                      octants 111                         resonance 782
Jacobian 549                          one-to-one transformation 546       Reuleaux triangle 464
joint density function 455            open set 323                        right-hand rule 110
                                      optimization problem 403            RLC series circuit 783
K                                     orientation 10                      rose 47
                                      orientation of a curve 599          rotational field 580
Kepler 284                            orientation of a surface 692        rulings 193
Kepler's laws of planetary motion     orthogonal 136
284                                   orthogonal vectors 136              S
                                      osculating circle 269
L                                     overdamped 774                      saddle point 390
                                                                          scalar 91
Lagrange multiplier 404               P                                   scalar equation of a plane 178
Laplace operator 671                                                      scalar line integral 594
Laplace's equation 339, 648           parallelepiped 160                  scalar multiplication 91
level curve of a function of two      parallelogram method 92             scalar projection 140
variables 308                         parameter 9                         simple curve 616
level surface of a function of three  parameter domain 675                simple harmonic motion 770
variables 313                         parameter space 675                 simple pendulum 360
limaçon 47                            parameterization of a curve 14      simply connected region 618
limit of a function of two variables  parameterized surface 675           skew lines 174
318                                   parametric curve 9                  smooth 265
limit of a vector-valued function     parametric equations 9              space curve 237
240                                   parametric equations of a line 170  space-filling curves 16
line integral 593                     parametric surface 675              speed 106
linear approximation 351              partial derivative 330              sphere 116
linearly dependent 749                partial differential equation 339   spherical coordinate system 215
linearly independent 749              particular solution 759             spring-mass system 769
local extremum 389                    path independent 622                standard equation of a sphere 116
lunes of Alhazen 464                  perpendicular 136                   standard form 65
                                      piecewise smooth curve 603          standard position 237
M                                     planar transformation 546           standard unit vectors 101
                                      plane curve 237                     standard-position vector 95
magnitude 90, 97                      polar axis 41                       steady-state solution 781
major axis 68                         polar coordinate system 38          Stokes' theorem 707, 723
mass flux 694                         polar equations 45                  stream function 647
mass of a wire 606                    polar rectangle 464                 sum and difference rules 245
method of Lagrange multipliers        pole 41                             superposition principle 748
404                                   potential function 588              surface 304
method of undetermined                power series 786                    surface area 683
coefficients 760                      principal unit normal vector 264    surface independent 712
method of variation of parameters     principal unit tangent vector 248   surface integral 696
764                                   product rule 245                    surface integral of a scalar-valued
minor axis 69                         projectile motion 279               function 687
mixed partial derivatives 337         prolate cycloid 20                  surface integral of a vector field
                                                                          694
N                                     Q                                   symmetric equations of a line 170
                                                                          symmetry 50, 474
nappes 63                             Quadric surfaces 196
nonhomogeneous linear equation                                            T
746                                   R
normal 136                                                                Tacoma Narrows Bridge 782
normal component of acceleration      radial coordinate 39                tangent plane 347
277                                   radial field 578                    tangent vector 247
normal form of Green's theorem        radius of curvature 269             tangential component of
643                                   radius of gyration 536              acceleration 277
normal plane 268                      region 323                          tangential form of Green's
normal vector 177                     regular parameterization 680
normalization 100

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         Index 907

theorem 637                     triple scalar product 158       vector projection 140    236
terminal point 90, 237          Type I 441                      vector sum 92             274
three-dimensional rectangular   Type II 441                     vector-valued function
coordinate system 109                                           vector-valued functions
topographical map 307           U                               velocity vector 274
Torque 162                                                      vertex 64
total differential 356          unit vector 100                 vertical trace 310
traces 195                      unit vector field 584
transformation 546                                              W
transient solution 781          V
tree diagram 364                                                wave equation 339
triangle inequality 93          vector 90                       William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) 342
triangle method 92              vector addition 92              witch of Agnesi 17
triple integral 486             vector difference 92            work done by a vector field 607
triple integral in cylindrical  vector equation of a line 170   work done by the force 144
coordinates 505                 vector equation of a plane 177
triple integral in spherical    vector field 577                Z
coordinates 511                 vector line integral 600
                                vector parameterization 237     zero vector 90
                                vector product 153
